persons suspected of terrorist or criminal activity may be transferred from one state ( i.e. , country ) to another to answer charges against them .

the surrender of a fugitive from one state to another is generally referred to as rendition .

a distinct form of rendition is extradition , by which one state surrenders a person within its territorial jurisdiction to a requesting state via a formal legal process , typically established by treaty between the countries .

however , renditions may be effectuated in the absence of extradition treaties , as well .

the terms "irregular rendition" and "extraordinary rendition" have been used to refer to the extrajudicial transfer of a person from one state to another , generally for the purpose of arrest , detention , and / or interrogation by the receiving state ( for purposes of this report , the term "rendition" will be used to describe irregular renditions , and not extraditions , unless otherwise specified ) .

unlike in extradition cases , persons subject to this type of rendition typically have no access to the judicial system of the sending state by which they may challenge their transfer .

sometimes persons are rendered from the territory of the rendering state itself , while other times they are seized by the rendering state in another country and immediately rendered , without ever setting foot in the territory of the rendering state .

sometimes renditions occur with the consent of the state where the fugitive is located ; other times , they do not .

besides irregular rendition and extradition , aliens present or attempting to enter the united states may be removed to another state under u.s. immigration laws , if such aliens are either deportable or inadmissible and their removal complies with relevant statutory provisions .

unlike in the case of rendition and extradition , the legal justification for removing an alien from the united states via deportation or denial of entry is not so that he can answer charges against him in the receiving state ; rather , it is because the united states possesses the sovereign authority to determine which non - nationals may enter or remain within its borders , and the alien fails to fulfill the legal criteria allowing non - citizens to enter , remain in , or pass in transit through the united states .

although the deportation or exclusion of an alien under immigration laws may have the same practical effect as an irregular rendition ( especially if the alien is subject to "expedited removal" under § 235 of the immigration and nationality act , in which case judicial review of a removal order may be very limited ) , this practice is arguably distinct from the historical understanding of what constitutes a rendition .

nonetheless , the term "extraordinary rendition" has occasionally been used by some commentators to describe the transfer of aliens suspected of terrorist activity to third countries for the purposes of detention and interrogation , even though the transfer was conducted pursuant to immigration procedures .

over the years , several persons have been rendered into the united states by u.s. authorities , often with the cooperation of the states where such persons were seized , to answer criminal charges , including charges related to terrorist activity .

the obama administration has continued this practice .

besides receiving persons through rendition , the united states has also rendered persons to other countries over the years , via the central intelligence agency ( cia ) and various law enforcement agencies .

there have been no widely - reported cases of persons being rendered from the interior of the united states , perhaps due to the constitutional and statutory limitations upon the summary transfer of persons from u.s. territory .

there have been cases where non - u.s. citizens were allegedly "rendered" at u.s. ports of entry but had yet to legally enter / be admitted into the united states .

however , these "renditions" appear to have been conducted pursuant to immigration removal procedures .

noncitizens arriving at ports of entry have no recognized constitutional rights with regard to their admission into the united states , and federal immigration law provides arriving aliens with fewer procedural protections against their removal than aliens residing in the united states .

instead , it appears that renditions by the u.s. to third countries have involved non - citizens seized outside u.s. territory .

the supreme court has found that the constitution protects u.s. citizens abroad from actions taken against them by the federal government , and this would generally appear to limit the summary transfer of such persons to the custody of foreign governments .

in contrast , noncitizens who have not entered the united states have historically been recognized as receiving few , if any , constitutional protections ( though noncitizens in foreign locations over which the united states exercises significant control , such as guantanamo bay , cuba , may be owed greater protections than other noncitizens abroad ) .

reportedly , the rendition of terrorist suspects to other countries was authorized by president ronald reagan in 1986 and has been part of u.s. counterterrorism efforts at least since the late 1990s .

in testimony before the house foreign affairs committee in april 2007 , former cia official michael f. scheuer claimed authorship of the cia's rendition program and stated that it originally began in mid - 1995 .

the initial goals of the rendition program , according to scheuer , were to ensure the detention of al qaeda members posing a threat to u.s. security and to seize any documents in their possession .

however , [a]fter 9 / 11 , and under president bush , rendered al - qaeda operatives have most often been kept in u.s. custody .

the goals of the program remained the same , although ... mr. bush's national security team wanted to use u.s. officers to interrogate captured al - qaeda fighters .

in a 2002 written statement to the joint committee inquiry into terrorist attacks against the united states , then - cia director george tenet reported that even prior to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , the "cia ( in many cases with the fbi ) had rendered 70 terrorists to justice around the world. .

the new york times has reported that following the 9 / 11 attacks , president bush issued a still - classified directive that broadened the cia's authority to render terrorist suspects to other states .

although there are some reported estimates that the united states has rendered more than 100 individuals following 9 / 11 , the actual number is not a matter of the public record .

controversy has arisen over the united states allegedly rendering suspected terrorists to states known to practice torture for the purpose of arrest , detention , and / or harsh interrogation .

critics charge that the united states has rendered persons to such states so that they will be subjected to harsh interrogation techniques prohibited in the united states , including torture .

in 2009 , an italian court convicted 22 cia operatives and a u.s. military colonel in absentia for their purported role in the irregular rendition of an egyptian cleric from italy to egypt .

the italian ministry of justice apparently has yet to request the united states to extradite these persons so that they may serve their criminal sentences .

the bush administration did not dispute charges that u.s. authorities rendered persons to foreign states believed to practice torture , but denied rendering persons for the purpose of torture .

answering a question regarding renditions in a march 16 , 2005 press conference , president bush stated that prior to transferring persons to other states , the united states received "promise[s] that they won't be tortured .. .

this country does not believe in torture. .

in testimony before the senate armed services committee in 2005 , acting cia director porter goss stated that in his belief , "we have more safeguards and more oversight in place [over renditions] than we did before" 9 / 11 .

secretary of state condoleezza rice stated that "the united states has not transported anyone , and will not transport anyone , to a country when we believe he will be tortured .

where appropriate , the united states seeks assurances that transferred persons will not be tortured. .

in january 2009 , president obama issued an executive order creating a special task force to review u.s. transfer policies , including the practice of rendition , to ensure compliance with applicable legal requirements .

in august , the task force issued recommendations to ensure that u.s. transfer practices comply with applicable standards and do not result in the transfer of persons to face torture .

these recommendations include strengthening procedures used to obtain assurances from a country that a person will not face torture if transferred there , including through the establishment of mechanisms to monitor the treatment of transferred persons .

little publicly available information from government sources exists regarding the nature and frequency of u.s. renditions to countries believed to practice torture , or the nature of any assurances obtained from them before rendering persons to them .

to what extent u.s. agencies have legal authority to engage in renditions remains unclear .

the only provision within the united states code appearing to expressly permit an agency's participation in a rendition is 10 u.s.c .

§ 374 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( d ) , as amended in 1998 , which permits the department of defense ( dod ) , upon request from the head of a federal law enforcement agency , to make dod personnel available to operate equipment with respect to "a rendition of a suspected terrorist from a foreign country to the united states to stand trial. .

on the other hand , given that the united states has participated in renditions , there would appear to be legal limits on the practice , especially with regard to torture .

this report describes the most relevant legal guidelines limiting the transfer of persons to foreign states where they may face torture , as well as recent legislation seeking to limit the rendition of persons to countries believed to practice torture .

the u.n. convention against torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment ( cat ) and u.s. domestic implementing legislation impose the primary legal restrictions on the transfer of persons to countries where they would face torture .

cat requires signatory parties to take measures to end torture within territories under their jurisdiction , and it prohibits the transfer of persons to countries where there is a substantial likelihood that they will be tortured .

torture is a distinct form of persecution , and is defined for purposes of cat as " severe pain or suffering ... intentionally inflicted on a person" under the color of law .

accordingly , many forms of persecution — including certain harsh interrogation techniques that would be considered cruel and unusual under the u.s. constitution — do not necessarily constitute torture , which is an extreme and particular form of mistreatment .

cat also obligates parties to take measures to prevent "other acts of cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment which do not amount to torture," but this obligation only extends to acts occurring in territory under a state party's jurisdiction .

cat also established the committee against torture , a monitoring body which has declaratory but non - binding authority concerning interpretation of the convention .

state parties are required to submit periodic reports to the committee concerning their compliance with cat .

the united states ratified cat in 1994 , subject to certain declarations , reservations , and understandings , including that the convention was not self - executing and therefore required domestic implementing legislation to take effect .

the express language of cat article 2 allows for no circumstances or emergencies where torture could be permitted by convention parties .

on the other hand , a number of cat provisions limiting the acts of convention parties do not use language coextensive as that contained in cat article 2 .

the following paragraphs describe the relevant provisions of cat and implementing statutes and regulations that restrict the rendition of persons to countries when there is a substantial likelihood that such persons will be tortured .

as will be discussed below , while cat imposes an absolute prohibition on the use of torture by convention parties , the plain language of certain cat provisions may nevertheless permit parties in limited circumstances to transfer persons to countries where they would likely face torture , though such an interpretation arguably conflicts with the intent of the treaty .

although the express intent of cat was to help ensure that no one would be subjected to torture , it is arguably unclear as to whether cat would in all circumstances bar renditions to countries that practice torture , including possibly in certain cases where the rendering state was aware that a rendered person would likely be tortured .

clearly , it would violate u.s. criminal law and cat obligations for a u.s. official to conspire to commit torture via rendition , regardless of where such renditions would occur .

however , it is not altogether clear that cat prohibits the rendering of persons seized outside the united states , or whether criminal sanctions would apply to a u.s. official who authorized a rendition without intending to facilitate the torture of the rendered person ( as opposed to , for instance , the harsh mistreatment of the rendered person to a degree not rising to the level of torture ) .

although cat and its implementing legislation provide the primary legal constraints upon the rendition of persons to countries believed to engage in torture , other treaties and statutes are also potentially relevant .

the following paragraphs briefly discuss a few of them .

on january 22 , 2009 , president barack obama issued a series of executive orders concerning the treatment of persons apprehended by the united states in connection with armed conflicts or counterterrorism operations .

the orders do not expressly modify u.s. rendition policy , though one order does mandate the closure of all cia detention facilities , some of which were used to hold persons seized by the united states in other locations .

however , two of the orders create separate task forces charged with reviewing aspects of u.s. detention policy , including the transfer of detainees to foreign states .

the executive order entitled "ensuring lawful interrogations" establishes a special interagency task force on interrogation and transfer policies , which is charged with reviewing the practices of transferring individuals to other nations in order to ensure that such practices comply with the domestic laws , international obligations , and policies of the united states and do not result in the transfer of individuals to other nations to face torture or otherwise for the purpose , or with the effect , of undermining or circumventing the commitments or obligations of the united states to ensure the humane treatment of individuals in its custody or control .

another executive order , entitled "review of detention policy options," creates a special task force on detainee disposition , which is required to conduct a comprehensive review of the lawful options available to the federal government with respect to the apprehension , detention , trial , transfer , release , or other disposition of individuals captured or apprehended in connection with armed conflicts and counterterrorism operations , and to identify such options as are consistent with the national security and foreign policy interests of the united states and the interests of justice .

each task force was required to issue a report to the president of its recommendations within 180 days , unless the task force chair determined that an extension was appropriate .

in july , the chairman of the special task force on interrogation and transfer polices extended the deadline for the task force's final report by two months , while the deadline for the special task force on detainee disposition was extended by six months .

on august 24 , 2009 , the special task force on interrogation and transfer polices issued its recommendations to the president , including with respect to the practice of rendition .

these included recommendations to ensure that u.s. transfer practices comply with applicable legal requirements and do not result in the transfer of persons to face torture .

the task force supported the continued use of assurances from a receiving country that an individual would not face torture if transferred there .

however , the task force made recommendations intended to strengthen the procedures used in obtaining and evaluating such assurances .

these include involving the state department in evaluating assurances in all cases .

the task force advised that relevant agencies obtaining assurances should "insist on a monitoring mechanism , or otherwise establish a monitoring mechanism , to ensure consistent , private access to the individual who has been transferred , with minimal advance notice to the detaining government. .

the task force also recommended that the inspectors general of the departments of state , defense , and homeland security prepare an annual , coordinated report on transfers which were effectuated in reliance on assurances and were conducted by each of their agencies .

the task force made specific recommendations with respect to immigration removal proceedings and military transfer decisions .

classified recommendations were also made to ensure that , in the event that the intelligence community participates in a transfer , any affected individual is subjected to lawful treatment .

in the 110 th congress , legislative proposals were introduced to limit the ability of u.s. agencies to render persons to foreign states , and it is possible that similar proposals will be introduced in the 111 th congress .

s. 1876 , the national security with justice act of 2007 , introduced by senator biden on july 25 , 2007 , would have barred the united states from rendering or participating in the rendition of any individual to a foreign state absent authorization from the foreign intelligence surveillance court , except under limited circumstances in the case of enemy combatants held by the united states ( though renditions in such circumstances would still have to comply with other legal requirements ) .

for an order to be issued by the foreign intelligence surveillance court authorizing a rendition , the requesting u.s. official would have needed to provide evidence that the rendered person was ( 1 ) an international terrorist ; and ( 2 ) would not be subjected to torture or lesser forms of cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment — a more stringent limitation on the transfer of persons than that expressly imposed by cat article 3 , which only bars the transfer of persons to countries where they would face torture .

h.r .

1352 , the torture outsourcing prevention act , introduced by representative markey on march 6 , 2007 , would have required the state department to provide annual reports to appropriate congressional committees regarding countries where there are substantial grounds for believing that torture or cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment is commonly used in the detention or interrogation of individuals .

generally , persons could not be transferred to such countries , whether through rendition or some other process .

this prohibition could be waived by the secretary of state in limited circumstances , including , at a minimum , when continuing access to each such person was granted to an independent humanitarian organization .

written or oral assurances made to the u.s. government would have been deemed insufficient to demonstrate that a person would not face torture or cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment if rendered to a particular state .

