the 110 th congress is grappling with a broad range of issues regarding the use of private contractors to provide security for people and property in iraq and elsewhere .

the united states has gradually increased the types of tasks and roles for which it contracts private companies in military operations .

congress has generally accepted the concept of using unarmed private contractors to carry out support functions in military operations , such as providing food and laundry services , although not without concerns regarding the costs of contracts and alleged favoritism in issuing them .

but for the department of state and the military , iraq is , in some ways , an atypical situation .

there , the united states is relying heavily , apparently for the first time in an unstable environment , on private firms to supply a wide variety of security services .

especially given a shortage of diplomatic security agents and u.s. troops , private security contractors are widely viewed as vital to u.s. efforts to protect many iraqi and u.s. government officials , general contractors working to stabilize and reconstruct iraq , and government facilities .

nevertheless , many members are concerned about transparency , accountability , and legal and symbolic issues raised by the use of armed civilians to perform security tasks formerly performed by the military and federal employees , as well as possible long - term effects on these organizations .

this report first summarizes available information on the private contractors providing security services under u.s. government contracts in iraq .

it then provides information on relevant u.s. , international , and iraqi law , and legal issues involved in the use of armed contractors .

it concludes with a discussion of issues involving the need for and suitability of private contractors , costs , oversight , and control , as well as potential foreign policy implications .

the united states is just one of many entities — including other governments , international organizations , and private industry — that employ private security contractors in iraq .

in recent years , the united states and many other nations and organizations , including the united nations , have increasingly turned to private contractors to provide security , as well as a variety of other functions in support of stabilization and reconstruction efforts .

this increased reliance on contractors has fueled the growth of the private security industry .

contractors to the coalition forces in iraq operate under three levels of legal authority: ( 1 ) the international order of the laws and usages of war and resolutions of the united nations security council ; ( 2 ) u.s. law ; and ( 3 ) iraqi law , including orders of the cpa that have not been superceded .

under the authority of international law , contractors and other civilians working with the military are civilian non - combatants whose conduct may be attributable to the united states or may implicate the duty to promote the welfare and security of the iraqi people .

iraqi courts do not currently have jurisdiction to prosecute them for conduct related to their contractual responsibilities without the permission of the sending state .

some contractors , particularly u.s. nationals , may be prosecuted in u.s. federal courts or military courts under certain circumstances .

the use of private contractors in personal security and military operations raises many questions regarding the appropriateness and practicality of entrusting private companies with duties that have been traditionally reserved for military and civilian federal personnel .

several issues are particularly sensitive when nations hire private contractors for potentially hostile situations .

some are even more sensitive when state - hired contractors carry arms , even on a strictly defensive basis .

these issues , as related to contractors as a whole and to private security contractors in particular , are briefly discussed below .

subtitles d and f of p.l .

110-181 address contracting in iraq and afghanistan .

subtitle a , which addresses acquisition of services , also contains provisions that may affect private security contracts .

section 808 , for example , requires an independent management review of contracts for services , including an assessment of their use to contract for services related to inherently governmental functions .

section 841 of p.l .

110-181 provides for the establishment of a special commission on wartime contracting to investigate and report to congress on federal agency contracting for the reconstruction of iraq and afghanistan , the logistical support of coalition forces and the performance of security and intelligence functions in operation iraqi freedom and operation enduring freedom .

it requires the commission to assess the extent and impact of reliance on contractors , the extent of waste , fraud , abuse , or mismanagement under such contracts , and the appropriateness of the organizational structure , policies , and practices of the departments of defense and state for handling contingency contract management and support .

an interim report from the commission is due march 1 , 2009 , and a final report is due no later than two years after the date of appointment of all commission members .

section 862 requires the secretary of defense to prescribe , within 120 days of enactment , regulations on the selection , training , equipping , and conduct of personnel performing private security functions under a covered contract or covered subcontract in a combat area .

these include processes for ( 1 ) registering , processing , and accounting for such personnel ; ( 2 ) authorizing and accounting for their weapons ; ( 3 ) investigating the death and injury of such personnel and their discharge of weapons ; ( 4 ) investigating the injury , death , or damage of property caused by the actions of such personnel ; and ( 5 ) incidents of alleged misconduct .

the regulations also provide guidance to commanders of combatant commands on orders , directives , and instructions to contractors and subcontractors performing private security functions relating to force protection , security , health , safety , relations and interaction with locals , and rules of engagement .

section 861 requires the secretary of defense , the secretary of state , and the administrator of usaid to enter into a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) no later than july 1 , 2008 , regarding contracting in iraq and afghanistan , including matters related to authorizing the carrying of weapons , establishing minimum qualifications for personnel carrying weapons , and setting rules regarding the use of deadly force .

the mou is to delineate responsibilities for investigating and referring possible violations of meja by contractor personnel .

the mou is also to identify a common database to house information on all contracts in iraq and afghanistan .

section 862 calls for the revision of relevant federal acquisition regulations to require all contracts and subcontracts for such personnel to conform with these regulations .

vetoed forerunner to h.r .

4986 is h.r .

1585 , which was introduced march 20 , 2007 .

h.r .

1585 was referred to the house armed services committee .

referred to hasc subcommittees april 10 , 2007 .

subcommittee mark - ups were held may 2-8 , 2007 .

committee consideration and mark - up was held may 9 , 2007 .

reported ( amended ) may 11 , 2007 ( h.rept .

110-146 ) .

a supplemental report was filed may 14 , 2007 ( h.rept .

110-146 , part 2 ) .

the house passed a substitute amendment in lieu on may 17 , 2007 .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , was placed on senate calendar , june 5 , 2007 ; laid before the senate by unanimous consent , june 28 , 2007 .

h.r .

185 was passed by the senate with amendments , october 1 , 2007 .

the conference report filed december 6 , 2007 ( h.rept .

110-47 .

the conference recommendations were agreed to in the house on december 12 , 2007 , and in the senate on december 14 , 2007 .

president bush vetoed h.r .

1585 , as agreed to by the house and senate , on december 28 , 2007 , based on objections to provisions not germane to this report .

a modified h.r .

1585 was reintroduced as h.r .

4986 and passed by the house on january 16 , 2008 , and by senate january 22 , 2008 .

president bush signed h.r .

4985 on january 28 , 2008 , as p.l .

110-181 .

section 864 defines private security functions as guarding personnel , facilities , or property , or any other activity that requires contractors to be armed to perform their duties .

while not addressed in law , the joint explanatory statement of the managers of the conference version ( h.rept .

110-434 ) of h.r .

3222 states that the dod "lacks accountability and management of its contracted services. .

it states that additional funding totaling $48 million has been provided to the defense contract audit agency ( $10 million ) , the defense contract management agency ( $14 million ) , and the defense inspector general ( $24 million ) "to provide more robust staffing of contractor management and oversight personnel .

it calls on the dod to improve its management of contract services "by instituting clear accountability mechanisms ; instituting unambiguous and short chains of command to the most - senior decision makers ; and improving the tracking and reporting of contract service costs and management of contract service performance. .

the conferees directed the secretary of defense to develop , within 90 days of enactment , uniform minimum personnel standards for contracted personnel and a compliance mechanism that specifies penalties for noncompliance with personnel standards "including fines , denial of contractual obligations or contract rescission. .

the secretary is also directed to establish "a clear set of rules of engagement for all contracted security personnel operating in the iraq and afghanistan theaters of operations. .

house committee on appropriations introduced an original measures , h.r .

3222 , on july 230 , 2007 with an accompanying committee report , h.rept .

110-279 .

h.r .

3222 was passed by the house august 5 , 2007 , and by the senate october 3 , 2007 .

the house and senate approved the conference report ( h.rept .

110-434 ) on november 8 , 2007 .

president bush signed the legislation and it was enacted as p.l .

110-116 .

section 322 of h.r .

5658 would mandate that development of a single government - wide definition for "inherently governmental functions. .

section 824 would bar the department of defense from allowing contractors to perform inherently governmental functions in a combat area .

the section would also require the secretary of defense to list those functions that should not be performed by private security contractors .

section 847 would require pscs working for the u.s. government in a combat area to report whenever a weapon is discharged against a private security contractor , and whenever a private security contractor takes active , non - lethal countermeasures .

on may 22 , 2008 , the house passed the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( h.r .

5658 ) .

section 841 of s. 3001 would mandate that private security contractors not be authorized to perform inherently governmental functions in an area of combat operations .

the section defines "inherently governmental" as protecting people , information , equipment , and supplies in non - permissive environments where deadly force is likely to be initiated by security personnel in public places or where security personnel are expected to make real - time decisions that could affect the private individuals or u.s. interests .

section 842 would require the establishment of mechanisms to ensure that contractors are required to report specified offenses that are alleged to have been committed by or against contractor personnel .

section 1036 would require that the federal acquisition regulations to prohibit contractors from interrogating prisoners during or after the cessation of hostilities .

on august 1 , 2008 , with a cloture motion failing to receive sufficient votes , the senate proceeded to consider s. 3001 on the floor .

s. 2147 would expand the coverage of the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) to include all persons "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united states in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. .

the bill would mandate that the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) establish a "theater investigative unit" for each contingency operation in which contract personnel are working to investigate suspected misconduct .

the fbi and other agencies or departments affected by the bill would have 90 days to implement to the provision , and the department of justice inspector general would be required to report to congress within 30 days of enactment on the investigation of abuses alleged to have been committed by contract personnel .

introduced october 4 , 2007 .

 ( similar to h.r .

2740 ) .

referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

2740 , passed as amended by the house of representatives , would extend the coverage of the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) to include all persons "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united sates in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. .

currently , meja covers contractors only if employed by "the armed forces outside the united states," or if employed by other federal agencies or "provisional authority," to the extent their employment is related to the support of the dod mission overseas .

the bill would mandate that the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) establish a "theater investigative unit" for each contingency operation in which covered contract personnel are working to investigate suspected misconduct .

it would also require that the department of justice inspector general report to congress within 30 days of enactment on the investigation of abuses alleged to have been committed by contract personnel .

introduced june 15 , 2007 .

referred to the house judiciary committee .

referred to the subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security .

full committee consideration and mark - up , july 24 , 2007 .

ordered to be reported august 2 , 2007 .

reported ( amended ) september 27 , 2007 , h.rept .

110-352 .

house passed an amendment in the nature of a substitute , october 4 , 2007 , 389-30 .

the amended version includes a new section , which provides that "[n]othing in this act shall be construed to affect intelligence activities that are otherwise permissible prior to the enactment of this act. .

 ( sec .

6 ) .

section 6 was added in response to the administration's concerns that the bill "would have unintended and intolerable consequences for crucial and necessary national security activities and operations. .

ordered placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders october 5 , 2007 .

s. 674 would require the secretaries of defense , state , and the interior ; the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ; and the director of national intelligence to provide information to the congress within 90 days of enactment on u.s. government contractors and subcontractors working in afghanistan and iraq , with particularly detailed requirements for information on private security contractors .

this information would include the number of persons performing work in iraq and afghanistan under contracts and subcontracts ; the companies awarded such contracts and subcontracts ; the total cost of these contracts ; and a method for tracking the number of persons killed and wounded while serving under such contracts .

also contains provisions intended to improve coordination between the u.s. armed forces and contractors performing private security functions , and to clarify the legal status of contract personnel by expanding meja ( similar to h.r .

369 , h.r .

2740 and s. 2147 ) .

introduced february 16 , 2007 .

referred to the senate armed services committee .

h.r .

369 would require the secretaries of defense and state and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development to prescribe minimum hiring standards and issue equipment guidance for contracts regarding private security contractors and would require contractors to provide specified information on costs and personnel and update it during the period of contract performance .

also contains provisions intended to improve coordination between the u.s. armed forces and contractors performing private security functions , and to clarify and extend the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) .

would extend meja to cover contractors "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united sates in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. .

meja covers contractors only if employed by "the armed forces outside the united states," or if employed by other federal agencies or provisional authority , to the extent their employment is related to the support of the dod mission overseas .

 ( this last provision is also included in h.r .

2740 , below. ) .

introduced january 10 , 2007 .

 ( similar to s. 674 . ) .

referred to the house armed services committee ( has ) and the judiciary committee .

referred to the has subcommittee on readiness , february 1 , 2007 .

referred to the judiciary committee's subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security , february 2 , 2007 .

the subcommittee held hearings on june 19 , 2007 .

h.r .

3695 would prohibit the dod and the department of state from increasing the number of private security contractors it uses to perform security functions in iraq .

introduced september 27 , 2007 .

referred to the committees on foreign affairs and armed services .

h.r .

4102 and s. 2398 would require that only u.s. federal government personnel provide security to all personnel at any u.s. diplomatic or consular mission in iraq within six months after enactment .

it also would require that the president report to specified congressional committees on "the status of planning for the transition away from the use of private contractors for mission critical or emergency essential functions by january 1 , 2009 , in all conflict zones in which congress has authorized the use of force. .

contracts with the federal government requiring personnel to perform mission critical or emergency essential functions may be renewed after that date only if the president reports to those committees that the relevant agency does not have adequate personnel to perform the duties stipulated in the contract .

the president must also certify that all contract employees meet set standards , including having undergone background checks to ensure they do not have criminal records and have not been accused of human rights abuses , and that they would remain in the custody of the united states if they are accused of crimes by the host country .

it also would provide for congressional access to contracts under certain conditions and reports to congress on iraq and afghanistan contracts .

h.r .

4102 was introduced on november 7 , 2007 .

it was referred to the committees on foreign affairs , armed services , and intelligence .

s. 2398 was introduced on november 16 , 2007 , and was referred to the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.res .

97 would resolve that the department of defense inspector general and the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction should report to congress on the expenditure of military and reconstruction funds in iraq and on the types and terms of u.s. contracts there .

it would resolves that congress should create a "truman commission" to conduct an ongoing investigation of the award and implementation of u.s. contracts with regard to operation iraqi freedom .

introduced january 24 , 2007 .

referred to the house armed services and foreign affairs committees .

house foreign affairs committee hearing held march 20 , 2007 .

