on july 27 , 2009 , the government of sweden asked for an explanation from venezuela of how the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) obtained swedish - made anti - tank rocket launchers that had been sold to venezuela in the 1980s .

venezuelan officials denied any venezuelan government involvement with the farc .

on july 20 , 2009 , the u.s. government accountability office issued a report on the status of drug trafficking through venezuela and the status of u.s. - venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation .

the report concluded that the lack of venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation is a significant impediment to the u.s. capacity to interdict drugs en route to the united states .

according to the report , u.s. and colombian officials assert that venezuela has extended a lifeline to illegally armed colombian groups by providing significant support and safe haven along the border .

 ( see " counternarcotics cooperation " below. ) .

on june 25 , 2009 , the state department announced that the united states and venezuela agreed to return respective ambassadors .

this led to u.s .

ambassador to venezuela patrick duddy resuming his post in caracas , and to the return of venezuelan ambassador bernardo alvarez to washington .

on february 15 , 2009 , venezuelans voted in a national referendum to approve a constitutional amendment abolishing term limits for elected local , state , and national officials , including for the president .

the amendment was approved with almost 55% voting for it and 45% voting against it .

president chávez proclaimed that the vote was a victory for the bolivarian revolution , and virtually promised that he would run for re - election in 2012 .

 ( see " february 15 , 2009 term limits referendum " below. ) .

on january 30 , 2009 , an unidentified group of assailants vandalized a synagogue in caracas .

president chávez and other venezuelan officials strongly condemned the attack .

subsequently , on february 2 , 2009 , 16 members of congress spoke out against the attack in a letter to president chávez .

the members called on chávez "to end the bullying and harassment of the jewish community" and "to extend the community the robust protection it deserves in light of the threats it faces. .

 ( see " human rights concerns " below. ) .

on november 23 , 2008 , venezuela held state and municipal elections across the country .

both pro - chávez and anti - chávez camps claimed victory .

of 22 governorships , government supporters won 17 , although of the 5 states won by the opposition , 3 were country's most the populous states of zulia , miranda , and carabobo .

the government won also won over 80% of the more than 300 mayoral races , but the opposition won the country's largest cities of caracas and maracaibo .

 ( see " november 2008 state and local elections " below. ) .

on october 3 , 2008 , venezuelan military intelligence officials detained retired general raúl baduel , and prohibited him from leaving the country on charges of corruption during his tenure as defense minister .

a former chávez supporter , baduel has become a staunch critic of the president .

chávez opponents maintain that the action against baduel was intended to intimidate the opposition before the state and municipal elections scheduled for november 23 .

on september 26 , 2008 , 41 members of the u.s. house of representatives wrote to president chávez expressing their outrage over the expulsion of two human rights watch staff , and urging the president to embrace the recommendations of the report and strengthen the promotion of human rights , democratic institutions , and political pluralism in the country .

on september 18 , 2008 , human rights watch issued an extensive report examining setbacks in human rights protections and practices under the chávez government .

late in the evening , the venezuelan government expelled two human rights watch employees visiting the country , an action that was condemned by numerous human rights groups throughout latin america .

the full report , "a decade under chávez , political intolerance and lost opportunities for advancing human rights in venezuela , " is available at http: / / hrw.org / reports / 2008 / venezuela0908 / .

on september 16 , 2008 , for the fourth year in a row , president bush determined that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements , but waived sanctions to allow the continuation of u.s. foreign assistance to support civil society programs and community development programs .

on september 12 , 2008 , the u.s. treasury department froze the assets of two senior venezuelan intelligence officials and the former interior minister for allegedly helping the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) with weapons and drug trafficking .

the state department also declared venezuela's u.s .

ambassador bernardo alvarez persona non grata .

on september 11 , 2008 , president chávez announced that he was expelling the u.s .

ambassador to venezuela , patrick duddy , and alleged that the venezuelan government had foiled a u.s. - backed conspiracy to assassinate him .

chávez also announced that he was recalling the venezuelan ambassador to the united states , bernardo alvarez .

on september 10 , 2008 , two russian long - range bombers arrived in venezuela for training exercises with the venezuelan military .

days earlier , russian and venezuelan officials maintained that russian naval ships would participate in joint naval exercises with venezuela in november .

on august 5 , 2008 , venezuela's supreme court held up the comptroller general's disqualification of 272 individuals from running for office , including a number of high - profile opposition figures such as leopoldo lópez who had intended to run for mayor of caracas .

on august 4 , 2008 , the venezuelan government made public 26 presidential decrees that had been enacted on july 31 at the end of an 18-month period in which president chávez had been given decree authority by the national assembly .

the decrees covered such areas as tourism , railways , social security , and financial institutions as well as controversial provisions that would allow the president to appoint regional leaders with broad budgetary powers , set up a civilian militia as a branch of the military , and allow the government to expropriate goods from private businesses and increase state control over food distribution .

venezuela's major economic sector is petroleum , which accounts for one - third of its gross domestic product and 80% of exports .

the country is classified by the world bank as an upper middle income developing country because of its relatively high per capita income of $7,320 ( 2007 ) .

despite the country's oil wealth , economic conditions in the country deteriorated in the 1990s .

the percentage of venezuelans living in poverty ( income of less than $2 a day ) increased from 32.2% to 48.5% of the population between 1991 and 2000 , while the percentage of the population in extreme poverty ( income of less than $1 a day ) increased from 11.8% in 1990 to 23.5% in 2000 .

in 2002-2003 , the country's political instability and polarization between the government and the opposition contributed to a poor investment climate , capital flight , and declines in gdp .

the national strike orchestrated by the opposition from late 2002 to early 2003 contributed to a contraction of the national economy by almost 9% in 2002 and 7.7% in 2003 .

from 2004 to 2007 , fueled by the windfall in international oil prices , the economy rebounded , with a growth rate over 18% in 2004 , over 10% in 2005 and 2006 , and 8.4% in 2007 .

strong economic growth allowed the chávez government to move ahead with economic goals that fit into his "bolivarian revolution. .

these include the expansion of a state - led development model , land reform , renegotiation of contracts with large foreign investors ( especially in the petroleum sector ) , the restructuring of operations at the state oil company , and diversification of trade and investment partners .

the government has nationalized a number of enterprises , including telecommunications , electricity , and food companies , and in 2008 announced the nationalization of cement companies , the country's largest steel company , sugar plantations , a dairy products company , and a cattle estate .

beginning in 2003 , the government began implementing an array of social programs and services known as missions .

as a result of the booming economy and increased social spending , poverty rates in venezuela have declined , from 48.6% in 2002 to 28.5% in 2007 , with extreme poverty falling from 22.2% to 8.5% over the same period .

despite the country's economic growth and progress in reducing poverty , venezuela's economy has experienced significant problems over the past several years , such as shortages of basic food staples and high levels of inflation that have eroded purchasing power .

in 2007 , the average inflation rate was almost 19% while in 2008 the average rose to just over 30% , the highest in latin america .

in january 2008 , the government introduced a new currency , the bolívar fuerte ( strong bolivar ) , that eliminated three zeroes from the bolívar and was intended in part to stem high inflation rates , but inflation has continued to increase monthly .

shortages of basic staples such as milk , sugar , and eggs worsened in 2007 as a result of price controls that stifled local production .

in response , the government has raised price caps on basic food items , and nationalized a large dairy company and a food distribution company that were incorporated into a subsidiary of the venezuelan oil company , pdvsa .

the policies have reportedly worked to help ease shortages for some staples , but not all .

in mid - 2009 , shortages of many basic staples were still being reported .

the global financial crisis and the associated drop in the price of oil are having significant effects on the venezuelan economy .

in october 2008 , the venezuelan government announced that it would be making budget cuts , including the reduction of high salaries for some officials .

high economic growth already began to slow in 2008 , with a growth rate of 4.8% , and the economy is forecast to contract by 4.2% in 2009 .

while inflation has slowed somewhat , the forecast for 2009 is for an average of 28% .

given the severe economic downturn , it is likely that the venezuelan government may have to cut back on its assistance programs abroad and to start reining in domestic spending in venezuela .

for now , the government remains defiant that it can ride out the economic crisis and has turned to using some of its substantial foreign reserves to maintain social spending .

as a result , foreign reserves are forecast to fall from an estimated $42 billion at the end of 2008 to about $25 billion by the end of 2009 .

the united states traditionally has had close relations with venezuela , the fourth major supplier of foreign oil to the united states , but there has been significant friction with the chávez government .

tensions in relations turned especially sour in the aftermath of president chávez's brief ouster from power in april 2002 .

venezuela alleged u.s. involvement in the ouster , while u.s. officials repeatedly rejected charges that the united states was involved .

over the past several years , u.s. officials have expressed concerns about human rights , venezuela's military arms purchases ( largely from russia ) , its relations with cuba and iran , and its efforts to export its brand of populism to other latin american countries .

declining venezuelan cooperation on antidrug and antiterrorism efforts also has been a u.s. concern .

since 2006 , the department of state has prohibited the sale of defense articles and services to venezuela because of lack of cooperation on antiterrorism efforts .

in the aftermath of colombia's march 1 , 2008 bombing of a farc camp in ecuador that killed the terrorist group's second in command , captured laptops contained files potentially linking the venezuelan government with efforts to support the farc .

in a turn of events , on june 8 , 2008 , president chávez publicly urged the farc to end its armed struggle , and release all hostages .

while strong political rhetoric from both u.s. and venezuelan officials in the 2002 to 2006 period contributed to elevated tensions in u.s. relations , the tenor of u.s. political rhetoric appears to have changed since the second half of 2006 .

when chávez spoke disparagingly of president bush at the united nations in september 2006 , u.s. officials refrained from responding to those personal attacks .

likewise , when president chávez led an anti - american rally in argentina in march 2007 during president bush's visit to brazil and uruguay , president bush ignored the taunts and u.s. officials emphasized that they wanted to focus on a positive agenda of u.s. engagement with latin america .

in 2008 , u.s. policy toward venezuela appeared to be to refrain from getting into any unneeded conflicts or spats with president chávez , and instead to focus on a positive u.s. agenda for the hemisphere .

assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs tom shannon stated in july 17 , 2008 congressional testimony that "we remain committed to a positive relationship with the people of venezuela and have the patience and the persistence necessary to manage our challenging relationship. .

shannon pointed out in his testimony that venezuela "for the first time in many years , expressed a willingness to explore improved relations with the united states," including counter - drug cooperation , and that "we have told venezuela that we would like to explore this diplomatic opening. .

by september 2008 , however , u.s. relations with venezuela took a significant turn for the worse when venezuela expelled u.s .

ambassador patrick duddy and the u.s. responded in kind with venezuelan ambassador bernardo alvarez .

also in september , u.s. officials criticized venezuela's efforts against drug trafficking , and president bush determined , for the fourth year in a row , that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements .

u.s. treasury department officials also froze the assets of two high - ranking venezuelan government officials and the former interior minister for allegedly helping the farc with weapons and drug trafficking .

under the obama administration , venezuela and the united states announced an agreement on june 25 , 2009 , for the return of respective ambassadors .

while some observers are hopeful that the return of ambassadors will mark an improvement in relations , others emphasize continued u.s. concerns about the venezuelan government's treatment of the news media and political opposition and about interference in the affairs of other countries in the region .

 ( see " obama administration policy " below. ) .

administration officials voiced increasing concern about president chávez in 2005 , and tensions increased in u.s. - venezuelan relations , with elevated rhetoric on both sides .

in both march and september 2005 , state department officials testified to congress that president chávez's "efforts to concentrate power at home , his suspect relationship with destabilizing forces in the region , and his plans for arms purchases are causes of major concern. .

they asserted that the united states "will support democratic elements in venezuela so they can fill the political space to which they are entitled. .

then secretary of defense donald rumsfeld expressed concerns in march about venezuela's plan to buy 10 military helicopters and 100,000 ak - 47 rifles from russia and questioned why venezuela needs the weapons .

u.s. officials have also expressed concerns about venezuela's plans to buy patrol boats and military transport aircraft from spain as well as a decision by venezuela in april 2005 to cancel a u.s. - venezuelan bilateral military exchange program .

on may 31 , 2005 , president bush met with maria corina machado , the founder of súmate , a venezuelan civic group that was involved in the signature drive for the august 2004 recall referendum .

the meeting exacerbated the already tense u.s. - venezuelan bilateral relations .

machado is facing charges in venezuela for conspiring against the government by accepting u.s. funding from the national endowment for democracy for súmate's activities leading up to the recall referendum .

u.s. officials and some members of congress have strongly defended the ned's activities in venezuela and have criticized the venezuelan government's efforts to intimidate the leaders of súmate .

 ( see " u.s. funding for democracy projects " below. ) .

in early august 2005 , venezuela suspended its cooperation with the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) because it alleged that dea agents were spying on venezuela .

u.s. officials asserted that the accusations were "baseless and outrageous" but also indicated that the united states would like to improve u.s. relations with venezuela and reverse the negative trend in relations over the past few months .

while traveling in south america in august 2005 , then secretary of state donald rumsfeld asserted that "there certainly is evidence that both cuba and venezuela have been involved in the situation in bolivia in unhelpful ways. .

some members of congress , such as senator arlen specter , reportedly called for the secretary to tone down his rhetoric .

specter met with president chávez and venezuelan ministers in mid - august 2005 to discuss cooperation on drug interdiction .

subsequently , on september 15 , 2005 , president bush designated venezuela as a country that has "failed demonstrably during the previous 12 months to adhere to their obligations under international counternarcotics agreements. .

at the same time , the president waived economic sanctions that would have curtailed u.s. assistance for democracy programs in venezuela .

 ( also see " counternarcotics cooperation " below. ) .

on august 22 , 2005 , the comments of tv evangelist pat robertson that the united states should "assassinate" chávez evoked a strong response from venezuelan officials and from many u.s. policymakers .

the state department responded by labeling robertson's comments as "inappropriate. .

 ( for further information on the u.s. prohibition against assassination , see crs report rs21037 , assassination ban and e.o .

12333: a brief summary , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . ) .

in testifying to congress on november 17 , 2005 , the new assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs thomas shannon asserted that there is "a growing hemispheric and international consensus that democracy in venezuela is in grave peril. .

he stated that the united states was working multilaterally and bilaterally with latin american and european nations to support venezuelan civil society , speak out against abuses of democracy , and hold venezuela accountable to its commitments under the inter - american democratic charter .

he described u.s. funding for democracy projects in venezuela as "working to preserve political and civic space for increasingly at - risk groups. .

reflecting an escalation of the venezuelan president's harsh rhetoric , chávez responded to shannon's comments by calling president bush a "crazy , genocidal killer. .

u.s. reaction to the venezuelan elections on december 5 , 2005 , was restrained , with a state department spokesman indicating that united states would wait until the oas and eu observers make their reports .

nevertheless , the state department did point to the high voter abstention rate in the election and maintained that it reflected "a broad lack of confidence in the impartiality and transparency of the electoral process. .

 ( there was a 75% abstention rate in the december legislative election , compared to an abstention rate of 44% in the last legislative election in july 2000 , which occurred at the same time that voters elected a president and state and local officials. ) .

u.s. - venezuelan relations continued to be tense in 2006 , with several incidents and rhetoric exacerbating the poor state of relations .

on february 2 , 2006 , then secretary of defense donald rumsfeld compared president chávez to adolf hitler in terms of someone who was elected legally and then consolidated power .

chávez responded by referring to president bush as hitler and as a madman , with plans to invade venezuela .

on february 2 , 2006 , president chávez announced that his government would expel a u.s. naval attache for spying , which u.s. officials strongly denied .

in response , the united states expelled a venezuelan diplomat based in washington .

administration testimony before congress in february 2006 highlighted u.s. concern about venezuela's foreign relations .

in february 16 , 2006 congressional testimony , secretary of state condoleezza rice stated that one of the biggest problems for the united states in latin america was venezuela , which she characterized as "attempting to influence its neighbors away from democratic processes. .

secretary rice also expressed concerns about venezuela's relationship with cuba , describing it as "a particular danger to the region," and also referred to both countries as iran's "sidekicks" in reference to those countries' votes in the international atomic energy agency against reporting iran to the u.n. security council over its uranium enrichment program .

also in february 2006 congressional testimony , director of national intelligence john negroponte expressed concern that president chávez "is seeking closer economic , military , and diplomatic ties with iran and north korea. .

in april 2006 , the state department issued its annual country reports on terrorism , which asserted that "venezuela virtually ceased its cooperation in the global war on terror , tolerating terrorists in its territory and seeking closer relations with cuba and iran , both state sponsors of terrorism. .

this was followed up in mid - may 2006 , with a state department announcement that , pursuant to section 40a of the arms export control act , it was prohibiting the sale or license of defense articles and services to venezuela because of its lack of cooperation on antiterrorism efforts .

the state department asserted that the determination was based on venezuela's near lack of antiterrorism cooperation over the last year , citing its support for iraqi insurgents and iran's development of nuclear capabilities , the country's status as a safe haven for colombian and basque terrorist groups , and its effort to derail hemispheric efforts to advance counter - terrorism policies in the oas .

in july 13 , 2006 , congressional testimony , the state department's principal deputy coordinator for counterterrorism , frank urbancic , asserted that venezuelan travel and identification documents are easy to obtain for persons not entitled to them , including non - venezuelans , and maintained that the united states was detaining increasing numbers of third - country aliens at its borders carrying falsified or fraudulently issued venezuelan documents .

on august 18 , 2006 , u.s. director of national intelligence john negroponte announced the establishment of the position of mission manager for cuba and venezuela responsible for integrating collection and analysis on the two countries across the intelligence community .

venezuelan officials responded that they would reconsider signing an anti - drug cooperation agreement negotiated between the two countries .

press reports in june and july had indicated that the two countries were on the verge of signing such an agreement .

in speaking before the u.n. general assembly on september 20 , 2006 , president chávez strongly criticized u.s. foreign policy and spoke pejoratively of president bush .

president chávez repeatedly referred to president bush as the "devil" and asserted that "the hegemonic pretension of u.s. imperialism ... puts at risk the very survival of the human species. .

in response to president chávez's comments , secretary of state condoleezza rice maintained his remarks "were not becoming of a head of state," while then u.s .

ambassador to the united nations john bolton said that the administration would "not address this sort of comic - strip approach to international affairs. .

state department spokesman tony casey said that he would "leave it to the venezuelan people to determine whether president chávez represented them and presented them in a way they would have liked to have seen. .

president chávez's remarks at the u.n. were not the first time that the venezuelan president has spoken disparagingly of president bush or other u.s. officials or criticized u.s. policy .

he routinely refers to president bush as a "donkey," "mr .

danger," or other pejorative terms .

u.s. officials appear largely to have refrained from responding to such personal charges or criticisms leveled by president chávez and instead have focused on the negative aspects of his policies , such as the status of democracy and human rights under his government , the extent of venezuela's military purchases , or president chávez's efforts to influence political events in other latin american countries .

several members of congress criticized president chávez for his anti - american rhetoric and introduced resolutions condemning his statements , including s.res .

607 approved by the senate on december 6 , 2006 .

in response to president chávez's reelection on december 3 , 2006 , state department officials initially emphasized that the united states was looking forward to working with the venezuelan government on issues of mutual concern .

subsequently , assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs thomas shannon stated that the election was positive in that there was a clear winner and that the opposition accepted the results .

u.s. officials continued to speak out about threats to democracy in venezuela , its military buildup , and other concerns in 2007 .

in january 11 , 2007 , testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , then director of national intelligence john negroponte stated that president chávez "is among the most stridently anti - american leaders anywhere in the world , and will continue to try to undercut u.s. influence in venezuela , in the rest of latin america , and elsewhere internationally. .

negroponte also expressed concern that the venezuelan leader's military purchases and moves toward developing his own weapons production capability are increasingly worrisome to his neighbors and could fuel an arms race in the region .

in february 7 , 2007 , testimony before the house foreign affairs committee , secretary of state condoleezza rice stated that she believes "there's an assault on democracy in venezuela" and that "the president of venezuela is really destroying his own country economically , politically. .

venezuelan foreign minister nicolas maduro responded by saying that "no u.s. official has the morality to qualify venezuelan democracy or the democratic leadership of president chávez. .

president chávez continued his tough rhetoric against the united states and president bush .

during the u.s. president's visit to latin america in march 2007 , chávez led a rally in argentina in which he denounced president bush and u.s. policy in latin america .

u.s. officials maintained that they do not want to get into a rhetorical contest with chávez , but want to focus on a positive agenda of u.s. engagement in latin america .

many observers contend that president bush's march trip to the region was at least in part an attempt to counter the growing influence of president chávez in latin america .

as noted above , in the aftermath of the closing of the venezuelan government's closing of rctv in late may 2007 , the state department issued a statement calling on venezuela to reverse its policies that limit freedom of expression .

secretary of state condoleezza rice raised the issue on june 4 , 2007 , at the oas general assembly meeting in panama , and called on the oas to address the issue .

ultimately , the oas did not specifically criticize venezuela for its action , but adopted a resolution calling upon members states to respect freedom of expression .

in the aftermath of the rejection of president chávez's proposed constitutional changes in december 2007 , president bush said that the "venezuelan people rejected one - man rule," and "voted for democracy. .

under secretary of state for political affairs nicholas burns said that the vote was a "victory for the people of venezuela. .

in testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence on february 5 , 2008 , director of national intelligence michael mcconnell maintained that the defeat of the constitutional referendum in december 2007 may slow president chávez's movement toward authoritarian rule and implementation of socialism in venezuela , although mcconnell stated that chávez would not abandon his goal of sweeping change in venezuela .

mcconnell testified that chávez will continue to attempt to unite latin america under his leadership behind an anti - u.s. and radical leftist agenda , but that his leadership ambitions are likely to encounter growing opposition as time passes .

mcconnell also noted venezuela's increasing relations with iran , expressed concerns about more than $3 billion in arms purchases from russia over the past two years , and noted growing anxiety among venezuela's neighbors because of this arms build - up .

on february 10 , 2008 , president chávez once again threatened to stop oil exports to the united states , this time if exxonmobil was successful in freezing billions in venezuela oil assets in a dispute over compensation for its orinoco oil investments .

state department officials played down the threat , pointing out that chávez has made the same threat in the past , but has never cut oil .

in light of information found on documents from laptops captured by colombian forces during a march 1 , 2008 raid on a camp of the farc in ecuador , some observers , including some members of congress , called on the bush administration to designate venezuela as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism .

the bush administration began an inquiry on the matter of designating venezuela as a state sponsor .

according to press reports , the computer files appeared to link the venezuelan government with efforts to secure arms for the farc , and colombian officials maintained that the documents for the computers showed that the venezuelan government may have channeled some $300 million to the farc .

president hugo chávez and other venezuelan officials strongly deny the accusations .

in june and july 2008 , president chávez reversed policy directions in several areas .

in early june , he called for the farc to disarm , and in early july , in a meeting with u.s .

ambassador to venezuela patrick duddy , he called for cooperation with the united states on drug trafficking and other issues .

this was noted by assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs tom shannon in congressional testimony on july 17 , 2008 before the house western hemisphere subcommittee .

shannon stated that venezuela "for the first time in many years , expressed a willingness to explore improved relations with the united states," including counter - drug cooperation , and maintained that "we have told venezuela that we would like to explore this diplomatic opening. .

by september 2008 , however , u.s. relations with venezuela took a significant turn for the worse when venezuela expelled u.s .

ambassador patrick duddy , and alleged that the venezuelan government had foiled a u.s. - backed conspiracy to assassinate him .

in expelling the u.s .

ambassador , chávez expressed solidarity with bolivia , which had just expelled the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia who had met with opposition leaders in that country .

at the time that chávez announced the expulsion of ambassador duddy , he also announced that he was recalling the venezuelan ambassador to the united states , bernardo alvarez .

on september 12 , the united states declared ambassador alvarez persona non grata .

president chávez announced that he would receive a new u.s .

ambassador as soon as the united states has a new administration .

also on september 12 , the u.s. treasury department froze the assets of two senior venezuelan intelligence officials and the former interior minister for allegedly helping the farc with weapons and drug trafficking .

just days later , on september 16 , 2008 , president bush determined , for the fourth consecutive year , that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements .

during the u.s. presidential campaign , barack obama maintained that his administration would use principled bilateral diplomacy to engage with such adversaries in the region as venezuela under populist president hugo chávez .

in response to written questions during her confirmation hearing for secretary of state before the senate foreign relations committee in mid - january 2009 , senator hillary clinton characterized president chávez as a "democratically elected leader who does not govern democratically. .

she maintained that while the united states should be concerned about chávez's actions and posture , "we should not exaggerate the threat he poses. .

clinton asserted that the united states "should have a positive agenda for the hemisphere in response to the fear - mongering propagated by chávez and [bolivian president] evo morales. .

she maintained that the administration believes that bilateral cooperation with venezuela on a range of issues ( like counterterrorism , counternarcotics , energy , and commerce ) would be in the mutual interests of venezuela and the united states .

clinton maintained that "it remains to be seen whether there is any tangible sign that venezuela actually wants an improved relationship with the united states. .

a week before his inauguration , president obama maintained in an interview that president chávez "has been a force that has impeded progress in the region," and expressed concern about reports that venezuela is assisting the farc .

president chávez strongly criticized obama for his comments , but subsequently stated that he would like to restore bilateral relations to the same level as during the clinton administration .

chávez suggested that a new period of constructive relations based on respect might be possible , but that it would depend on the attitude of the president and secretary of state .

at the fifth summit of the americas held in trinidad and tobago in mid - april 2009 , president obama met president chávez along with other hemispheric leaders .

chávez maintained that he would be open to the u.s .

ambassador returning to caracas .

two months later , on june 25 , 2009 , the state department announced that the united states and venezuela had exchanged diplomatic notes and agreed to return respective ambassadors .

this led to u.s .

ambassador to venezuela patrick duddy resuming his post in caracas , and to the return of venezuelan ambassador bernardo alvarez to washington .

the return of respective ambassadors has raised some hopes of an improvement in bilateral relations .

in an interview with globovision in early july 2009 , secretary of state clinton maintained that there needs to be a dialogue between the united states and venezuela on a range of issues , and maintained that there are ways for countries that do not agree on many issues to have a conversation .

at the same time , with regard to the political situation in venezuela , clinton maintained that she hoped to see over the next months a "recognition that you can be a very strong leader and have very strong opinions without trying to take on too much power and trying to silence all your critics. .

state department officials have expressed continued concerns about the intimidation of the news media in venezuela , and steps taken by the government to restrict political participation and debate .

the state department has also expressed concern about president chávez's interference with respect to relations with other countries in the region , including colombia , and most recently honduras .

the united states has funded democracy - related projects in venezuela for a number of years through a variety of programs funded by the state department , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) .

usaid , through its office of transition initiatives , has funded democracy projects in venezuela since 2002 , with the goals of strengthening democratic institutions , promoting space for dialogue , and encouraging citizens' participation in democratic processes .

transitions initiatives ( ti ) funding in recent years was $5 million in fy2005 , $3.7 million in fy2006 , $3 million in fy2007 , $3.6 million in fy2008 , and an estimated $2 million in fy2009 .

according to usaid , the funding supports projects implemented by five u.s. organizations: development alternatives inc , which focuses on dialogue , public debate , citizen participation and leadership training ; the international republican institute and the national democratic institute , which offer technical assistance for political parties ; freedom house , which provides technical support to human rights groups ; and the pan - american development foundation , which provides support to civil society .

the state department has supported democracy projects in venezuela largely through economic support funds ( esf ) , but also recently through development assistance ( da ) funding .

in recent years , the following amounts have been provided: in fy2004 , $1.497 million in esf ; in fy2005 , $2.4 million in esf ; in fy2007 , $1.6 million in esf ; and in fy2008 , $6.5 million in da and almost $3 million in esf .

for fy2009 , an estimated $5 million in esf will be provided for democracy projects , while the fy2010 request is for $6 million in esf .

ned has funded democracy projects in venezuela since 1992 , but the level of funding has increased under the chávez government .

in fy2003 , ned funded 15 venezuela projects with $1.05 million .

in fy2004 , it funded 13 projects with about $874,000 .

in fy2005 , ned funded 16 democracy projects with $902,000 .

for fy2006 , the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations measure ( p.l .

109-102 ) provided $2 million in democracy funds for ned for democracy programs in venezuela ; with the assistance , ned funded 18 democracy projects in venezuela and 5 regional democracy projects that included components in venezuela .

for fy2007 , ned funded 17 projects with over $800,000 in funding .

for fy2008 , ned funded 18 projects with over $1 million in total funding .

the venezuelan government and some other critics have criticized ned's funding of opposition groups .

they maintain that the ned has funded groups headed by people involved in the overthrow of chávez in april 2002 as well as a group , súmate , involved in the signature collecting process for the 2004 recall referendum campaign .

critics argue that súmate led the signature drive for the recall referendum , and question whether the ned should have funded such a group .

u.s. officials and some members of congress strongly defended the ned's activities in venezuela and have criticized the venezuelan government's efforts to intimidate the leaders of súmate by charging them with conspiring against the government .

the state department asserts that the charges are without merit , and constitute an attempt "to intimidate members of civil society for exercising their democratic rights. .

according to the ned , its program in venezuela "focuses on promoting citizen participation in the political process , civil and political rights , freedom of expression and professional journalism , and conflict mediation. .

the ned asserts that all of the venezuelan programs that it funds operate on a non - partisan basis .

it maintains that súmate , which received a grant of $53,400 in september 2003 , mobilized a citizen campaign to monitor the signature collection process and that the money was used "in developing materials to educate citizens about the constitutional referendum process and to encourage citizens to participate. .

ned officials also assert that they did not fund the democratic coordinator for the development of its july 2004 consensus platform .

the ned points out that it did fund a consensus building project in 2002 for one of the ned's core institutions , the center for international private enterprise ( cipe ) .

for the project , cipe partnered with a venezuelan group , the center for the dissemination of economic information ( cedice ) to work with several venezuelan nongovernmental organizations and the business sector for the development of a broad - based consensus .

in early september 2005 , the board of the ned approved a new $107,000 grant to súmate for a program to train thousands of people on their electoral rights .

as a result of the controversy , the conference report to the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( division b of p.l .

108-447 , h.rept .

108-792 ) required a comprehensive report on ned's activities in venezuela since fy2001 , and reaffirmed ned's duty to ensure that all sponsored activities adhere to core ned principles .

the reporting requirement had first been included in the report to the house version of the fy2005 commerce , justice , and state appropriations bill ( h.r .

4754 , h.rept .

108-576 ) .

since venezuela is a major supplier of foreign oil to the united states ( the fourth major foreign supplier in 2007 , after canada , mexico , and saudi arabia ) , providing about 11.5% of u.s. crude oil imports , a key u.s. interest has been ensuring the continued flow of oil exports .

some 68% of venezuela's oil exports are destined for the united states , highlighting the dependency of venezuela on the u.s. market , and oil exports account for the overwhelming majority of venezuela's exports to the united states .

in 2007 , venezuela's total exports destined for the united states amounted to $39.9 billion , with oil products accounting for almost 96% of the total .

the december 2002 strike orchestrated by the opposition reduced venezuela's oil exports , but by may 2003 , venezuelan officials maintained that overall oil production returned to the pre - strike level .

venezuela's state - run oil company , pdvsa , owns citgo , which operates three crude oil refineries and a network of some 14,000 retail gasoline stations in the united states .

the chávez government benefitted from the rise in world oil prices , which increased government revenues and sparked an economic boom .

as a result , chávez was able to increase government expenditures on anti - poverty and other social programs associated with his populist agenda .

in april 2008 , the government approved a measure that taxes foreign oil companies 50% when crude oil is $70 a barrel , and 60% when oil exceeds $100 a barrel .

the rapid decline in the price of oil since 2008 has reduced government revenue considerably .

under president chávez , the venezuelan government moved ahead with asserting greater control over the country's oil reserves .

by march 2006 , it had completed the conversion of its 32 operating agreements with foreign oil companies to joint ventures , with the venezuelan government now holding a majority share of between 60-80% in the ventures .

in 2007 , the government completed the conversion of four strategic associations involving extra - heavy oil orinoco river basin projects .

six foreign companies had been involved in the projects — u.s. - based conocophillips , chevron , and exxonmobil , norway's statoil - hydro , britain's bp , and france's total .

in the conversion to venezuelan government majority ownership , chevron and bp maintained their previous investments , total and statoil - hydro reduced their holdings , while conocophillips and exxonmobil chose to leave the projects .

however , statoil - hydro , total , and italy's eni subsequently signed agreements that could result in additional investments in the orinoco belt projects .

other state - owned oil companies , such as iran's petropars , the china national petroleum corporation , cuba's cupet , as well as russian companies such as gazprom , tnk - bp , and lukoil have also signed agreements for exploration in the orinoco region .

according to some critics , majority state ownership in the oil sector has reportedly slowed the rate of foreign investment .

production also has reportedly not been able to recover from the firing of some 18,000 pdvsa employees in early 2003 and from continued underinvestment in maintenance and repairs .

pdvsa announced in early april 2008 that it would raise output to 3.5 million barrels a day ( mbd ) , up from 3.15 mbd in 2007 , but other sources , including the international energy agency , put 2007 production at far less , just 2.4 million mbd .

some oil analysts also question whether pdvsa is prepared to take over operation of the heavy oil fields in the orinoco .

despite notable frictions in bilateral relations , venezuela continues to be a major supplier of oil to the united states .

even though venezuela opposed the u.s. war in iraq , the chávez government announced before the military conflict that it would be a reliable wartime supplier of oil to the united states .

on numerous occasions , however , chávez has threatened to stop selling oil to the united states .

in february 2006 , he asserted that the "u.s. government should know that , if it crosses the line , it will not get venezuelan oil. .

in april 2006 , he warned that his government would blow up its oil fields if the united states ever were to attack .

in november 2006 ( amid venezuela's presidential election campaign ) , president chávez asserted that venezuela would "not send one more drop of oil to the u.s." if the united states or its " lackeys" in venezuela try a "new coup," fail to recognize the elections , or try to overthrow the oil industry .

many observers believe chávez's threats have been merely part of his rhetoric that is designed to bolster his domestic political support .

venezuela's ambassador to the united states asserted in july 2006 that oil - cutoff comments by venezuelan officials , including president chávez , only reflect what would be venezuela's response against aggression initiated by the u.s. government .

once again in february 2008 , president chávez once again threatened to stop oil exports to the united states , this time if exxonmobil was successful in freezing billions in venezuela oil assets in a dispute over compensation for its orinoco oil investments .

state department officials played down the threat , pointing out that chávez has made the same threat in the past , but has never cut oil .

a week later , on february 17 , chávez said that he would only stop sending oil if the united states attacked venezuela .

because of these comments , however , some observers have raised questions about the security of venezuela as a major supplier of foreign oil .

there are also concerns that venezuela is looking to develop china as a replacement market , although venezuelan officials maintain that they are only attempting to diversify venezuela's oil markets .

in june 2006 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued a report , requested by senate foreign relations committee chairman richard lugar , on the issue of potential venezuelan oil supply disruption .

the gao report concluded that a sudden loss of all or most venezuelan oil from the world market could raise world prices up to $11 per barrel and decrease u.s. gross domestic product by about $23 billion .

it also concluded that if venezuela does not maintain or expand its current level of oil production , then the world oil market may become even tighter than it is now , putting pressures on both the level and volatility of energy prices .

because of venezuela's extensive 1,370-mile border with colombia , it is a major transit route for cocaine and heroin destined for the united states .

as noted above , venezuela suspended its cooperation with the u.s. drug enforcement administration in early august 2005 because it alleged that dea agents were spying on venezuela .

u.s. officials maintained that the charges were baseless .

from 2005 to 2008 , president bush annually designated venezuela , pursuant to international drug control certification procedures set forth in the foreign relations authorization act , fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 ) , as a country that has failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics agreements , although he waived economic sanctions that would have curtailed u.s. assistance for democracy programs in venezuela .

venezuelan officials maintain that president bush's decision to designate venezuela was purely political because of the overall state of u.s. - venezuelan relations .

press reports in june and july 2006 indicated that the united states and venezuela were on the verge of signing an anti - drug cooperation agreement that would allow the dea to continue working with the venezuelan government , but approval of the agreement has still not taken place .

in august 2006 , venezuelan officials said that they were reconsidering signing the agreement in response to the announcement by u.s. director of national intelligence john negroponte on the establishment of a new position of mission manager for cuba and venezuela .

according to the bush administration's september 2006 justification for determining that venezuela had "failed demonstrably" to adhere to counternarcotics obligations , "the role and status of the dea in venezuela remains in limbo since the host country refuses to sign a memorandum of understanding authorizing" a dea presence "even after successfully concluding a lengthy process of negotiation with u.s .

officials. .

on july 26 , 2006 , the house approved h.con.res .

400 ( burton ) , which , among other provisions , condemned venezuela's failures to stem the flow of narcotics through its territory and calls for , among other measures , steps to restore cooperation between venezuela and the dea .

in 2008 , the venezuela government appeared to be taking more action on antidrug measures .

it began a program aimed at destroying clandestine airstrip used by colombian drug traffickers and at tracking drug smuggling planes .

by early september 2008 , venezuelan officials claimed to have destroyed more than 200 illegal landing strips .

venezuelan officials maintain that venezuela has cooperated extensively with other countries in combating drug trafficking .

they point to cooperation with colombia , including the return of captured colombian drug traffickers and a joint eradication program to target coca , poppy , and cannabis cultivation in the common sierra de perijá mountain area bordering the two countries .

venezuelan officials also assert that the country is setting up a radar system , purchased from china , that when in operation , will help it monitor suspected drug flights .

in early july 2008 , president chávez met briefly with u.s .

ambassador patrick duddy and expressed a desire to reopen cooperation with the united states on drug trafficking and other issues .

u.s. officials increased their criticism of venezuelan antidrug efforts in august and september 2008 , maintaining that the country was playing a leading role in drug trafficking in the western hemisphere .

the white house office of national drug control policy maintained that the number of drug flights leaving venezuela increased tenfold from 21 metric tons in 2002 to 220 metric tons in 2007 and that the figure would be higher in 2008 .

on september 16 , 2008 , for the fourth year in a row , president bush determined that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements , but he waived sanctions to allow the continuation of u.s. foreign assistance to support civil society programs and community development programs .

according to the state department , the amount of drugs bound for the united states and europe continues to grow , despite venezuelan assurances that seizures have increased .

the state department again noted venezuela's refusal to renew counternarcotics cooperation agreements with the untied states .

from fy2002-fy2007 , venezuela received small amounts of u.s. assistance under the administration's andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) focusing on counternarcotics cooperation and judicial reform support .

some $5 million was provided in fy2002 ; $2.075 million in fy2003 ; $5 million in fy2004 ; almost $3 million in fy2005 ; $2.229 million in fy2006 ; and $1 million in fy2007 .

since fy2008 , no counternarcotics assistance has been requested for venezuela .

the department of state , in its february 2009 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) , maintained that venezuela is one of the preferred routes for trafficking illicit narcotics out of colombia because of the permissive and corrupt environment in venezuela and because of counternarcotics successes in colombia .

the majority of narcotics transiting venezuela are destined for the united states , according to the report , but an increasing percentage has started to flow toward western africa and then toward europe .

venezuela's corruption problem has been compounded by the transit of drugs , as has the increased level of crime and violence throughout the country .

according to the report , the annual flow of narcotics trafficking through venezuela has increased fivefold since 2002 , from 50 metric tons ( mt ) to an estimated 250 mt in 2007 .

venezuela reported that 54 metric tons of cocaine were seized in 2008 ( up from 28 mt in 2007 ) , but the report maintained that the united states could not confirm these seizures or verify the destruction of the drugs .

according to the state department report , the government of venezuela has almost eliminated all counternarcotics related cooperation contact with the u.s. government , including , despite repeated u.s. requests , the signing of an anti - drug agreement negotiated with venezuela in 2005 .

in 2007 , venezuela ended the judicial sector's participation in several united nations office of drugs and crime ( unodc ) programs funded by the u.s. - government , and maintained that it would not participate in any programs receiving u.s. funding .

venezuela has not made the u.s. - funded container inspection facility ( cif ) at puerto cabello operational , even though the facility was completed in 2006 .

the state department report , did maintain however , that venezuela generally continues to authorize the u.s. government to board venezuelan flagged vessels on the high seas suspected of being engaged in narcotics trafficking .

looking ahead , the state department maintained in the report that the united states remains prepared to renew cooperation with venezuela to fight the increasing flow of illegal drugs , and pointed to two venezuelan steps that would be positive: ( 1 ) the signing of the outstanding bilateral anti - drug agreement negotiated in 2005 and ( 2 ) stemming the rise in drug transshipments from colombia by working with the united states to make the cif operational .

on july 20 , 2009 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) issued a report on the status of drug trafficking through venezuela and the status of u.s. - venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation .

according to the report , u.s. and colombian officials assert that venezuela has extended a lifeline to colombian illegally armed groups by providing significant support and safe haven along the border .

u.s. officials also contended that a high level of corruption within the venezuelan government , military , and other law enforcement and security forces contributes to the permissive environment .

while the venezuelan government maintains that counternarcotics cooperation with the united states was not necessary because it has its own programs , venezuelan officials expressed willingness for greater technical cooperation with the united states if the venezuelan government would allow it .

the report concluded that the lack of venezuelan counternarcotics cooperation is a significant impediment to the u.s. capacity to interdict drugs en route to the united states .

for several years , u.s. officials have expressed concerns about venezuela's purchases of military equipment .

defense intelligence agency ( dia ) director lt. gen. michael maples expressed concern in february 2006 congressional testimony about venezuela's arms purchases , maintaining that venezuela was seeking to increase their capability for their own defense and to operate elsewhere in the region .

in january 2006 , the state department indicated that the united states had denied licenses — required by the arms export control act — to transfer u.s. technology for use in 12 military transport planes that spanish companies had contracted to sell to venezuela .

according to a state department spokesman , the proposed sale could contribute to de - stabilization in latin america .

spain initially responded by indicating that it would go ahead with the sale of the airplanes utilizing non - u.s. technology , but in mid - october 2006 , spain's foreign minister announced that such an alternative was not economically feasible and the deal was cancelled .

venezuela responded to the u.s. action by labeling it as "imperialist. .

the state department official also indicated that the united states had expressed similar concerns to brazil about military sales to venezuela .

venezuela expressed interested in purchasing at least a dozen light - attack aircraft , manufactured by embrarer , that contain u.s. technology .

in may 2006 , as discussed below ( "venezuela and u.s. anti - terrorism sanctions" ) , the state department determined ( pursuant to section 40a of the arms export control act ) that venezuela was not fully cooperating with u.s. antiterrorism efforts , an action that triggered a prohibition on the sale or license of defense articles and services to venezuela .

since then , the state department made the same annual determination each year , most recently in may 2009 .

in january 11 , 2007 , testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , then director of national intelligence ( dni ) john negroponte expressed concern that the president chávez's military purchases and moves toward developing his own weapons production capability were increasingly worrisome to his neighbors , and could fuel an arms race in the region .

in february 5 , 2008 , testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , then dni michael mcconnell expressed concerns about more than $3 billion in arms purchases from russia over the past two years , and noted growing anxiety among venezuela's neighbors because of this arms build - up .

mcconnell testified at a february 27 , 2008 senate armed services committee hearing that venezuela's military build - up is probably 3 to 4 times what would be needed for external defense .

with regard to rifles from venezuela potentially ending up in the hands of the farc , dia director maples maintained at the hearing that he had not seen that , and that the likely purpose was "using asymmetric capabilities and tactics and empowering the population in some way , in a home guard sense. .

in february 12 , 2009 , testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , current dni dennis blair maintained that the chávez government has made $5.3 billion in military purchases since 2005 , but that venezuela's overall military capabilities remain plagued by logistic , maintenance , and transportation shortfalls .

president chávez has vowed to continue with his nation's military purchases , asserting that he was acquiring the minimum equipment for venezuela to defend itself from the united states .

venezuela is buying significant amounts of military equipment from russia .

this includes contracts to buy 24 sukhoi su - 30 fighter jets , 50 military helicopters , 100,000 kalashnikov assault rifles , a license to build a factory to produce kalashnikov rifles in venezuela , and several submarines .

the venezuelan government maintains that it is buying the russian fighter jets because the united states is refusing to sell the country spare parts for its aging fleet of f - 16 fighters that it purchased in the 1980s .

some press reports indicate that future additional military purchases from russia could include transport planes , tanks , additional submarines , and an air defense missile system .

during a trip to russia in late september 2008 , russia announced that it would loan $1 billion to venezuela for arms purchases and military development .

in may 2009 , u.s. officials expressed concern that venezuela's arms purchases were exceeding the country's needs and specifically expressed concern about venezuela's purchase of shoulder - fired anti - aircraft missiles ( sa - 24 man - portable missiles ) from russia .

on july 27 , 2009 , the government of sweden asked for an explanation from venezuela of how the colombian farc had obtained swedish - made anti - tank rocket launchers that had been sold to venezuela in the 1980s .

venezuelan officials denied any venezuelan government involvement with the farc .

in october 2008 , three of the launchers were reportedly recovered from a farc arms cache .

as u.s. - venezuelan relations have deteriorated over the past several years , the chávez government has focused its relations with latin america and its activities in the region in part as a means of countering the united states and u.s. interests and influence in the hemisphere .

dni michael mcconnell testified in february 5 , 2008 testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , chávez will continue to attempt to unite latin america under his leadership behind an anti - u.s. and radical leftist agenda , but noted that as time passes , chávez's leadership ambitions are likely to encounter growing opposition .

over the years , there have been concerns about president chávez's attempts to export his brand of populism to other latin america countries .

he has strongly supported bolivia's president evo morales , and offered assistance to help bolivia re - write its constitution and implement radical reforms to the economy .

in peru's 2006 presidential elections , chávez openly supported the unsuccessful presidential candidacy of a nationalist former army colonel who had led a failed military uprising in 2000 .

current peruvian president alan garcia , a strong u.s. ally , has expressed concern about venezuelan activities in peru .

venezuela also has had close with nicaragua under the presidency of daniel ortega , providing substantial assistance , and with ecuador under the presidency of rafael correa .

in 2004 , president chávez launched a bolivarian alternative for the americas ( alba ) as an alternative to the free trade area of the americas .

alba advocates a socially oriented trade block that would include mechanisms for poverty reduction , and cooperation in a range of areas including health , education , culture , investment , and finance .

currently nine countries in the region have joined alba .

venezuela and cuba were the first countries to launch alba in 2004 , while bolivia joined in 2006 , and nicaragua in 2007 .

in 2008 , the caribbean nations of dominica joined in january , while honduras joined in august .

in june 2009 , three additional countries joined — ecuador , st. vincent and the grenadines , and antigua and barbuda .

in december 2007 , venezuela and six other south american countries – argentina , bolivian , brazil , ecuador , paraguay , and uruguay – joined to sign the founding act of a new bank of the south , a chávez initiative to offer a new source of development financing apart from the world bank and the international monetary fund .

the bank reportedly will have a start - up capital of some $7 billion , largely from brazil and venezuela , but it remains unclear what the lending conditions of the bank will be .

since 2005 , president chávez has used so - called "oil diplomacy" to provide oil to caribbean basin nations on preferential terms in a program known as petrocaribe , prompting u.s. concern that venezuela is using these programs to increase its influence in the region .

under the program , venezuela initially offered to supply 190,000 barrels per day of oil to the region on preferential terms with 50% of the oil financed over 25 years at an annual interest rate of 1% .

at a july 2008 petrocaribe summit , president chávez announced that up to 60% of the oil could be financed while oil prices remained over $100 a barrel , and this would rise to 70% financed if oil prices rise to over $150 a barrel .

most caribbean nations are members , with the exception of barbados and trinidad and tobago .

cuba , a major beneficiary , receives over 90,000 barrels per day ( bpd ) of oil under the program .

in central america , nicaragua and honduras joined petrocaribe in 2007 and guatemala joined in july 2008 .

petrocaribe also has the goal of putting in place a regional supply , refining , and transportation and storage network , and establishing a development fund for those countries participating in the program .

in addition to these preferential oil arrangements , venezuela is investing in energy sectors in several latin american countries .

chávez has pledged to invest $1.5 billion in bolivia's gas industry .

ecuador and venezuela have signed agreements for joint development in oil , gas , refining , and petrochemical sectors .

in 2005 , pdvsa signed an agreement to build an oil refinery in northeastern brazil .

construction on the 200,000 bpd refinery began in september 2007 , and is to be supplied with oil from both brazil and venezuela when it begins operations in 2010 .

colombia and venezuela signed an agreement in july 2006 initiating a gas pipeline project that would initially supply gas to venezuela from northern colombia , and then reverse the flow once venezuela develops its own natural gas reserves .

argentina and venezuela also announced an alliance in july 2006 involving cooperation on hydrocarbon exploration and development in both countries .

in cuba , pdvsa helped refurbish an oil refinery in cienfuegos , and has signed an exploration and production agreement with cupet , cuba's state - oil company .

the potential use of venezuela's windfall oil profits abroad to influence activities in other latin american countries was highlighted in december 2007 when three venezuelans — franklin duran , moises maionica , and carlos kauffmann — and one uruguayan national were arrested and charged in u.s. federal court in miami with acting and conspiring to act as agents of the venezuelan government without prior notification to the u.s. attorney general .

 ( a fifth foreign national wanted in the case , antonio josé canchica gomez , reportedly a venezuelan intelligence official , remains at large. ) .

all four defendants were alleged to have conspired in a scheme to conceal the source and destination and the role of the venezuelan government in the attempted delivery of $800,000 to argentina by a u.s. businessman , guido alejandro antonini wilson .

the funds were alleged to be destined for the presidential campaign of argentine president cristina fernández de kirchner .

high - level venezuelan officials also were alleged to be involved in the matter , including from the office of the vice president and the intelligence and preventative services directorate ( disip ) .

ultimately three of the four defendants facing trial — maionica , kauffmann , and wanseele — pled guilty , while duran was tried and convicted in early november 2008 and later sentenced to four years .

in august 2007 , colombian president alvaro uribe authorized president chávez and colombian senator piedad cordoba to play a role in negotiations with the farc to release some 45 high - profile hostages .

this included efforts to release three american defense contractors – marc gonsalves , keith stansell , and thomas howes – held since february 2003 , when their plane crashed in farc - controlled territory .

in late november 2007 , however , uribe withdrew his support of these efforts because chávez reportedly broke protocol by having direct contact with the top commander of the colombian army .

nevertheless , chávez continued to play a key role in the effort to release the hostages .

on january 10 , 2008 , the farc ultimately released to venezuelan officials two prominent colombians that had been hostage for several years .

a day after the two hostages' release , chávez's calls for the international community to no longer label the farc and the national liberation army ( eln ) as terrorist groups prompted widespread condemnation .

nevertheless , his role in the release of hostages continued .

on february 27 , 2008 , the farc released four former members of the colombian congress to venezuelan officials in colombian territory .

on march 7 , 2008 , the venezuelan government received from the farc "proofs of life" for 10 colombian soldiers held by the farc .

in the aftermath of the ecuador - colombia border crisis ( discussed below ) , chávez's role in future hostage releases became unclear .

moreover , on july 2 , 2008 , the colombian military rescued the three american hostages along with former colombian presidential candidate ingrid betancourt and 11 other hostages .

over 700 hostages are still being held by the farc .

venezuela initially played a significant role in stoking regional tensions in the aftermath of colombia's march 1 , 2008 bombing of a farc camp in ecuador that killed raúl reyes , the farc's second highest commander .

president chávez warned colombian president uribe not to do anything similar in venezuelan territory "because it would be a cause for war. .

venezuela , along with ecuador , announced that it would mobilize troops along its border with colombia , and chávez threatened to send its russian fighter jets to attack colombia if president uribe attempted a similar operation against the farc rebels on the venezuelan side of the border .

he ordered 10 battalions to the colombian border , including tank units , closed the venezuela embassy in bogotá , and expelled colombia's ambassador from venezuela .

few analysts took chávez's order to send tanks and fighter jets to the border as a serious threat of war , maintaining that venezuela's active military of 115,000 troops pales in comparison to colombia's 254,000 troops that have seen active combat against insurgent groups for many years .

moreover , some maintain that venezuela's troop movements were delayed for several days , and may have been far less than chávez led everyone to believe .

just days after the colombian incursion , president chávez reportedly played an important role at the successful rio group summit that helped resolve the crisis .

oas secretary general insulza maintained that chávez's role was "decisive and tremendously constructive" in sorting out the crisis at the santo domingo meeting .

after six hours of contentious exchanges , chávez reportedly called for reflection and cooling off , and paved the way for dominican president leonel fernández to urge the parties to end the meeting with a cordial embrace .

he maintained that the conflict cannot be solved militarily , and must be resolved by a negotiated settlement .

by march 10 , venezuela announced that it was fully establishing diplomatic and commercial ties with colombia , and pulled its troops back .

u.s. officials have expressed concerns over the past several years about venezuela's lack of cooperation on antiterrorism efforts , its relations with cuba and iran , and president chávez's sympathetic statements for colombian terrorist groups .

since may 2006 , the secretary of state has made an annual determination that venezuela has not been "cooperating fully with united states antiterrorism efforts" pursuant to section 40a of the arms export control act ( p.l .

90-629 ) .

as a result , the united states has imposed an arms embargo on venezuela since 2006 , which ended all u.s. commercial arms sales and re - transfers to venezuela .

when the state department issued its first determination in 2006 , it was based on venezuela's near lack of antiterrorism cooperation over the previous year , citing its support for iraqi insurgents and iran's development of nuclear capabilities , the country's status as a safe haven for colombian and basque terrorist groups , and its effort to derail hemispheric efforts to advance counter - terrorism policies in the oas .

the state department's april 2009 country reports on terrorism maintained that while venezuela president hugo chávez's ideological sympathy for the farc and the eln had limited venezuelan cooperation with colombia in combating terrorism , president chávez publicly changed course in june 2008 and called on the farc to unconditionally release all hostages , declaring that armed struggle is "out of place" in modern latin america .

in july 2008 , the venezuelan military detained a senior farc official and handed him over to colombian authorities .

nevertheless , in september 2008 , the treasury department froze the assets of two senior venezuelan intelligence officials — general hugo carvajal and general henry rangel — and the former interior minister , ramón rodríguez chacín , for allegedly helping the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) with weapons and drug trafficking .

information on captured computer files from colombia's march 2008 raid of a farc camp in ecuador had raised questions about potential support of the farc by the chávez government .

venezuelan officials have dismissed the data as having been fabricated even though interpol verified in may 2008 that the files had not been tampered with since they were seized .

on june 6 , 2008 , two venezuelan nationals ( one a national guard sergeant ) and two colombians were arrested in eastern colombia for gun - running .

the four were captured with some 40,000 rounds of ammunition allegedly destined for the farc .

in the april 2009 terrorism report , the state department stated that the farc , eln , and remnants of the auc often crossed into venezuelan territory to rest and regroup as well as to extort protection money and kidnap venezuelans in order to finance their operations .

according to the report , the venezuelan government also did not systematically police its country's border with colombia to prevent the movement of armed groups or to interdict the flow of narcotics .

some limited amounts of weapons and ammunition from official venezuelan stocks and facilities were reported to have ended up in the hands of colombian terrorist groups .

as noted above , the swedish government questioned venezuela in late july on how farc had obtained swedish - made anti - tank rocket launchers that had been sold to venezuela in the 1980s .

the state department terrorism report also cited two other concerns about venezuela .

first , as noted in the past , venezuelan citizenship , identity , and travel documents remained easy to obtain , making the country a potentially attractive way - station for terrorists .

second , the report noted that passengers on weekly flights connecting tehran and damascus with caracas were subject only to cursory immigration and customs controls in caracas .

there has been increasing concern in recent years about iran's increasing interest in latin america , particularly its relations with venezuela under president hugo chávez .

one reason for the concern is iran's ties to the radical lebanon - based islamic group hezbollah ( party of god ) , which is reported to have been linked to the 1994 bombing of a jewish cultural center in buenos aires .

in june 2008 , the treasury department announced that it was freezing the u.s. assets of two venezuelans for providing financial and other support to hezbollah .

in the 110 th congress , the house approved h.res .

435 ( klein ) in november 2007 , which expressed concern about iran's efforts to expand its influence in latin america , and noted venezuela's increasing cooperation with iran .

in light of the captured farc documents cited above , some observers , including some members of congress , had called on the bush administration in 2008 to designate venezuela as a state sponsor of terrorism pursuant to section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act ( eaa ) of 1979 ( p.l .

96-72 ) .

other countries currently on the state sponsors of terrorism list include cuba , iran , sudan , and syria .

the bush administration began an initial inquiry into designating venezuela as a state sponsor in march 2008 , but did not make such a designation .

in the 110 th congress , h.res .

1049 ( mack ) , introduced in march 2008 , would have urged the administration to designate venezuela as such .

in terms of economic sanctions associated with being on the terrorism list , the eaa requires a validated license for the export of goods and technology to a country if the secretary of state determines that the government of such a country "has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism" and if the export of such goods and technology could make a significant contribution to the country's military potential or could enhance its ability to support acts of international terrorism .

beyond the eaa , several provisions of law impose additional sanctions on countries on the state sponsors of terrorism list , such as: a ban on arms - related exports and sales ; various restrictions and prohibitions on foreign assistance ; denial of duty - free treatment of goods exported to the united states under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) ; denying companies and individuals tax credits for income earned in the terrorist - listed countries ; and authority to prohibit any u.s. citizen from engaging in a financial transaction with a terrorist - list government without a treasury department license .

the sanctions associated with being on the terrorism list would likely have an effect on u.s. - venezuelan economic relations .

a substantial portion of u.s. exports to venezuela , particularly for the oil sector , would likely require validated licenses for so - called dual - use exports and technology .

the termination of the tax credit that prevents double taxation would increase the cost of u.s. companies operating in venezuela , and could be a disincentive for some u.s. companies operating there .

the stock of u.s. foreign investment in venezuela is estimated at $11.6 billion , concentrated in the manufacturing and mining sector .

the state sponsor of terrorism designation also potentially could complicate u.s. oil imports from venezuela , in part because pdvsa owns citgo , based in houston texas , which operates three oil refineries and two asphalt refineries in the united states and has some 14,000 branded retail outlets selling gasoline across the united states .

pdvsa also has a 50% interest in a large refinery in the u.s. virgin islands .

according to the venezuelan government , pdvsa and citgo annually purchase more than $2 billion in goods and services from 800 u.s. companies .

the designation of venezuela as a state sponsor of terrorism in 2008 also could have increased popular support for president chávez at a time when venezuela was preparing for state and local elections in november 2008 .

some venezuelan opposition figures maintain that such a designation would have only been helpful to the chávez government , which would have portrayed itself as a victim .

short of designating venezuela as a state sponsor of terrorism , some observers have suggested the consideration of "smart" or targeted sanctions aimed at venezuelan officials or particular activities in order to demonstrate u.s. concern with their alleged actions supporting the farc .

suggestions for such sanctions generally include denying entry into the united states of designated individuals or freezing assets of named individuals or entities , such as occurred on september 12 , 2008 , when the treasury department froze the assets of three high - ranking venezuelan officials for their support for the farc ( noted above ) .

venezuela's relations with iran have been longstanding because they were both founding members of opec .

nevertheless , as their relations have intensified over the past several years , u.s. officials and some members of congress have expressed concerns .

in november 2007 , the house approved h.res .

435 ( klein ) , expressing concern about iran's efforts to expand its influence in latin america , and noting venezuela's increasing cooperation with iran .

iranian president mahmoud ahmadinejad has visited caracas on several occasions since 2006 , and president chávez has visited iran several times .

the personal relationship between the two leaders has driven the strengthening of bilateral ties .

the two nations have signed a variety of agreements in agriculture , petrochemicals , oil exploration in the orinoco region of venezuela , and the manufacturing of automobiles , bicycles , and tractors .

weekly flights between the two countries began in 2007 .

in february 5 , 2008 testimony before the senate select intelligence committee , then director of national intelligence ( dni ) michael mcconnell maintained that most cooperation between iran and venezuela has been on the economic and energy fronts , but that military cooperation is growing , and the two nations have discussed cooperation on nuclear energy .

in october 2008 , the u.s. treasury department imposed sanctions on an iranian - owned bank based in caracas , the banco internacional de desarollo , c.a. , under executive order 13382 , which allows the president to block the assets of proliferators of weapons of mass destruction and their supporters .

the bank is linked to the export development bank of iran ( edbi ) , which the treasury department asserts has provided or attempted to provide services to iran's ministry of defense and armed forces logistics .

during an april 2009 trip to tehran , chávez and ahmadinejad inaugurated a new development bank for economic projects in both countries , with each country providing $100 million in initial capital .

venezuela also has played a key role in the development of iran's expanding relations with the region .

dni dennis blair maintained in february 2009 congressional testimony that venezuela "is serving as a bridge to help iran build relations with other latin american countries. .

in recent years , iran's relations have grown with bolivia under president evo morales , with ecuador under president rafael correa , and with nicaragua under president daniel ortega .

while iran has promised significant assistance and investment to these countries , observers maintain that there has been no evidence that such promises have materialized .

in nicaragua for example , iran has not followed through with its promise to finance the construction of a deep - water port .

likewise in bolivia and ecuador , there is little evidence showing that iran has followed up with its promises of investment .

a major rationale for iran's recent overtures toward latin america is to show that it is not isolated diplomatically .

for some observers , a key reason for ahmadinejad's increased interest in the region , especially with countries such as venezuela , has been to develop leverage against the united states in its own neighborhood , rather than any real economic interest in latin america .

assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs tom shannon has said that one of the concerns about iran's increasing interest in latin america is its ties to the radical lebanon - based islamic group hezbollah .

according to shannon , "what worries us is iran's history of activities in the region and especially its links to hezbollah and the terrorist attack that took place in buenos aires [in 1994]. .

on june 18 , 2008 , the u.s. treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) announced that it was freezing the u.s. assets of two venezuelans — ghazi nasr al din ( a venezuelan diplomat serving in lebanon ) and fawzi kan'an — for providing financial and other support to hezbollah .

u.s. citizens are also prohibited in engaging in any transactions with the two venezuelans , including any business with two travel agencies in caracas owned by kan'an .

in march 2009 congressional testimony , admiral james g. stavridis , then commander of the u.s. southern command ( southcom ) , also asserted that the main concern about iran's increased activity in latin america is its links to hezbollah .

he maintained that there was hezbollah activity throughout south america , particularly the tri - border area ( tba ) of argentina , brazil , and paraguay as well as parts of brazil and the caribbean basin .

venezuela requested the extradition of three of its citizens from the united states in two controversial terrorism cases .

in early 2004 , the chávez government requested the extradition of two former venezuelan national guard lieutenants , josé antonio colina and german rodolfo varela , charged with the february 2003 bombings of the spanish embassy and the colombian consulate in caracas .

both applied for political asylum because they claimed that they would be executed or tortured if returned to venezuela .

they were held from december 2003 until april 2006 by u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

in february 2005 , a u.s. immigration judge denied them asylum because of "serious reasons for believing" that they were involved in the bombings but prohibited the united states from deporting them to venezuela because of the likelihood of being tortured .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) asked an immigration appeals court to deport the two venezuelans , arguing that they would not be tortured if returned home .

as evidence , they cited the treatment of a former general arrested in venezuela for the same case .

in late december 2005 , colina and varela — on a hunger strike for a month in protest of being held by u.s. immigration — were transferred from florida to houston for medical treatment .

they ended their 33-day hunger strike in early january 2006 .

in april 2006 , ice reversed its stance on the deportation case and joined with the attorneys for colina and varela in filing a joint motion asking the immigration appeals court to dismiss the case , whereupon they were released .

lawyers for the two former officers maintain that the state department's march 2006 human rights report on venezuela played a role in ice's decision to abandon its efforts to deport colina and varela .

the report cited accusations that a military general imprisoned in venezuela for alleged involvement in the bombings had been subject to sensory deprivation and psychological torture .

the venezuelan government condemned the release of colina and varela , maintaining that the united states had become a "sanctuary for terrorists. .

in another controversial case , venezuela has requested the extradition of anti - castro activist luis posada carriles for his alleged role in the 1976 bombing of a cuban airliner that killed 73 people .

in april 2005 , posada's lawyer announced that posada had entered the united states illegally from mexico and would apply for asylum because he has a "well - founded fear of persecution" for his opposition to fidel castro .

posada had been imprisoned in venezuela for the bombing of the cuban airliner but reportedly was allowed to "escape" from prison in 1985 after his supporters paid a bribe to the prison warden .

he had been acquitted for the bombing but remained in prison pending a prosecutorial appeal .

posada also reportedly admitted , but later denied , involvement in a string of bombings in havana in 1997 , one of which killed an italian tourist .

more recently , posada was imprisoned for several years in panama for his involvement in an alleged plot in november 2000 to kill fidel castro .

he was convicted on weapons charges in the case and sentenced to eight years in prison , but ultimately was pardoned by outgoing president mireya moscoso in august 2004 .

ice arrested posada on may 17 , 2005 , and subsequently charged him with illegally entering the united states .

a dhs press release indicated that ice does not generally deport people to cuba or countries believed to be acting on cuba's behalf .

venezuela has pledged that it would not hand posada over to cuba , but on september 26 , 2005 , a u.s. immigration judge ruled that posada could not be deported to venezuela because he could be tortured .

ice reviewed the case and determined on march 22 , 2006 , that posada would not be freed from a federal immigration facility in el paso , texas .

in november 2006 , however , a u.s. federal judge , who was considering posada's plea that he be released , ordered the government to supply evidence , by february 1 , 2007 , justifying his continued detention .

on january 11 , 2007 , a federal grand jury in texas indicted posada on seven counts for lying about how he entered the united states illegally in march 2005 , whereupon he was transferred from immigration detention in el paso to a country jail in new mexico near the texas border .

posada was released from jail in new mexico on april 19 , 2007 , and allowed to return to miami under house arrest to await an upcoming trial on immigration fraud charges , but on may 9 , 2007 a federal judge in texas dismissed the charges .

the judge maintained that the u.s. government mistranslated testimony from posada and manipulated evidence .

on june 5 , 2007 , justice department prosecutors filed a notice of appeal with the 5 th u.s .

circuit court of appeals in new orleans and on november 6 , 2007 , federal prosecutors field a brief requesting that the court reverse the lower court's decision .

both venezuela and cuba strongly denounced posada's release , contending that he is a terrorist , and in mid - march 2008 , the two countries raised the issue at a un security council meeting on the un's anti - terrorism strategy .

venezuela maintains that the state department has ignored its request to extradite posada .

in a new turn of events , posada was again indicted by a federal grand jury in texas on april 8 , 2009 .

in the 10-count indictment , posada was accused , among other things , of lying during immigration proceedings regarding his involvement in bombings in havana in 1997 .

originally , a federal trial was set to begin in august 2009 but was rescheduled until february 2010 in order to give him time to prepare his defense .

press reports maintain that posada is also being investigated by a grand jury in new jersey for his role in the 1997 bombings in cuba .

on july 22 , 2009 , the senate approved s.amdt .

1536 ( martinez ) to the senate version of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 , s. 1390 , that requires the director of national intelligence to provide a report on venezuela to the defense and intelligence committees within 180 days of the enactment of the act .

the senate subsequently approved s. 1390 on july 23 , 2009 .

the required report is to address the following topics: ( 1 ) an inventory of all weapons purchases by , and transfers to , the government of venezuela and venezuela's transfers to other countries since 1998 ; ( 2 ) the mining and shipping of venezuelan uranium to iran , north korea , and other states suspected of nuclear proliferation ; ( 3 ) the extent to which hugo chávez and other venezuelan officials and supporters of the venezuelan government provide political counsel , collaboration financial ties , refuge , and other forms of support , including military materiel , to the farc ; ( 4 ) the extent to which hugo chávez and other venezuelan officials provide funding , logistical and political support to the islamist terrorist organization hezbollah ; ( 5 ) deployment of venezuelan security or intelligence personnel to bolivia , including any role such personnel have in suppressing opponents of the government of bolivia ; ( 6 ) venezuela's clandestine material support for political movements and individuals throughout the western hemisphere with the objective of influencing the internal affairs of western hemisphere nations ; ( 7 ) efforts by hugo chávez and other officials or supporters of the venezuelan government to convert or launder funds that are the property of venezuelan government agencies , instrumentalities , parastatals , including pdvsa ; and ( 8 ) covert payments by hugo chávez or other officials or supporters of the venezuelan government to foreign political candidates , government officials , or officials of international organizations for the purpose of influencing the performance of their official duties .

several resolutions and bills related to venezuela have also been introduced in the 111 th congress .

h.r .

375 ( ros - lehtinen ) , introduced january 9 , 2009 as the western hemisphere counterterrorism and nonproliferation act of 2009 , would , among its provisions , place restrictions on nuclear cooperation with countries assisting the nuclear programs of venezuela or cuba ( section 209 ) .

the bill would also authorize the president to impose foreign aid and export controls on countries that the president determines is engaged in military cooperation or nonmarket - based trade with a state sponsor of terrorism , is carrying out policies that threaten u.s. national security interests , or is not fully cooperating with u.s. counterterrorism or nonproliferation efforts ( section 106 ) .

it would also amend annual international drug control certification procedures to include progress in adhering to obligations under international counterterrorism agreements and the implementation of effective counterterrorism measures ( section 104 ) .

h.r .

2475 ( ros - lehtinen ) , the foreign relations authorization and reform act for fy2010 and fy2011 introduced on may 19 , 2009 , includes a provision ( section 728 ) identical to that in h.r .

375 described above that would place restrictions on nuclear cooperation with countries assisting the nuclear programs of venezuela or cuba .

before venezuela's february 2009 constitutional referendum was held , h.res .

161 ( mack ) was introduced on february 11 .

the resolution would express the sense of the house regarding the need for free , democratic , transparent , and fair elections in venezuela without threats or intimidation .

two introduced resolutions express concern about anti - semitism in venezuela .

h.res .

174 ( hastings ) , introduced february 13 , 2009 , would acknowledge "the growing threat of anti - semitism throughout south america , namely in venezuela , bolivia , and argentina. .

h.con.res .

124 ( mack ) , introduced may 12 , 2009 , would express the support of congress for the jewish community in venezuela .

among its provisions , the resolution would condemn anti - semitic acts in venezuela and urge the government of venezuela to take verifiable steps to ensure the safety of the jewish community in the country .

the resolution also would express grave concern regarding the increased collaboration between iran , hezbollah , and the venezuelan government , and the ramifications of such collaboration on the jewish community in venezuela .

in the 110 th congress , congressional concerns regarding venezuela focused on the state of democracy and human rights , energy issues , terrorism issues , and the overall status of bilateral relations and u.s. policy .

the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere held an oversight hearing on venezuela on july 17 , 2008 focusing on u.s. policy and developments in venezuela .

in terms of legislative action in the 110 th congress , the senate and house approved resolutions on venezuela .

the senate approved s.res .

211 ( lugar ) on may 24 , 2007 , which expressed profound concerns regarding freedom of expression and venezuela's decision not to renew the license of rctv .

the house approved by voice vote h.res .

435 ( klein ) on november 5 , 2007 , which expressed "concern over the emerging national security implications of the iranian regime's efforts to expand its influence in latin america. .

among other provisions , the resolution noted venezuela's support for iran in the international atomic energy agency , plans for a $2 million iranian - venezuelan fund for investments in third countries , and the establishment of direct civilian airline flights from iran to venezuela .

also in the 110 th congress , the house approved two measures related to venezuela that ultimately were not enacted into law .

first , on june 21 , 2007 , the house approved by voice vote h.amdt .

358 ( mack ) to h.r .

2764 , the fy2008 state department and foreign operations appropriations bill , which would have directed $10 million in international broadcasting operations funding for targeted broadcasting for venezuela .

the house subsequently approved h.r .

2764 on june 22 , 2007 .

the senate version of the bill , approved september 6 , 2007 , did not include such a provision .

the final enacted measure , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 , division j ) , did not specify such funding , but the joint explanatory statement on the bill expresses support for restoring shortwave and medium wave transmission to venezuela .

second , on july 23 , 2008 , the house passed h.r .

6545 ( cazayouz ) by a vote of 414-0 , 2 present , which would have required a national intelligence assessment on national and energy security issues .

this would have included an assessment of "the implications of the potential use of energy resources as leverage against the united states by venezuela , iran , or other potential adversaries of the united states as a result of increased energy prices. .

the senate did not take action on the measure .

there were also several legislative initiatives introduced in the house and senate that were not considered in the 110 th congress .

in the house , seven resolutions were introduced: h.con.res .

50 ( fortuño ) , introduced january 31 , 2007 , which would have called on the venezuelan government to uphold the human rights and civil liberties of its people ; h.con.res .

77 ( weller ) , introduced march 1 , 2007 , which would have called on the venezuelan government to respect a free and independent media and to avoid all acts of censorship against the media and free expression ; h.res .

560 ( barton ) , introduced july 19 , 2007 , which would have expressed concern about the venezuelan government taking control of the majority stakes of the operations of six major oil companies and stripping these companies of all operational control of their energy development projects in venezuela ; h.res .

965 ( issa ) , introduced february 7 , 2008 , which , among other provisions , would have called upon the chávez government to take action to deny venezuelan territory and weapons from being used by terrorist organizations ; h.res .

1049 ( mack ) , introduced march 13 , 2008 , which , among other provisions , would have urged the administration to designate venezuela a state sponsor of terrorism ; h.res .

1483 ( burton ) , which would have expressed outrage over the expulsion of u.s .

ambassadors to venezuelan and bolivia , and called for these countries to resume full counternarcotics cooperation with the united states ; and h.res .

1510 ( mccotter ) , introduced september 26 , 2008 , which would have , among its provisions , regarded venezuela's ( future ) attainment of nuclear energy programs or nuclear weapons as a grave danger to peace and u.s. national interests and considered the russian military deployments in the western hemisphere as reckless , provocative , and in violation of the monroe doctrine .

in the senate , two bills would have increased hemispheric cooperation on energy issues: s. 193 ( lugar ) , the energy diplomacy and security act of 2007 , introduced january 4 , 2007 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee april 12 , 2007 ( s.rept .

110-54 ) ; and s. 1007 ( lugar ) , the united states - brazil energy cooperation pact of 2007 , introduced march 28 , 2007 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on september 23 , 2008 .

in the 109 th congress , there was legislative action on several initiatives on venezuela and oversight hearings were held in both houses .

the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations measure ( p.l .

109-102 , h.r .

3057 , h.rept .

109-265 ) appropriated $2 million in democracy funds for the ned for democracy programs in venezuela and $2.252 million in funding under the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) , although slightly less was provided because of a 1% across - the - board rescission in the defense department appropriations measure ( p.l .

109-148 ) that affected foreign operations funding .

the administration also had requested $500,000 in economic support funds ( esf ) for venezuela , although no specific earmark was provided in the conference report to p.l .

109-102 , and the administration ultimately did not allocate the assistance .

for fy2007 , the administration requested $1 million in aci funding , $1.5 million in esf for democracy initiatives , and $45,000 for international military education and training ( imet ) .

the house - passed version of the fy2007 foreign operations appropriation bill , h.r .

5522 , would have provided no aci funding for venezuela .

the senate appropriations committee report to the bill recommended fully funding the administration's $1 million aci and esf requests for venezuela .

final action on fy2007 foreign aid appropriations was not completed by the end of the year , leaving the 110 th congress to complete action in 2007 .

two resolutions on venezuela were also approved in the 109 th congress .

with regard to counternarcotics cooperation , the house approved h.con.res .

400 ( burton ) , by voice vote on july 26 , 2006 , which expressed the sense of congress that venezuela should actively support strategies for ensuring secure airport facilities that meet international certifications to prevent trafficking of controlled substances , narcotics , and laundered money .

the resolution also condemned venezuela's failures to stem the flow of narcotics through its territory and called for , among other measures , steps to restore cooperation between venezuela and the dea .

s.res .

607 ( bunning ) , approved by unanimous consent on december 6 , 2006 , condemned president chávez's anti - american rhetoric during his september 20 , 2006 , speech before the u.n. general assembly and "the undemocratic actions of president chávez. .

in other action , the house - passed version of h.r .

2601 ( h.rept .

109-168 ) , the fy2006 and fy2007 foreign relations authorization act , had a provision ( section 1025 ) that would have authorized $9 million in economic support funds for each of fy2006 and fy2007 "to fund activities which support political parties , the rule of law , civil society , an independent media , and otherwise promote democratic , accountable governance in venezuela. .

h.r .

2601 also had a provision , in section 106 ( 5 ) , that would have authorized funds for the "broadcasting board of governors to carry out broadcasting to venezuela for at least 30 minutes per day of balanced , objective , and comprehensive television news programming , radio news programming , or both. .

final action on h.r .

2601 was not completed by the end of the 109 th congress .

other legislative initiatives not completed before the end of the 109 th congress included h.con.res .

224 ( fortuño ) , which would have called on the venezuelan government to uphold human rights and civil liberties ; h.con.res .

328 ( mack ) , which would have condemned president chávez's anti - democratic actions ; s. 2435 ( lugar ) , which would have increased hemispheric cooperation on energy issues , including cooperation among the governments of brazil , canada , mexico , the united states , and venezuela ; h.res .

1033 ( graves ) , which would have condemned president chávez's anti - american rhetoric at the united nations ; and s.res .

587 ( santorum ) , which would have condemned the anti - democratic actions and statements of the leaders of iran , cuba , and venezuela and expressed concern about the national security implications of the relationships between those leaders .

several oversight hearings were held in the 109 th congress dealing with venezuela policy issues .

on november 17 , 2005 , the house international relations committee , subcommittee on the western hemisphere , held a hearing on the status of democracy in venezuela .

earlier in the year , the subcommittee held hearings on march 9 and september 28 , 2005 , regarding the state of democracy in the latin america , both of which touched on venezuela .

in 2006 , the full house international relations committee held a june 21 hearing on the status of democracy in latin america that covered venezuela , while the house subcommittee on international terrorism and nonproliferation held a july 13 , 2006 , hearing specifically on venezuela and terrorism issues .

in terms of energy security in the western hemisphere , the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere held a hearing on march 2 , 2006 , while the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on june 22 , 2006 .

in the 108 th congress , members of congress expressed concerns about the political situation in venezuela .

the senate foreign relations committee held hearing in june 2004 on the status of democracy in venezuela and the august recall referendum .

as noted above ( u.s. funding for democracy projects ) , the conference report to the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( division b of p.l .

108-447 , h.rept .

108-792 ) required a comprehensive report on ned's activities in venezuela since fy2001 and reaffirmed ned's duty to ensure that all sponsored activities adhere to core ned principles .

also in the 108 th congress , two resolutions were introduced in the house , but no action was taken on these measures .

h.res .

716 , introduced by representative elton gallegly on july 14 , 2004 , would , among other provisions , have encouraged venezuelans to participate in a constitutional , peaceful , democratic , and electoral solution to the political crisis in venezuela , and appealed to the venezuelan government and the opposition to support a free , fair , and transparent recall referendum in accordance with the venezuelan constitution .

h.res .

867 , introduced by representative tom lantos on november 20 , 2004 , would have expressed support for the national endowment for democracy in venezuela .

the resolution would have expressed the view that charges against súmate were politically motivated .

as noted above , súmate is a venezuelan civic organization involved in voter education and electoral observation that received funding from the national endowment of democracy .

the resolution also would have welcomed the dropping of charges by the venezuelan government against súmate .

earlier in the year , in a july 12 , 2004 , letter to president chávez , the house international relations committee expressed serious concern about the treatment of the leaders of súmate .

