the u.s. - mexico bilateral economic relationship is of key interest to the united states because of mexico's proximity , the extensive cultural and economic ties between the two countries , and the strong economic relationship with mexico under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

the united states and mexico share many common economic interests related to trade , investment , and regulatory cooperation .

the two countries share a 2,000-mile border and have extensive interconnections through the gulf of mexico .

there are also links through migration , tourism , environmental issues , health concerns , and family and cultural relationships .

congress has maintained an active interest on issues related to nafta renegotiations and the recently signed u.s. - mexico - canada trade agreement ( usmca ) ; u.s. - mexico trade and investment relations ; mexico's economic reform measures , especially in the energy sector ; the mexican 2018 presidential elections ; u.s. - mexico border management ; and other related issues .

congress has also maintained an interest in the ramifications of possible withdrawal from nafta .

congress may also take an interest in the economic policies of mexico's new president andrés manuel lópez obrador , the populist leader of the national regeneration movement ( morena ) party , who won the july 2018 election with 53% of the vote .

morena's coalition also won majorities in both chambers of the legislature that convened on september 1 , 2018 .

former president enrique peña nieto successfully drove numerous economic and political reforms that included , among other measures , opening up the energy sector to private investment , countering monopolistic practices , passing fiscal reform , making farmers more productive , and increasing infrastructure investment .

this report provides an overview and background information regarding u.s. - mexico economic relations , trade trends , the mexican economy , nafta , the proposed usmca , and trade issues between the united states and mexico .

it will be updated as events warrant .

mexico is one of the united states' most important trading partners , ranking second among u.s. export markets and third in total u.s. trade ( imports plus exports ) .

under nafta , the united states and mexico have developed significant economic ties .

trade between the two countries has more than tripled since the agreement entered into force in 1994 .

through nafta , the united states , mexico , and canada form one of the world's largest free trade areas , with about one - third of the world's total gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

mexico has the second - largest economy in latin america after brazil .

it has a population of 129 million people , making it the most populous spanish - speaking country in the world and the third - most populous country in the western hemisphere ( after the united states and brazil ) .

mexico's gross domestic product ( gdp ) was an estimated $1.15 trillion in 2017 , about 6% of u.s. gdp of $19.39 trillion .

measured in terms of purchasing power parity ( ppp ) , mexican gdp was considerably higher , $2.35 trillion , or about 12% of u.s. gdp .

per capita income in mexico is significantly lower than in the united states .

in 2017 , mexico's per capita gdp in purchasing power parity was $17,743 , or 30% of u.s. per capita gdp of $59,381 ( see table 1 ) .

ten years earlier , in 2007 , mexico's per capita gdp in purchasing power parity was $13,995 , or 29% of the u.s. amount of $48,006 .

although there is a notable income disparity with the united states , mexico's per capita gdp is relatively high by global standards , and falls within the world bank's upper - middle income category .

mexico's economy relies heavily on the united states as an export market .

the value of exports equaled 37% of mexico's gdp in 2017 , as shown in table 1 , and approximately 80% of mexico's exports were headed to the united states .

mexico's economy is closely linked to the u.s. economy due to the strong trade and investment ties between the two countries .

economic growth has been slow in recent years .

the forecast over the next few years projects economic growth of above 2% , a positive outlook , according to some economists , given external constraints but falling short of what the country needs to make a significant cut in poverty and to create jobs .

over the past 30 years , mexico has had a low economic growth record with an average growth rate of 2.6% .

mexico's gdp grew by 2.4% in 2017 and 2.1% in 2016 .

the country benefitted from important structural reforms initiated in the early 1990s , but events such as the u.s. recession of 2001 and the global economic downturn of 2009 adversely affected the economy and offset the government's efforts to improve macroeconomic management .

the oecd outlook for mexico for 2018 states that there are some encouraging signs for potential economic growth , including improvements in fiscal performance , responsible and reliable monetary policy to curb inflation , growth in manufacturing exports and inflows of foreign direct investment , and positive developments due to government reforms in telecommunications , energy , labor , education , and other structural reforms .

according to the oecd , full implementation of mexico's structural reforms could add as much as 1% to the annual growth rate of the mexican economy .

while these achievements may be positive , mexico continues to face significant challenges in regard to alleviating poverty , decreasing informality , strengthening judicial institutions , addressing corruption , and increasing labor productivity .

trends in mexico's gdp growth generally follow u.s. economic trends , as shown in figure 4 , but with higher fluctuations .

mexico's economy is highly dependent on manufacturing exports to the united states , as approximately 80% of mexico's exports are destined for the united states .

the country's outlook will likely remain closely tied to that of the united states , despite mexico's efforts to diversify trade .

nafta has been in effect since january 1994 .

prior to nafta , mexico was already liberalizing its protectionist trade and investment policies that had been in place for decades .

the restrictive trade regime began after mexico's revolutionary period , and remained until the early to mid - 1980s , when it began to shift to a more open , export - oriented economy .

for mexico , an fta with the united states represented a way to lock in trade liberalization reforms , attract greater flows of foreign investment , and spur economic growth .

for the united states , nafta represented an opportunity to expand the growing export market to the south , but it also represented a political opportunity to improve the relationship with mexico .

the united states and mexico have had a number of trade disputes over the years , many of which have been resolved .

these issues have involved trade in sugar , country of origin labeling , tomato imports from mexico , dolphin - safe tuna labeling , and nafta trucking provisions .

u.s. policymakers may follow trade issues regarding the proposed usmca and the possibility of a nafta withdrawal by president trump .

policymakers may consider numerous issues as they begin to debate the proposed usmca and consider its approval .

some issues could include the timetable for consideration under tpa , whether the proposed usmca meets tpa's negotiating objectives and other requirements , and the impact of the agreement on u.s. - mexico trade relations .

the full effects of the proposed usmca on u.s. - mexico trade relations would not be expected to be significant because nearly all u.s. trade with mexico is now conducted duty and barrier free .

a usmca would maintain nafta's tariff and nontariff barrier eliminations .

if the agreement is approved by congress , ratified by mexico and canada , and enters into force , some economists and other observers believe that it is not expected to have a measurable effect on overall u.s. - mexico trade and investment , jobs , wages , or overall economic growth , and that it would probably not have a measurable effect on the u.s. trade deficit with mexico .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) is conducting an investigation into the likely economic impacts of a usmca , a required element of the tpa process .

tpa 2015 states that the itc must issue its report within 105 days of the president's signing of a trade deal .

with president trump's signing of the usmca on november 30 , 2018 , the itc report would be due by mid - march 2019 .

one exception to this overall economic evaluation may be the motor vehicle industry , which may experience more significant effects than other industries because of the changes in rules of origin in the usmca and because of the high percentage of motor vehicle goods that enter duty - free under nafta .

the highest share of u.s. trade with mexico is in the motor vehicle industry , and it is also the industry with the highest percentage of duty - free treatment under nafta because of high north american content .

in 2017 , leading u.s. merchandise imports from mexico were motor vehicles ( $57.4 billion or 26% of imports ) and motor vehicle parts ( $45.5 billion or 20% of imports ) .

about 99.4% of u.s. motor vehicle imports and about 75.6% of motor vehicle parts imports from mexico entered the united states duty - free under nafta .

in comparison , only 55.6% of total u.s. imports from mexico in 2017 received duty - free benefits under nafta .

some analysts believe that the updated auto rules of origin requirements contained in the usmca could raise compliance and production costs and could lead to higher prices , which could possibly negatively affect u.s. vehicle sales .

the net impact , however , may be more limited depending on the capacity of u.s. automakers and parts manufacturers to shift suppliers and production locations and the ability to absorb higher costs , according to some observers .

some observers contend that manufacturers with a stronger presence in mexico , such as general motors and fiat chrysler automobiles , may be more impacted .

other observers and stakeholders are continuing to review the provisions in the new agreement and what effect , if any , these changes would have on u.s. economic relations with canada and mexico .

to some analysts , provisions in areas such as customs regulation , digital trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and enforcement on labor and the environment are considered an improvement over similar provisions in nafta .

other proposed changes in the agreement , such as largely heightened ipr protections and generally less extensive investment provisions , have both supporters and detractors .

for example , there is some concern that the isds provisions in the usmca effectively may only apply to certain u.s. contracts in mexico's energy sector and possibly leave out other sectors such as services .

under usmca , investors would be limited to filing isds claims for breaches of national treatment , most - favored nation treatment , or expropriation , but not indirect expropriatio .

president donald trump stated to reporters on december 1 , 2018 , that he intended to notify canada and mexico of his intention to withdraw from nafta in six months .

article 2205 of nafta states that a party may withdraw from the agreement six months after it provides written notice of withdrawal to the other parties .

if a party withdraws , the agreement shall remain in force for the remaining parties .

private sector groups are urging the president to remain within nafta until the proposed usmca enters into force .

they claim that withdrawing from nafta would have "devastating" negative consequences .

congress may consider the ramifications of withdrawing from nafta and how it may affect the u.s. economy and foreign relations with mexico .

it may monitor and consider the congressional role in a possible withdrawal .

if the united states withdraws from nafta , it could return to wto most - favored - nation tariffs , the rate it applies to all countries with which the united state does not have an fta .

the united states and canada maintain relatively low simple average mfn rates , at 3.5% .

mexico has a higher 7.0% simple average rate .

however , both countries have higher "peak" tariffs on labor intensive goods , such as apparel and footwear , and some agriculture products .

of the three nafta parties , the united states has the lowest mfn tariffs in most categories .

applied tariffs are considerably higher in mexico than the united states .

mexico's bound tariff rates are very high and far exceed u.s. bound rates .

without nafta , there is a risk that tariffs on u.s. exports to mexico could reach up to 36.2% ( see table 6 ) .

in agriculture , u.s. farmers would face double - digit applied and trade - weighted rates in both mexico and canada .

mexico and canada likely would maintain duty - free treatment between themselves through maintenance of a bilateral nafta , or through commitments made in conjunction with the cptpp .

if the united states withdrew from nafta without the proposed usmca entering into force , certain commitments would be affected , such as the following: services access .

the three nafta countries committed themselves to allowing market access and nondiscriminatory treatment in certain service sectors .

if the united states withdrew from nafta , it would still be obligated to adhere to the commitments it made for the wto's general agreement on trade in services .

while these commitments were made contemporaneously with nafta , given that the nafta schedule operated under a negative list basis — all sectors included unless specifically excluded — and gats on a positive list — specific sectors are listed for inclusion — nafta is likely more extensive .

government procurement .

the nafta government procurement chapter sets standards and parameters for government purchases of goods and services .

the schedule annexes set forth opportunities for firms of each party to bid on certain contracts for specified government agencies .

the wto government procurement agreement ( gpa ) also imposes disciplines and obligations on government procurement .

unlike most other wto agreements , membership in the gpa is optional .

mexico is not a member of the gpa , and u.s. withdrawal from nafta would allow mexico to adopt any domestic content or buy local provisions .

 ( since u.s. firms are more competitive in obtaining mexican contracts than mexican firms in the united states , this may adversely affect some u.s. domestic firms. ) .

investment .

unlike many chapters in nafta that have analogous counterparts in the wto agreements , the investment chapter in the wto does not provide the same level of protection for investors as do nafta , subsequent u.s. trade agreements , or bilateral investment treaties .

if the united states withdrew from nafta , u.s. investors would lose protections in mexico .

countries would have more leeway to block individual investments .

u.s. investors would not have recourse to the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) mechanism , but would need to deal with claims of expropriation through domestic courts , recourse to government - to - government consultation , or dispute settlement .

canada and mexico likely would maintain investor protection between them through the prospective cptpp or through maintenance of nafta provisions .

policymakers may consider issues on how the united states can improve cooperation with mexico in the areas of border trade , transportation , competitiveness , economic growth , and security enhancement through the hled , hlrcc , and the 21 st century border management programs mentioned earlier in this report .

some policy experts emphasize the importance of u.s. - mexico trade in intermediate goods and supply chains and argue that the two governments can improve cooperation in cross - border trade and can invest more in improving border infrastructure .

the increased security measures along the u.s. - mexico border , they argue , have resulted in a costly disruption in production chains due to extended and unpredictable wait times along the border .

