the rate of long - term economic growth is the salient measure of the nation's ability to steadily advance its material living standard .

that living standard advances by increasing the economy's capacity to produce goods and services and thereby expanding the range of choices open to society .

today's level of gross domestic product ( gdp ) per person is 15 to 25 times that of a person alive in 1895 .

this degree of improvement in material well - being is not only the result of today's far lower cost relative to income of directly comparable products ( such as an hour of illumination , a new suit of clothes , or a chair ) but also the availability of an array of products that defines our current standard of living ( such as a cd player , air conditioning , tv , and air travel ) that were not available at any price in 1895 .

aside from the creation of new products , economic growth has also meant a dramatic change in what we do .

agriculture has gone from the principal occupation to that of a tiny share of the labor force .

the automobile has transformed how we move about and where we live .

higher education has become an endeavor of the many rather than the few .

hours of work have decreased while hours of leisure have increased .

the pace of long - term economic growth is likely to be a central focus of attention in the decades just ahead , as the u.s. economy must confront the need to undertake unprecedentedly large generational transfers of income to pay for the retirement of the huge baby - boom generation .

faster economic growth leads to a larger economic pie from which to make such transfers and makes this redistribution less onerous for future workers .

another element of concern about the future burden on workers grows out of the united states' large accumulation of foreign debt stemming from a long succession of large trade deficits .

with a net foreign debt that now approaching $3 trillion and could plausibly approach $10 trillion in the decade ahead , the united states could expect to have to make annual debt service payments to foreign creditors of $80 to $100 billion .

this means that a significant share of future output growth will be transferred to foreigners and will not be available to improve the future living standard of domestic consumers .

again , the eroding effect of these transfers on future living standards of workers will be less if the annual rate of long - term growth is greater .

although the trend growth rates of mature industrial economies have historically not shown great variability , even relatively small differences in that growth rate steadily cumulate to have sizeable effects on the scale of improvement in future living standards .

an economy in which output per capita grows at an average annual pace of 2.0% will double in size in 34 years , while growth at 3.0% leads to a doubling in size in only 24 years .

put another way , beginning at the 2004 level of real gdp per capita of about $37,000 , at the end of 24 years a 3% annual growth rate generates a level of per capita real gdp of about $75,000 , as compared to a level of only about $59,000 generated by a 2% annual growth rate for the same time interval .

that extra $16,000 confers a substantial broadening of economic choices and the ability to achieve any given spectrum of economic and social goals with less sacrifice .

despite its importance for future living standards , long - term growth is seldom the explicit interest of economic policy .

nevertheless , many policies directed at more immediate goals are likely to have implications for the speed of economic growth .

tax policy , labor market policy , science and technology policy , education policy , budget policy , as well as legal and regulatory policy can all have effects on the rate of economic growth and the level of future income .

if a more explicit concern with the rate of long - term growth is thought appropriate by policy makers , then it will be important to understand: what the salient determinants of long - term growth are ; whether the decisions of economic agents in private markets lead to a economically optimal allocation of resources to each determinate ; how could economic policy most successfully correct for a particular market failure ; and what admixture of particular economic policies are likely to offer the best chance of achieving an optimal rate of improvement in future living standards .

there are some other distinctions about long - term growth that should be understood before proceeding .

first , long - term growth refers to an economy increasing its productive capacity or what is usually called "potential output. .

this is somewhat distinct from short - run changes in economic activity over the course of the business cycle , such as recovery from recession .

the short - term goal is to have the economy operate near potential output , while the long - term goal is to steadily increase potential output .

short - term performance is certainly going to have an effect on long - term economic performance , but there will also be important differences in the forces governing each , as well as different policy implications presented by each .

for example , in the short run in an economy operating below potential output due to slack demand , monetary and fiscal policy can stimulate aggregate demand , accelerate economic growth and push an economy towards potential output .

but these policies may have little impact on the rate at which potential output expands .

the distinct forces that govern the growth of potential output — or aggregate supply — are the concern of this report .

second , analysis of long - term growth focuses on the growth of per capita output , most often measured as real ( or inflation adjusted ) gdp divided by the nation's population , as more gdp per capita will likely be the essential requirement for a higher standard of living .

it is possible to increase real gdp per capita by increasing the percentage of the population in the labor force or the average hours worked by the labor force .

but both of these actions are bounded in that you can only increase the labor force up to the size of the population ( and realistically the upper bound will be well short of that ) and increase the average hours of work up to 24 hours a day ( and , again , realistically the upper bound will be well short of that ) .

therefore , these are not actions that can cause a sustained increase in the rate of long - term growth .

this is probably particularly true for a mature economy such as the united states' where these labor force parameters tend to be relatively stable .

more fundamentally , one can question whether increases in per - capita gdp by such means represents a true rise in the standard of living .

as we will see , a focus on per - capita output points to a critical requirement for long - term growth and a rising standard of living — increased efficiency , or productivity , that is , doing things that enable each worker to steadily produce more in any given time period .

the standard measure of economic growth — increased real gdp / population — does not always function as a precise gauge of changes in economic welfare .

many valuable things are simply not measured in gdp .

for example , leisure time , child rearing , and volunteer work all contribute to our well - being but they are not reflected in gdp .

therefore , if parents decided to work fewer hours to spend more time rearing their children , measured gdp would fall but general well - being could increase rather than fall .

also , many negative things can occur with economic growth that subtract from our well - being but are not counted as decrements in measures of real gdp .

environmental damage , increased income inequality , decreased quality of public education , or falling public health decrease economic well - being , but do not necessarily result in a corresponding reduction of measured gdp .

conversely , there are things measured in gdp , such as more prisons , more locks on doors , and expenditures to protect against terrorism , that do not easily correlate with a rising living standard .

nevertheless , while greater gdp does not assure a higher living standard , it provides the potential means for achieving greater well - being by making the various elements of how we choose to define that well - being more affordable .

more affordable in economics is essentially a reduction in the number and degree of tradeoffs confronted in economic life .

if we choose to work fewer hours or reduce environmental damage then we can do so with less sacrifice of other things if gdp is greater .

another important economic distinction between growth and economic welfare is that society's economic objective is not likely to be reaching the maximum rate of growth that is possible , but rather , achieving the optimal rate of growth .

that economic policy has the ability to accelerate the rate of long - term growth does not necessarily mean that it should .

because faster future growth usually means that the economy must divert resources from the production of goods for current consumption and toward growth - generating activities , the growth rate consistent with an optimal balance between the level of current consumption and the raised level of future consumption will likely be far short of the greatest possible rate .

super - fast growth would have little appeal if the fruits of that achievement are never consumed because they must be continuously diverted to the investment needed to sustain that growth rate .

private economic agents will make decisions in the market place that establish a relative valuation of current versus future output , but if there is some degree of market failure , this outcome will not be the optimal one and economic policy can potentially improve on the market outcome .

sustained economic growth , anywhere , is a relatively recent historical phenomenon .

while our knowledge is imperfect , before 1500 there is no record of any increase in output per capita anywhere in the world for millennia .

and only after 1800 is there consistent evidence of sizeable sustained increases in living standards across the globe .

between 1800 and 1900 , output per capita in the industrializing economies probably grew on average at 1.0% per year .

between 1900 and 2000 , that rate of growth likely accelerated to about 2.0% .

this may seem to be a modest pace , but its was a sharp break from the stagnation and poverty that had prevailed for centuries before , and because it was a sustained rate of increase generating cumulative gains , it was sufficient to steadily advance standards of living at a historically unprecedented speed , and ultimately transform the world economy .

we also observe over the last 100-year span that the rates of economic growth across the then emerging industrial nations were fairly tightly clustered around this 2.0% pace .

at the high end was japan with an annual rate of growth averaging about 2.7% , while at the low end was great britain with an annual growth rate averaging 1.4% .

the united states , which grew at a 1.8% average annual rate , was slightly below average .

in the 25 year subperiod of 1980-2004 , this clustering has become tighter and the relative speed ranking has also changed .

among the major advanced industrial economies , the united kingdom grew fastest at 2.3% , japan's growth decelerated to 2.0% , u.s. growth accelerated to 2.0% , and the major european economies ( germany , france , italy and , the netherlands ) grew relatively slower , with each achieving a 1.6% pace .

in general , this convergence of growth paths among the industrial economies has meant that the differences in average growth rates of per - capita output are typically only a few tenths of a percentage point .

however , over the long - run , a few percentage points more will make a substantial difference in the cumulative gain in the nations' material standard of living .

for the united states , the long - term growth of real gdp per capita over the last 125 years has revealed remarkable steadiness , advancing decade after decade with only modest and temporary variation from the observed 1.8% annual rate of increase .

this constancy is not absolute , however .

there has been short - run variability caused by the business cycle , but on balance these short - run effects do not deflect the underlying long - term trend .

there has also been some medium - term variability , however , that demarcates some distinct subperiods for u.s. economic growth .

growth decelerated to a 1.4% pace in the 1929-1950 period , a slowdown primarily reflecting the large and pervasive crippling effects of the great depression on economic activity throughout the 1930s .

from 1950 to 1973 , economic growth accelerated to an above trend average annual pace of 2.1% , as the united states ( and the world ) experienced a strong economic rebound after wwii .

the most pronounced deviation from the long - term trend occurred from 1973 to 1995 , with the growth rate of per - capita gdp slowing to 0.6% .

 ( other industrial economies also experienced similar or larger decelerations of economic growth. ) .

unlike the period of the great depression this slowdown was not a matter of persistent slack demand , for the economy was most often operating at capacity .

rather , the u.s. economy's productive capacity was just expanding at a much slower rate .

while some slowing from the post - war boom could be expected , this degree of deceleration went well below the long - term trend and why it did so remains largely an economic mystery .

since 1995 , the speed of u.s. economic growth accelerated once again , reaching a pace of 2.3% , somewhat above the trend rate for the complete post - world war ii period .

this above - average rate of growth is attributable to the economic boom of the late 1990s .

over the second half of this decade , growth was somewhat below the long - term trend , largely due to the effects of the 2001 recession .

overall , the limited variability of the rate of u.s. long - term growth over such a long time period , despite major changes in economic conditions , as well as economic and social polices , suggests that u.s. long - term growth may be governed by forces other than typical economic variables and may not be easy to deliberately alter with conventional economic policies .

nevertheless , the evidence of some degree of medium - term variability suggests the possibility of using economic policy to exert some influence .

the reasons for those medium - term decelerations and accelerations may reveal the do's and don'ts of accelerating economic growth .

in the next section , the report examines the current economic understanding of the determinants of long - term economic growth and what the behavior of those determinants suggests to be possible channels by which economic policy might be able to accelerate economic growth .

a rising living standard is the result of increasing the productive power of workers , causing over time an increase in the amount of goods and services the average worker can produce per hour , or what is most often called — increased productivity .

economists have isolated a series of factors , which through accumulation and interaction , are thought to play critical roles for generating steady increases in productivity and sustained long - term growth .

three factors: physical capital , human capital , and technological knowledge are seen playing a direct role in magnifying the worker's productivity .

other factors of importance play a more indirect role .

these include the laws , government policies , and institutions that come together to create a growth infrastructure that encourages , enables and co - ordinates the economic behavior that causes steady accumulation of physical capital , human capital , and technical knowledge , which , in turn , together generate sustained long - term growth .

understanding what determines long - term economic growth does not necessarily mean that economic policy should be used to affect it .

that faster economic growth is possible does not necessarily mean it is desirable .

there is always a strong presumption in the efficacy of the "market" to get things right , including the rate of investment in physical capital , human capital , and technological knowledge .

market failure can occur , however , when goods have attributes that preclude market prices from fully reflecting the economic value of an activity .

if a market failure is present , economic policy can , in theory , be used to improve on the market outcome and raise economic welfare .

in thinking about using economic policy to overcome some form of market failure , it is important to recognize there will often be a distinction between a market failure's "economic relevance" and its "policy relevance. .

economic analysis may indicate that a significant market failure is occurring and its correction could generate large economic returns .

this , however , does not mean that it will be particularly easy or even possible to craft a policy to correct for the market failure without also causing distortions and other inefficiencies that will lead to the policy generating more economic cost than economic benefit .

the often incomplete information about the market failure's precise location , extent , and degree of interconnection with other economic activities elevates the risk of the policy creating more inefficiency than efficiency and doing more economic harm than a good .

in the preceding section of the report on the determinants of economic growth , economic theory and evidence established reasons to suspect that , due to various forms and degrees of market failure , the u.s. economy under invests in physical capital , human capital , and technical knowledge .

therefore , the potential likely exists for various forms of economic policy , by correcting or compensating for these market failures , to accelerate the rate of economic growth and boost future living standards .

in the cases of physical and human capital , economic analysis indicates that the growth - accelerating effect may be temporary , but it would endure long enough to still lead to a significant permanent increase in the level of gdp .

most economists would agree that the "engine of long - term economic growth," the force that sustains a rising living standard decade after decade , generation after generation , is the production of new ideas , or what this report has subsumed under the term "technical knowledge. .

there is less agreement over what governs the rate of advance of technical knowledge and how it might be influenced by economic policy .

some would argue that the level of resource commitment to r&d is an important determinant of the long - term growth rate and also an activity where a greater degree of public support is warranted .

on the other hand , the acceleration of economic growth commencing in the last half of the 1990s occurred without any increase in r&d intensity .

also the marked historical stability of the u.s. long - term growth rate of real per capita gdp ( at a 1.8% average annual rate ) for more than 125 years , despite significant changes in a broad array of economic circumstances and policies over this long time span , suggests to others that the generation of technical knowledge and , in turn , the long - term growth rate may be propelled by deeply embedded social forces that are not likely to be manipulated by economic policy .

of course , if a boost in r&d activity only leads to a temporary medium - term increase in the pace of economic growth it will still have a beneficial effect on future living standards .

as regards the invariability of the long - term growth rate , it is also true that the united states has never really pursued a well - defined and orchestrated long - term growth policy .

the closest approximation was the 1950s and 1960s , when the confluence of high rates of investment in physical capital , human capital , and technical knowledge was also a period when economic growth was significantly above trend .

even here it is hard to isolate specific economic policies that contributed to this higher rate of growth .

we do observe in this period , however , a rising government commitment to r&d spending , although a sizable share of this r&d was for defense related programs .

it was also a time of increased government support for higher education through the gi bill and other programs .

there were also periodic attempts to use the tax code to encourage business investment in physical capital .

it was also a period when maintaining economic stability became a central task of government .

the remainder of this section will examine specific economic polices to boost investment in the three principal direct determinants of economic growth and , in turn , accelerate economic growth .

sustained long - term economic growth is a defining characteristic of the highly successful u.s. economy and , perhaps more significantly , it is also a basic presumption that undergirds american society .

economic well - being is expected to improve for the current and each successive generation .

to be able to realistically hold such an expectation is reflective of a momentous economic achievement .

over the long course of history , sustained economic growth has been a rarity and even today all too many nations struggle to achieve it .

economic historians suggest that one thing that likely demarcates past failure from current success at achieving sustained growth , as well as the current disparities between rich and poor nations , is the development of an infrastructure for growth .

this is an amalgam of laws , government policies , and institutions that form an environment that , on balance , encourages production and economic transactions .

given this supporting infrastructure , economic theory and evidence make it reasonably clear that countries that have achieved sustained long - term growth such as the united states are those that invest a sizable fraction of current income in the accumulation of physical and human capital and have accumulated large stocks of both .

more importantly , they are also economies that have been able to steadily raise the productivity of these two inputs through a steady advance of technical knowledge .

there are reasons to believe , despite its evident economic success , that the united states , due to varying degrees of market failure , may under invest in each of the three basic determinants of economic growth .

in theory , correcting that under investment through some form of government intervention could lead to an optimal increase in the rate of accumulation of each determinant , and through that an acceleration of the economy's rate of economic growth .

in some instances , the induced boost in the rate of growth may not be permanent but the level of future income and output will be higher , nevertheless .

knowing that there is the potential for improving on certain market outcomes is one thing .

designing economic policies that will efficiently induce these improvements is another thing .

the information shortcoming about what , where , and how much to invest that the policymaker would have to contend with will often be substantial , and greatly raise the risk that the policy will be so blunt and misdirected that it generates more economic costs than benefits .

this risk is probably the greatest with policies aimed at increasing private investment and saving .

this leads most economists to argue that the surest and most efficient way to raise investment and saving is for the government to run budget surpluses rather than budget deficits .

this provides a general incentive to investment in physical capital through its favorable effects on interest rates , but leaves the decision on particular investments with the individual business firm .

this may not extract the greatest social benefit , but what is extracted is done with a minimum of the economic cost that would result from the distortions and rent seeking that a more focused investment incentive policy would likely cause .

the government has been a longstanding supporter of human capital accumulation through large scale funding for education programs .

these efforts have had a substantial positive effect on economic growth .

however , the slipping educational attainment of younger labor force cohorts evident over the last 20 years raises concern about slowing human capital investment leading to a future decrement in the pace of long - term growth .

based on estimates of likely high economic return , policies to improve access to higher education by minorities and members of low income households , and policies to enhance early childhood education may warrant more attention .

new ideas and the accumulation of technical knowledge is what ultimately propels long - term economic growth .

the production of new ideas is a process that is unlikely to occur on an economically optimal scale without government support .

r&d activities do receive public support , but there is still concern about whether this support is accurately targeted and undertaken on an optimal scale .

of particular concern for public policy is spending on the basic research that is likely an important well - spring for new ideas .

such research is largely dependent on public funding and by some measures , that funding has been steadily waning , and tends to be very skewed in its distribution across research disciplines .

this would seem to be a movement away from policies that have a high probability of helping to sustain or accelerate economic growth .

in trying to boost the long - term rate of economic growth , the policy maker faces what is often a thankless task in that he is asking citizens to incur costs today for gains that will only fully accrue decades into the future .

in addition , given the maturity and existing strength of the u.s. economy , as well as the revealed historical steadiness of the economy's rate of long - term growth , it may be that economic policies aimed at an acceleration of the economy's long - term growth rate will boost that rate by only several tenths of a percentage point .

nevertheless , that would be a significant achievement and , as discussed earlier , those seemingly moderate increases cumulate to a substantial improvement in the level of national income 25 to 30 years from now .

the bulk of the benefits could be seen as largely a gift from one generation to the next generation .

finally , policies that encourage one growth determinant at the expense of other determinants are unlikely to accelerate the rate of economic growth .

for example , a reduction of the budget deficit that occurs through reductions of government spending that supports investment in education and r&d is not a pro - growth policy mixture .

moreover , the likely interdependencies of the determinants of economic growth suggests that a successful overall growth policy is most likely to occur by generating a balanced advance of investment in each determinant of economic growth so as to gain the fullest benefit from their complementary influence on each other .

