t he house and senate are scheduled to convene in joint session on january 6 , 2017 , for the purpose of opening the 2016 presidential election electoral votes submitted by state government officials , certifying their validity , counting them , and declaring the official result of the election for president and vice president .

this report describes the steps which precede the joint session and the procedures set in the constitution and statute by which the house and senate jointly certify the results of the electoral vote .

it also discusses the procedures set in law governing challenges to the validity of an electoral vote , and makes reference to the procedures followed during the joint session in 2005 by which the election of george w. bush was certified .

much of what follows in this report is based on the united states constitution ( particularly article ii , section 1 , and amendment 12 ) , and on a federal law enacted in 1887 ( the electoral count act of 1887 ) and amended in 1948 , now codified in title 3 of the united states code .

reference is also made to congressional precedent and practice .

early congressional precedents on the counting of electoral votes , which may be found in hinds' and cannon's precedents of the house of representatives , are sometimes inconsistent with each other and with more recent practice .

this record , coupled with disputes over the electoral count in 1877 , provided the impetus for codifying procedure in the 1887 law .

precedents which pre - date the 1887 act may be primarily of historical significance , particularly to the extent that they are inconsistent with express provisions of the 1887 act , as amended .

due to the absence of specific and persuasive authority on some issues , and in the interest of brevity , this report attempts to at least identify and present some of the possible issues and questions that have been raised , even when not necessarily resolving them by reference to authoritative source material or decisions .

the topics presented are arranged in the approximate order of their occurrence .

title 3 of the u.s. code includes provisions governing the conduct of the joint session .

section 16 of title 3 is intended to ensure that the joint session conducts and completes its business expeditiously .

as discussed below , ยง18 prohibits debate as well as the offering and consideration of almost all questions .

section 16 provides that the joint session is to continue until the count is completed and the result announced , and limits recesses if the process of counting the votes and announcing the results becomes time - consuming .

the seating of senators , representatives , and officials ( the clerk of the house , the secretary of the senate , the members designated as tellers , and other administrative officers of the house and senate ) is also governed by ยง16 .

under ยง18 , the president of the senate is to preserve order .

this authority may be interpreted as encompassing the authority to decide questions of order , but the statute is not explicit on this point .

nevertheless , on several occasions during the joint session of january 6 , 2001 , vice president albert a. gore , jr. , presiding over the joint session , ruled on the admissibility of objections to the receipt of electoral votes from the state of florida , and also advised house and senate members that debate was not permitted and that a unanimous consent request for debate on the issue could not be entertained .

he further stated that even incidental parliamentary motions , including those that only affect the actions of the house , needed the written endorsement of at least one representative and one senator in order to be valid .

vice president gore also declined to entertain a point of order that no quorum was present because the point of order had not been endorsed by one member from each chamber .

the statute provides that no question is to be "put by the presiding officer except to either house on a motion to withdraw. .

 ( the statute provides for the senate to withdraw automatically under circumstances discussed below .

the statute , however , makes no other explicit reference to a motion to withdraw. ) .

provisions in 3 u.s.c .

ยง15 include a procedure for making and acting on objections to the counting of one or more of the electoral votes from a state or the district of columbia .

when the certificate or equivalent paper from each state ( or the district of columbia ) is read , "the president of the senate shall call for objections , if any. .

any such objection must be presented in writing and must be signed by at least one senator and one representative .

the objection "shall state clearly and concisely , and without argument , the ground thereof.... " during the joint session of january 6 , 2001 , the presiding officer intervened on several occasions to halt attempts to make speeches under the guise of offering an objection .

when an objection , properly made in writing and endorsed by at least one senator and one representative , is received , each house is to meet and consider it separately .

the statute states that "[n]o votes or papers from any other state shall be acted upon until the objections previously made to the votes or papers from any state shall have been finally disposed of. .

however , in 1873 , before enactment of the law now in force , the joint session agreed , without objection and for reasons of convenience , to entertain objections with regard to two or more states before the houses met separately on any of them .

the timetable for the certification , transmission , review , and approval of the electoral votes was established by congress to avoid a repetition of the extraordinary delay incident to the electoral vote controversy surrounding the 1876 presidential election .

in the event that no candidate has received a majority of the electoral vote for president , the election is ultimately to be decided by the house of representatives in which the names of the three candidates receiving the most electoral votes for president are considered by the house , with each state having one vote .

in the event that no candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes for vice president , the names of the two candidates receiving the highest number of electoral votes for that post are submitted to the senate , which elects the vice president by majority vote of the senators .

the development and current practices for election of the president and vice president by congress specified in the constitution and law are discussed in detail in crs report rl32695 , election of the president and vice president by congress: contingent election , by [author name scrubbed] .

