f or centuries , industrial hemp ( plant species cannabis sativa ) has been a source of fiber and oilseed used worldwide to produce a variety of industrial and consumer products .

currently , more than 30 nations grow industrial hemp as an agricultural commodity , which is sold on the world market .

in the united states , however , production is strictly controlled under existing drug enforcement laws .

currently there is no large - scale commercial production in the united states , and the u.s. market depends on imports .

congress made significant changes to federal policies regarding hemp in the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) .

the 2014 farm bill provided that certain research institutions and state departments of agriculture may grow hemp under an agricultural pilot program .

in addition , in subsequent omnibus appropriations , congress has blocked the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) and federal law enforcement authorities from interfering with state agencies , hemp growers , and agricultural research .

appropriators have also blocked the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) from prohibiting the transportation , processing , sale , or use of industrial hemp that is grown or cultivated in accordance with the 2014 farm bill provision .

despite these efforts , industrial hemp continues to be subject to u.s. drug laws , and growing industrial hemp is restricted .

under current u.s. drug policy , all cannabis varieties — including industrial hemp — are considered schedule i controlled substances under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , and dea continues to control and regulate cannabis production .

although hemp production is now allowed in accordance with the requirements under the 2014 farm bill provision , other aspects of hemp production are still subject to dea oversight , including the importation of viable seeds .

congress has sought to further distinguish between industrial hemp and marijuana .

among the bills addressing industrial hemp , the industrial hemp farming act would amend the csa to specify that the term marijuana does not include industrial hemp , thus excluding hemp from the csa as a controlled substance subject to dea regulation .

this bill was reintroduced and expanded from bills introduced in previous congresses dating back to the 109 th congress .

an expanded version of this bill was introduced in the 115 th congress in both the house and senate ( h.r .

5485 ; s. 2667 ) .

other provisions in these bills would further facilitate hemp production in the united states .

many of the provisions in these bills are included in the senate version of the 2018 farm bill legislation ( h.r .

2 ) that has passed the senate .

similar provisions are not part of the house - passed 2018 farm bill ( h.r .

2 ) .

other introduced legislation would amend the csa "to exclude cannabidiol and cannabidiol - rich plants from the definition of marihuana" intended to promote the possible medical applications of industrial hemp .

myriad other bills introduced in both the house and the senate would further amend the csa and other federal laws to address industrial hemp .

botanically , industrial hemp and marijuana are from the same species of plant , cannabis sativa , but from different varieties or cultivars that have been bred for different uses .

however , industrial hemp and marijuana are genetically distinct forms of cannabis that are distinguished by their use , chemical makeup , and differing cultivation practices in production .

while marijuana generally refers to the psychotropic drug ( whether used for medicinal or recreational purposes ) , industrial hemp is cultivated for use in the production of a wide range of products , including foods and beverages , personal care products , nutritional supplements , fabrics and textiles , paper , construction materials , and other manufactured goods .

both hemp and marijuana also have separate definitions in statute .

while marijuana is defined in u.s. drug laws , congress established a statutory definition for industrial hemp as "the plant cannabis sativa l. and any part of such plant , whether growing or not , with a delta - 9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis" as part of the 2014 farm bill .

hemp is generally characterized by plants that are low in delta - 9 tetrahydrocannabinol ( delta - 9 thc ) , the dominant psychotrophic ingredient in cannabis sativa .

for more background information , see crs report r44742 , defining "industrial hemp": a fact sheet .

however , joint guidance issued in august 2016 by dea , usda , and the food and drug administration ( fda ) suggests that there continues to be questions about what constitutes industrial hemp and its oversight under federal law .

since the mid - 1990s , there has been a resurgence of interest in the united states in producing industrial hemp .

farmers in regions of the country that are highly dependent upon a single crop , such as tobacco or wheat , have shown interest in hemp's potential as a high - value alternative crop , although the economic studies conducted so far paint a mixed profitability picture .

beginning around 1995 , an increasing number of state legislatures began to consider a variety of initiatives related to industrial hemp .

most of these have been resolutions calling for scientific , economic , or environmental studies , and some are laws authorizing planting experimental plots under state statutes .

following enactment of the 2014 farm bill provision , several states have quickly been adopting new state laws to allow for cultivation .

to date , nearly 40 states or territories have enacted or introduced legislation favorable to hemp cultivation ( figure 6 ) .

other states reportedly considering hemp legislation include arizona , georgia , iowa , kansas , mississippi , new mexico , oklahoma , south dakota , and texas .

 ( the status of state actions regarding hemp is changing rapidly , and information differs depending on source. ) .

requirements differ among the states , and some states have enacted laws that are considered more comprehensive than others .

some common provisions across these state laws include defining industrial hemp ( based on the percentage of thc it contains ) and excluding hemp from the definition of "controlled substances" under state law ; authorizing the growing and possessing of industrial hemp by creating an advisory board or commission ; establishing or authorizing a state licensing or registration program for growers and / or seed breeders ; requiring recordkeeping ; requiring waivers or changes to federal law ; establishing or authorizing fee structures ; establishing inspection procedures ; allowing state departments to collect funds for research programs ; promoting research and development of markets for industrial hemp ; establishing certified seed requirements or , in some states , "heritage hemp seeds" ( eg , in colorado and kentucky ) ; and establishing penalties .

some states have well - developed guidelines for growers , covering issues such as registration and reporting requirements , inspection , thc testing and threshold determination , seed availability and certification , pesticide use , production standards , and other information .

other general requirements may apply under some circumstances .

for example , in 2016 , usda published guidance on organic certification of industrial hemp products .

some are calling for the need to develop more far - reaching consensus standards for a range of cannabis varieties given concerns about the general lack of standards and test methods .

production of industrial hemp has been reported in several states ( table 2 ) .

among the states that have enacted taxation and / or fees for industrial hemp are california , colorado , indiana , kentucky , maine , montana , nevada , north dakota , oregon , tennessee , vermont , and west virginia .

in addition to industry groups as well as various state commissions and organizations that are actively promoting reintroducing hemp as a commodity crop in the united states , some key agricultural groups also support u.s. policy changes regarding industrial hemp .

for example in 2018 , the national association of state departments of agriculture ( nasda ) sent a letter to senate majority leader mitch mcconnell and representative james comer in support of the hemp farming act of 2018 ( s. 2667 / h.r .

5485 ) .

nasda claims that the bill addresses "numerous issues hindering the success of industrial hemp pilot programs allowed under the 2014 farm bill. .

in 2017 , the wisconsin farm bureau federation ( wfbf ) sent a letter to usda secretary sonny perdue recommending that the trump administration consider hemp to be an agricultural crop .

a reported 27 other farm bureau presidents supported the initiative .

the bipartisan congressional cannabis caucus — launched in february 2017 by representatives dana rohrabacher , don young , earl blumenauer , and jared polis — is focused on policy reforms regarding federal drugs laws and issues regarding legalization in some states .

the national farmers union ( nfu ) updated its 2013 farm policy regarding hemp to urge the president , attorney general , and congress to direct dea to "reclassify industrial hemp as a non - controlled substance and adopt policy to allow american farmers to grow industrial hemp under state law without affecting eligibility for usda benefits. .

previously nfu's policy advocated that dea "differentiate between industrial hemp and marijuana and adopt policy to allow american farmers to grow industrial hemp under state law without requiring dea licenses. .

in 2010 , nasda stated it "supports revisions to the federal rules and regulations authorizing commercial production of industrial hemp" and has urged usda , dea , and the office of national drug control policy to "collaboratively develop and adopt an official definition of industrial hemp that comports with definitions currently used by countries producing hemp. .

nasda also "urges congress to statutorily distinguish between industrial hemp and marijuana and to direct dea to revise its policies to allow usda to establish a regulatory program that allows the development of domestic industrial hemp production by american farmers and manufacturers. .

nasda first adopted a policy on industrial hemp in 2002 .

in 2014 , the american farm bureau federation , from efforts led by the indiana farm bureau , endorsed a policy to support the "production , processing , commercialization , and utilization of industrial hemp" and reportedly also passed a policy resolution to oppose the "classification of industrial hemp as a controlled substance. .

previously , in 1995 , the farm bureau had passed a resolution supporting "research into the viability and economic potential of industrial hemp production in the united states ... [and] further recommend that such research includes planting test plots in the united states using modern agricultural techniques. .

regional farmers' organizations also have policies regarding hemp .

for example , the north dakota farmers union , as part of its federal agricultural policy recommendations , has urged "congress to legalize the production of industrial hemp. .

the rocky mountain farmers union has urged "congress and the usda to re - commit and fully fund research into alternative crops and uses for crops" including industrial hemp .

also , they "support the decoupling of industrial hemp from the definition of marijuana" under the csa and "demand the president and the attorney general direct the u.s. drug enforcement agency ( dea ) to differentiate between industrial hemp and marijuana and adopt a policy to allow american farmers to grow industrial hemp under state law without requiring dea licenses" to "legalize the production of industrial hemp as an alternative crop for agricultural producers. .

the national grange voted in 2009 to support "research , production , processing and marketing of industrial hemp as a viable agricultural activity. .

in california , ongoing efforts to revise the definition of marijuana to exclude "industrial hemp" ( sb 566 ) are supported by the state's sheriffs' association .

the county farm bureau and two sheriffs' offices supported previous efforts in 2011 to establish a pilot program to grow industrial hemp in selected counties ( although the state's governor later vetoed the bill , sb 676 ) .

north american industrial hemp council — a coalition of farmers , state legislators , former officials , scientists , merchants , entrepreneurs , and environmentalists — filed a petition in june 2016 asking dea to "remove industrial hemp from the federal drug schedules. .

despite support by some , other groups continue to oppose policy changes regarding cannabis .

for example , the national alliance for health and safety , as part of drug watch international , claims that proposals to reintroduce hemp as an agricultural crop are merely a strategy by "the international pro - drug lobby to legalize cannabis and other illicit substances. .

the california narcotic officers' association claims that allowing for industrial hemp production would undermine state and federal enforcement efforts to regulate marijuana production , since , they claim , the two crops are not distinguishable through ground or aerial surveillance but would require costly and time - consuming lab work to be conducted .

this group also claims that these similarities would create an incentive to use hemp crops to mask illicit marijuana production , since marijuana is such a lucrative cash crop .

concerns about the potential linkages to the growing and use of illegal drugs are also expressed by some parent and community organizations , such as the drug free america foundation and pride .

given dea's current policy positions and perceived dea opposition to changing its current policies because of concerns over how to allow for hemp production without undermining the agency's drug enforcement efforts and regulation of the production and distribution of marijuana , hemp proponents say that further policy changes regarding industrial hemp are likely not forthcoming absent congressional legislative action .

hemp production in the united states faces a number of obstacles in the foreseeable future , such as u.s. government drug policies and dea concerns about the ramifications of u.s. commercial hemp production .

these concerns are that commercial cultivation could increase the likelihood of covert production of high - thc marijuana , significantly complicating dea's surveillance and enforcement activities and sending the wrong message to the american public concerning the government's position on drugs .

dea officials and a variety of other observers also express the concern that efforts to legalize hemp — as well as those to legalize medical marijuana — are a front for individuals and organizations whose real aim is to see marijuana decriminalized .

hemp production in the united states also faces competition from other global suppliers .

the world market for hemp products remains relatively small , and china , as the world's largest hemp fiber and seed producer , has had and likely will continue to have major influence on market prices and thus on the year - to - year profits of producers and processors in other countries .

canada's lead start in the north american market for hemp seed and oil would also likely affect the profitability of a start - up industry in the united states .

nevertheless , the u.s. market for hemp - based products has a highly dedicated and growing demand base , as indicated by recent u.s. market and import data for hemp products and ingredients , as well as market trends for some natural foods and body care products .

given the existence of these small - scale , but profitable , niche markets for a wide array of industrial and consumer products , commercial hemp industry in the united states could provide opportunities as an economically viable alternative crop for some u.s. growers .

appendix a .

listing of selected hemp studies a review of hemp as a sustainable agricultural commodity , task force report by the university of washington's henry m. jackson school of international studies , 2018 .

j. h. cherney and e. small , "industrial hemp in north america: production , politics , and potential," agronomy , vol .

6 , no .

56 ( 2016 ) .

l. lane et al. , industrial hemp: legal , political / social and economic issues raised over time , university of arkansas , 2016 .

university of kentucky , economic considerations for growing industrial hemp: implications for kentucky's farmers and agricultural economy , july 2013 .

c. a. kolosov , "regulation of industrial hemp under the controlled substances act" ucla law review , vol .

57 , no .

237 ( october 2009 ) .

manitoba agriculture , national industrial hemp strategy , march 2008 ( prepared for food and rural initiative agriculture and agri - food canada ) .

reason foundation , "illegally green: environmental costs of hemp prohibition," policy study 367 , march 2008 , http: / / www.reason.org / ps367.pdf .

agriculture and agri - food canada , canada's industrial hemp industry , march 2007 , http: / / www.agr.gc.ca / misb / spcrops / sc - cs_e.php ? page+hemp - chanvre .

maine agricultural center , an assessment of industrial hemp production in maine , january 2007 .

n. cherrett et al. , "ecological footprint and water analysis of cotton , hemp and polyester," stockholm environment institute , 2005 .

t. r. fortenbery and m. bennett , "opportunities for commercial hemp production," applied economics perspectives and policy , vol .

26 , no .

1 ( 2004 ) .

e. small and d. marcus , "hemp: a new crop with new uses for north america," trends in new crops and new uses , 2002 .

t. r. fortenbery and m. bennett , "is industrial hemp worth further study in the u.s. ? .

a survey of the literature," staff paper no .

443 , july 2001 .

j. bowyer , "industrial hemp ( cannabis sativa l. ) as a papermaking raw material in minnesota: technical , economic and environmental considerations," department of wood and paper science report series , may 2001 .

k. hill , n. boshard - blackey , and j. simson , "legislative research shop: hemp," university of vermont , april 2000 .

usda , economic research service , industrial hemp in the united states: status and market potential , ages001e , january 2000 .

m. j. cochran , t. e. windham , and b. moore , "feasibility of industrial hemp production in arkansas," university of arkansas , sp102000 , may 2000 .

d. g. kraenzel et al. , "industrial hemp as an alternative crop in north dakota," north dakota state university , aer 402 , july 1998 .

e. c. thompson et al. , economic impact of industrial hemp in kentucky , university of kentucky , july 1998 .

d. t. ehrensing , feasibility of industrial hemp production in the united states pacific northwest , oregon state university , sb 681 , may 1998 .

appendix b .

joint dea / usda / fda "statement of principles on industrial hemp" as noted in the joint dea / usda / fda "statement of principles on industrial hemp," published august 12 , 2016 , which is excerpted below: usda , having consulted with and received concurrence from the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) and the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) , therefore , is issuing this statement of principles to inform the public regarding how federal law applies to activities involving industrial hemp so that individuals , institutions , and states that wish to participate in industrial hemp agricultural pilot programs can do so in accordance with federal law .

the growth and cultivation of industrial hemp may only take place in accordance with an agricultural pilot program to study the growth , cultivation , or marketing of industrial hemp established by a state department of agriculture or state agency responsible for agriculture in a state where the production of industrial hemp is otherwise legal under state law .

the state agricultural pilot program must provide for state registration and certification of sites used for growing or cultivating industrial hemp .

although registration and certification is not further defined , it is recommended that such registration should include the name of the authorized manufacturer , the period of licensure or other time period during which such person is authorized by the state to manufacture industrial hemp , and the location , including global positioning system coordinates , where such person is authorized to manufacture industrial hemp .

only state departments of agriculture , and persons licensed , registered , or otherwise authorized by them to conduct research under an agricultural pilot program in accordance with section 7606 , and institutions of higher education ( as defined in section 101 of the higher education act of 1965 ( 20 u.s.c .

1001 ) ) , or persons employed by or under a production contract or lease with them to conduct such research , may grow or cultivate industrial hemp as part of the agricultural pilot program .

the term "industrial hemp" includes the plant cannabis sativa l. and any part or derivative of such plant , including seeds of such plant , whether growing or not , that is used exclusively for industrial purposes ( fiber and seed ) with a tetrahydrocannabinols concentration of not more than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis .

the term "tetrahydrocannabinols" includes all isomers , acids , salts , and salts of isomers of tetrahydrocannabinols .

for purposes of marketing research by institutions of higher education or state departments of agriculture ( including distribution of marketing materials ) , but not for the purpose of general commercial activity , industrial hemp products may be sold in a state with an agricultural pilot program or among states with agricultural pilot programs but may not be sold in states where such sale is prohibited .

industrial hemp plants and seeds may not be transported across state lines .

section 7606 specifically authorized certain entities to "grow or cultivate" industrial hemp but did not eliminate the requirement under the controlled substances import and export act that the importation of viable cannabis seeds must be carried out by persons registered with the dea to do so .

in addition , any usda phytosanitary requirements that normally would apply to the importation of plant material will apply to the importation of industrial hemp seed .

section 7606 did not amend the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act .

for example , section 7606 did not alter the approval process for new drug applications , the requirements for the conduct of clinical or nonclinical research , the oversight of marketing claims , or any other authorities of the fda as they are set forth in that act .

the federal government does not construe section 7606 to alter the requirements of the controlled substances act ( csa ) that apply to the manufacture , distribution , and dispensing of drug products containing controlled substances .

manufacturers , distributors , dispensers of drug products derived from cannabis plants , as well as those conducting research with such drug products , must continue to adhere to the csa requirements .

institutions of higher education and other participants authorized to carry out agricultural pilot programs under section 7606 may be able to participate in usda research or other programs to the extent otherwise eligible for participation in those programs .

