total private nonfarm employment fell from a peak of 111.6 million in february 2001 to a trough of 108.4 million in july 2003 .

it then expanded through 2007 , reducing the unemployment rate to a relatively low level , although not as low as was reached at the end of the previous expansion .

since the beginning of 2008 , employment has fallen again and the unemployment rate has risen .

job loss — declines in employment — is one of the most important macroeconomic problems facing policymakers , both in terms of its economic cost and the social toll it takes on our society .

but what is often missing from the policy debate is a distinction between net job loss and gross job loss .

gross job loss is the total number of jobs eliminated by all contracting firms in a given period , whereas net job loss is the result of greater gross job loss than gross job gains in a given period .

in expansions , the labor market is characterized by net job creation amidst gross job loss .

this is required to maintain steady employment rates with a growing population .

it is only during recessions that the overall labor market experiences persistent net job loss .

economists view net job loss as a detrimental phenomenon and most recommend that policy be used to mitigate it .

however , they view gross job loss , as long as it is offset by gross job gains , as a healthy and normal part of a functioning market economy , although it may have social costs .

a quarterly data series from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , shown in figure 1 , provides data that help to put the distinction between gross and net job loss into perspective .

these data are measured from the firm's perspective — changes in the size of the firm's workforce — not the employee's perspective .

for this reason , the data , in a sense , undercount the amount of change in the workforce because they do not account for movements of individual workers to and from any given firm if the firm remains the same size ( eg , a worker quits and is quickly replaced by a new hire ) .

the gross job loss figures , from the employee's perspective , could be involuntary ( layoff , firing ) or voluntary ( quitting , retirement ) .

in the third quarter of 2007 , gross job loss and gains equaled 7.5 million and 7.2 million per quarter , respectively , each about 5% of total employment .

as can be seen in figure 1 , gross job loss and job gains are each , on average , around 20 times higher than net job loss ( or gains ) in any given quarter .

this is true in both expansions and recessions .

the rate of job gains increased steadily from the beginning of the series in 1992 until the end of 1999 ; at the same time , job losses increased steadily from 1992 to 2001 .

some , but not all , of the long run increase in gross job gains and losses can be attributed to a growing labor force .

the rest of the increase indicates that the u.s. labor force is becoming more mobile over time , but the data do not indicate whether this is the worker's or the firm's decision , or both .

most of the gross job flows occur at existing firms , and are not due to new firms opening or old firms closing .

clearly , gross job loss is not incompatible with a healthy labor market: during an expansion in which the unemployment rate was lower than it had been in three decades , gross job losses steadily increased as the expansion progressed .

and even during the 2001 recession and subsequent "jobless recovery," gross job gains continued to average about 8 million per quarter ; but gross job gains in this period were more than offset by gross job losses .

in the current expansion , job gains and losses have been modestly lower than in the second half of the 1990s .

although gross job gains stayed relatively constant , net employment began to rise again because gross job losses fell .

there is not yet data available on whether net job loss in 2008 has been driven primarily by gross job gains or losses .

it is often claimed that small businesses are the engine of job creation in the u.s. economy .

to an extent , this is a misconception based on the confusion between net and gross job flows .

firms with 99 employees or fewer , which account for 38.1% of total private employment , accounted for 61.1% of gross job gains between 1992:3 and 2005:1 .

but while these firms had a disproportionate share of gross job gains , they also had a disproportionate share of gross job loss , 62.1% of the total .

on net , they accounted for 46.3% of net job gains over that time period — modestly more than their share of total employment , but significantly less than gross flows would indicate .

 ( recent employment trends followed a similar pattern. ) .

interestingly , in the 2001 recession and jobless recovery , very large firms accounted for a disproportionate share of net job loss .

overall , these data provide a picture , during expansions , of a highly dynamic u.s. labor market in which labor rapidly shifts from firm to firm to its most efficient use .

this vitality is the essence of economic growth and rising living standards for society as a whole in a market economy .

it is caused both by output shifting from some firms to more efficient ones within an industry and by shifts in spending from one industry to another , due to factors such as changing consumer tastes , technology , or comparative advantage .

of course , there will always be winners and losers in a market economy .

although significant gross job loss is consistent with net job creation ( because it is offset by gross job gains ) for the nation as a whole , gross job loss can translate into net job loss at the local level even when national employment is rising because the losses and gains may not occur in the same geographic area .

several economic phenomena have been identified in popular discussion as purportedly causing job loss .

although all of these phenomena cause gross job loss , most have a much smaller effect on net job loss than popularly perceived .

the exception is the business cycle: in each instance , recessions have been the cause of persistent net job loss in the post - war period .

most economists agree that net job loss is an undesirable phenomenon , and recommend that public policy be used to offset it .

policymakers can use expansionary monetary policy ( lower short term interest rates by the federal reserve ) or expansionary fiscal policy ( an increase in the budget deficit ) to stimulate aggregate spending and offset net job loss .

if used properly and prudently , these policy tools can theoretically minimize net job loss .

unfortunately because of policy lags in recognition , implementation , and effectiveness , fiscal and monetary policy will probably never be conducted effectively enough to eliminate recessionary periods of net job loss .

direct job creation programs have been used by the government in past recessions to stem net job loss , but from an economic perspective , these policies have a similar effect to any expansionary fiscal policy , and they also are prone to implementation lags .

policies that impede gross job loss ( eg , regulatory restrictions on dismissal or layoffs ) may seem to be a desirable way to limit net job loss at first blush .

however , such policies could have the unintended effect of making firms reluctant to take on new workers , because a firm would not be able to subsequently reduce its workforce easily if the need for the new workers proved to be only temporary .

as a result , gross job gains could decline ; if gross job gains declined by more than gross job loss declined , net job creation would decline .

this suggests that attempts to limit gross job loss could be counterproductive .

because gross job flows are , on the whole , caused by the reallocation of resources to their most efficient use , policies to impede gross job loss would also likely have adverse consequences for growth and efficiency .

helping job losers make the transition into a new employment situation is a less costly alternative , and one that is compatible with an efficient , dynamic labor market .

international comparison confirms this view .

the organization of economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) ranked countries on a scale of zero to six based on regulatory restrictions on dismissal from regular employment , temporary employment , and mass layoffs .

as seen in table 2 , countries with little protection such as switzerland , japan , australia , new zealand , and the united states had low unemployment rates , between 3.6% and 5.3% in 2007 .

countries with greater protection had a mixed experience: some small countries like austria , the netherlands , and norway kept unemployment low , but the four large countries with the most protection ( germany , france , italy , and spain ) had relatively high unemployment rates .

the unemployment rate in the united states was lower at the trough of the recession than the lowest level many of these countries attained at the peak of their business cycles .

if policies to forestall gross job loss are deemed to have too high an efficiency cost , what role can policy play ? .

two perspectives can be used to answer that question .

one perspective would view the labor reallocation issue as a purely social problem .

that is , allowing gross job loss to occur with no impediment from the government may be an economically desirable outcome as long as it is cancelled out by job creation , but the situation creates social problems that government may wish to tackle on non - economic grounds .

these social problems include poverty , psychological problems , crime , alcoholism and substance abuse , the undermining of families and communities , and so on that reportedly increase when gross job loss occurs .

economic analysis provides little guidance on the best role for the government to play in tackling these non - economic problems .

alternatively , an economic perspective would ask if any market failure is associated with gross job loss , and what role the government can play in potentially rectifying that market failure .

although it can be argued that gross job loss poses no market failure in and of itself , a persuasive argument can be made that there are market failures that prevent individuals from efficiently insuring themselves in the private market against the risks posed by gross job loss .

to a considerable extent , the possibility of gross job loss is a risky event beyond a worker's control , such as adverse changes in the business cycle , tastes , technology , or trade patterns .

one would expect a worker to be willing to use some of his income to privately purchase insurance against those risks , just as individuals insure against the risk of death , fire , health problems , and so on .

yet the limited use of private unemployment insurance to supplement government - provided insurance suggests that market failures may significantly hamper the functioning of the private market .

all insurance markets are hampered by two important market failures — adverse selection and moral hazard .

a persuasive argument can be made that unemployment insurance may be more adversely affected by both types of market failure than most other types of insurance .

adverse selection is caused by asymmetric information: buyers of insurance know more about their riskiness than sellers .

as a result , only buyers with higher risks will tend to purchase insurance because they are more certain that the benefit of the insurance will exceed the cost .

this pushes up the price of insurance and hampers insurers' efforts to pool risk .

adverse selection hampers efficiency in the market for unemployment insurance because some causes of unemployment are beyond the worker's control , and some are not .

since insurance firms cannot identify which workers have a greater chance of losing their jobs because of the factors within their control , they cannot efficiently pool the risks that workers do not control .

moral hazard occurs when an individual's behavior becomes more risky once he is insured .

moral hazard also drives the cost of insurance above its efficient level .

moral hazard can occur in the unemployment insurance market in two ways: it can cause insured workers to engage in behavior that is more likely to lead to job loss , and once job loss has occurred it can make an insured worker less willing to take a new job ( because the worker can subsist on the income provided by the insurance ) .

government provision of unemployment insurance solves the adverse selection problem by making participation universal .

as long as all workers are participating , insurance can be priced at its efficient level , even though benefit will not match cost for any given worker .

government mitigates , but does not eliminate , the moral hazard problem by making the insurance temporary ( normally 26 weeks in most states ) and imposing eligibility restrictions ( eg , not providing insurance when the worker has quit or been fired ) .

the government has also tended to extend the duration of insurance during economic downturns , since events beyond the worker's control are a greater source of job loss then .

the private sector could use the same methods as the government to mitigate moral hazard , but it could not prevent adverse selection .

if one accepts that government provision of unemployment insurance is more efficient than private provision , then the policy issue is whether or not insurance is adequate or excessive at current levels .

are workers adequately protected against the risk of gross job loss at existing benefit levels ? .

should benefit levels or duration be increased or coverage be expanded since gross job loss seems to be following an upward trend ? .

would more generous insurance reduce the social problems associated with gross job loss ? .

the tradeoff here is between both benefit and cost to the individual ( more generous insurance would require higher premiums ) and cost to the economy because of the moral hazard problem: as the insurance becomes more generous , disincentives to maintain employment or seek new employment among the unemployed increase .

government's role in insuring workers against the risks associated with gross job loss can also be viewed through a broader prism than the unemployment insurance program .

disability insurance insures against the risk of job loss due to physical incapacity .

trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) , which offers extended unemployment benefits and job training , reduces the risk that workers adversely affected by trade will be unable to find re - employment .

 ( some policymakers have suggested that taa be extended to workers in the service industry , given the growing concern with offshore outsourcing. ) .

government programs such as cobra ( named after title x of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ) reduce the loss of health care associated with job loss .

some would argue that income redistribution , in general , is a form of income insurance , whether it takes the form of progressive taxation , the earned income tax credit , the food stamps program , the supplemental security income program , and so on .

kletzer and litan have argued that the government should implement a "wage insurance" program so that workers who lose their jobs and are forced to take lower paid employment are directly compensated by the government .

along these lines , the alternative trade adjustment assistance program for older workers was introduced in 2002 .

an eligible worker ( over 50 years old , earning less than $50,000 , and meeting other criteria ) can receive half the difference between the wages received from reemployment and the wages received at the displaced job for up to two years and payments up to $10,000 .

this program applies only to workers affected by trade , although the economic rationale for such a program could apply to all workers .

bills in the 110 th congress , such as s. 1330 ( senator schumer ) and h.r .

2202 ( representative mcdermott ) , would create broader wage insurance programs .

at the community level , fiscal transfers ( differences between outlays received and taxes paid ) that change with economic conditions and government programs such as the empowerment zone / enterprise communities program provide what could be characterized as "insurance" for the community as a whole against the economic effects of significant job loss .

drawing a distinction between net job loss and gross job loss can help to inform the policy debate .

net job loss is a serious economic problem that fiscal and monetary policy can be used to mitigate .

although it has social costs , gross job loss is part of the normal functioning of a market economy , and has the beneficial role of reallocating resources to their most efficient use when tastes , technology , or comparative advantage changes .

even in expansions , gross job loss is sizeable , between 6.5 million and 8.5 million per quarter from 1992 to 2000 , but it is more than offset by gross job gains .

trade , trade deficits , offshore outsourcing , overseas investment , and economic restructuring all cause gross job loss .

but in normal economic conditions , none typically causes net job loss , according to theory and evidence .

to see why , consider that they all have the same effect on employment as technological advances .

for example , the advent of the automobile caused gross job loss in the horse buggy industry , but was more than offset by gross job gains in the rest of the economy .

as the buggy example suggests , policies that impede gross job loss can have high efficiency costs .

the difference in the unemployment experience of countries with high barriers to job loss , such as the high unemployment countries of western europe , and countries with low barriers , such as the united states , offers some evidence that barriers to gross job loss can lead to lower gross job gains , making such barriers ultimately self - defeating .

however , public policies to protect workers against the risks posed by gross job loss can be justified on both social and economic grounds .

if crafted properly , they have been shown not to reduce gross job gains , and they can arguably raise efficiency by addressing market failures .

for example , public provision of unemployment insurance helps overcome moral hazard and adverse selection problems in that market .

the challenge for policymakers going forward is to find the right balance between mitigating risk and maintaining market dynamism in an increasingly fluid labor market .

