in february 2002 , the bush administration announced two air quality proposals to addressthe control of emissions of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , mercury ( hg ) , and carbondioxide ( co 2 ) .

 ( 1 ) the firstproposal , called "clear skies," would amend the clean air act ( caa ) to place emission caps onelectric utility emissions of so 2 , nox , and hg .

implemented through a tradeable allowanceprogram , the emissions caps would be imposed in two phases: 2010 ( 2008 in the case of nox ) and2018 .

as part of a complete rewrite of title iv of the clean air act , clear skies was introduced inthe 108th congress on february 27 , 2003 , as h.r .

999 and s. 485 .

 ( 2 ) in the 109th congress , amodified version of clear skies ( s. 131 ) has been introduced by senator inhofe and hasbecome the focus of congressional hearings and potential markup .

 ( 3 ) much of the debate surrounding the administration's clear skies proposal has focused onits cap - and - trade implementation scheme .

for example , epa states: "the clear skies approachwould deliver guaranteed emissions reductions of so 2 , nox , and mercury at a fraction of commandand control costs , increasing certainty for industry , regulators , consumers and citizens. .

 ( 4 ) in some ways , the proposal'scap - and - trade provisions are its least significant aspects in terms of the proposal's interaction withthe structure of the clean air act .

epa has already promulgated regulations using a regionalcap - and - trade program to control nox emissions over the eastern united states ( called the nox sipcall ) under existing clean air act authority , and has proposed other cap - and - trade regulations toachieve clear skies' level of reductions over 28 eastern states and the district of columbia for bothso 2 and nox .

 ( 5 ) inaddition , epa has proposed other cap - and - trade regulations to achieve similar clear skies mercuryreductions , although their legality has been subject to some question .

 ( 6 ) far more important to the fabric of the clean air act are the various provisions in clearskies to alter , delete , or hold in abeyance for some time existing sections of the clean air act withrespect to affected electric generating units and industrial sources that choose to opt into theprogram .

the administration has made it clear that with clear skies , it believes certain caaprovisions are no longer necessary .

as stated by then - epa administrator whitman before thesenate environment and public works committee , as epa was developing clear skies legislation: well , it is our feeling that right now that depending onwhere you set the targets , that new source review is certainly one of those regulatory aspects thatwould no longer be necessary - - the regional haze , the bart , as i mentioned before , the mactstandards , the nox sip call , the 126 rule , acid rain - - all of those could be eliminated and combinedinto one regulatory process under a new piece of legislation that would be vastly simplified .

itdepends where they go on those for utilities - - we are talking for utilities now - - as far as most ofthose are concerned .

but where you go depends on what level is set in the final legislation , how faryou can go to eliminate the additional regulations that we have in place now .

 ( 7 ) this report examines the potential impact clear skies legislation would have on the structureof the clean air act with respect to electric generating units and other industrial sources that chooseto opt into the program .

many of the changes in the clean air act proposed by clear skies would occur with respectto title i .

within its general regulatory structure , several distinctions arise that affect utility planningand operations - - for example , whether the facility is located in clean or dirty air areas , whether afacility is existing or new , and what fuel it burns .

and while the underlying regulatory structuregenerally applies to so 2 , nox , and particulate matter ( pm ) , the specific requirements for each differ .

despite changes made in the 1990 clean air act amendments , specifically the addition of acap - and - trade program to control so 2 emissions ( title iv ) , the basic structure designed in 1970 andexpanded in 1977 remains the backbone of the act .

the addition of title iv in 1990 did not changeany of the basic requirements of the act ; title iv was a supplemental provision , not a substitute forexisting provisions .

clear skies would change numerous provisions of current law .

some of thesechanges add new authorities or programs - - for example , the establishment ofnational cap - and - trade programs for utility emissions of nox and mercury , and theextension and revision of the title iv cap - and - trade program for so 2 .

other changesremove existing authority ( eg , the hazardous air pollutant provisions of section 112,as they relate to mercury emissions from utilities and from opt - in facilities in otherindustries ) .

and other changes modify and / or hold in abeyance certain provisions forseveral years ( eg , bart , section 126 , conformity ) .

a list of the additional authorities would include ( 1 ) the cap - and - tradeprograms for so 2 , nox , and hg ; ( 2 ) statutory national emission standards for newand reconstructed electric generating units ( egus ) ; ( 3 ) authority for sources in otherindustries to opt into the cap - and - trade program ; and ( 4 ) establishment of an optional"transitional area" category in place of the traditional nonattainment area designationsunder sections 107 and 110 .

a list of the authorities removed ( or limited in new ways ) would include ( 1 ) provisions for major sources ( i.e. , affected egus and opt - in units would no longerbe considered major sources ) ; ( 2 ) changes to the hazardous air pollutant provisionsof section 112 , removing utilities and opt - in units from the sources whose mercuryemissions can be controlled under maximum achievable control technology ( mact ) and residual risk provisions ; ( 3 ) changes to section 126 , establishing amoratorium on the use of petitions to control interstate air pollution , and establishingsubstantially more stringent requirements for acceptance of such petitions after themoratorium ; ( 4 ) reduction of the noncompliance penalties under the new so 2 cap - and - trade program ; ( 5 ) effective preemption of more stringent state requirementsfor nox and mercury ; ( 6 ) elimination of new source review ( nsr ) formodifications of major sources ; ( 7 ) elimination of best available retrofittechnology ( bart ) requirements under section 169a ( which concerns visibilityprotection ) ; ( 8 ) establishment of a statutory 50 km zone around class i areas forimposition of the prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) requirements ( replacing a current regulatory 100 km zone ) ; ( 9 ) exempting affected units locatedin psd class ii areas from class ii limitations on pollution increments ; ( 10 ) extension of deadlines for meeting the ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs ; ( 11 ) a de facto moratorium on the provisions of subpart 2 dealing with ozone nonattainment in mostareas ; and ( 12 ) a de facto moratorium on the conformity requirements ( for highwaysand other projects ) under section 176 in most ozone and pm 2.5 nonattainment areas .

in some ways , former administrator whitman has identified the central issuein clear skies' interaction with the clean air act: are the targets stringent enoughto permit the relaxing or removal of some provisions of the clean air act designedto achieve the same thing with respect to electric utilities ? .

in terms of utility controls designed to achieve the naaqs , it must be statedthat clear skies will not achieve either the 8-hour ozone naaqs or the fineparticulate naaqs within the current caa compliance deadlines , neither in termsof the reductions necessary to achieve those standards nor the timing of thereductions clear skies would achieve .

epa's analysis indicates that somenonattainment areas will need additional controls and time to reach attainment .

 ( 26 ) clear skies,as currently drafted , would effectively remove additional electric utility control fromthe suite of options available to states to achieve that additional level of control .

inaddition , the opt - in provision means that the reach of clear skies is unclear .

in someareas , the removal of an industrial source from part c or part d could greatly reducethe options state and local authorities would have to achieve naaqs attainment orto maintain psd increments .

similar problems are anticipated for clear skies' mercury controls .

atpresent , 45 states have issued fish consumption advisories because of mercurycontamination .

in about half the cases , the advisories affect every water body in thestate .

clear skies proposes relatively modest controls on mercury from electricutilities , ( 27 ) and most other sources of mercury are alreadysubject to more stringent controls .

 ( 28 ) as currently drafted , clear skies wouldeffectively remove additional electric utility controls from the suite of optionsavailable to the states to further reduce mercury emissions .

the ability of industrialsources to opt into the clear skies program would further reduce state mercurycontrol options .

the response of the administration is to argue that reductions will beachieved sooner and less expensively under clear skies than under the clean airact , ( 29 ) even though clear skies would extend compliance deadlines 5 to 15 years for statesto achieve air quality standards .

the record of title iv suggests that substantialovercontrol may be achieved in the early years of a market - based cap - and - tradeprogram .

however , as the program also illustrates over the past couple of years,those early reductions can be used later to increase emissions in a given year over themandated cap .

 ( 30 ) thus , achieving reductions early under acap - and - trade program does not mean achieving more reductions over the longerterm .

for state and local authorities , this additional flexibility allowing sources touse banked allowances can further complicate compliance strategies .

