reliable documents that accurately indicate the status and identity of the bearer are critical to the effective administration of immigration law .

a range of documents , including immigrant and nonimmigrant visas , permits , border crossing cards , and alien registration receipt cards , may enable an alien to enter the united states and / or be eligible for various benefits for the duration of his or her stay .

the integrity of the immigration system depends on the genuineness of ( 1 ) the documents indicating the eligibility of an alien to enter and remain in the united states or receive certain benefits and ( 2 ) the records and papers submitted to obtain such documents .

to enter or remain in the united states and be eligible for various immigration - related benefits , aliens must comply with a number of document requirements under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended .

attempts to circumvent these document requirements have been prohibited and punishable since at least 1924 .

under the ina , an alien who uses , acquires , or produces fraudulent documents for immigration - related purposes may be subjected to civil penalties and denied certain immigration benefits , including the ability to enter or remain in the united states .

further , certain fraudulent actions may carry criminal penalties under both the ina and the united states criminal code .

this report discusses the primary civil , criminal , and immigration - related penalties associated with immigration - related document fraud .

it does not discuss criminal statutes generally barring fraud or identity theft ( other than 18 u.s.c .

§ 1028 ) that could also potentially be used to penalize immigration - related document fraud .

the primary provision of the ina concerning immigration - related document fraud is ina § 274c .

in general , ina § 274c prohibits the fraudulent production , use , or possession of documents in order either ( 1 ) to acquire benefits under the ina or ( 2 ) to satisfy an ina requirement .

specifically , ina § 274c makes it unlawful for any person or entity ( including non - aliens ) to knowingly forge , counterfeit , alter , or falsely make any document for the purpose of satisfying an ina requirement or obtaining a benefit under the ina ; use , attempt to use , possess , obtain , accept , receive , or provide any forged , counterfeit , altered , or falsely made document for the purpose of satisfying an ina requirement or obtaining a benefit under the ina ; use , attempt to use , provide , or attempt to provide any document lawfully issued to or with respect to a person other than the possessor for the purpose of satisfying an ina requirement or obtaining a benefit under the ina ; accept , receive or provide any document lawfully issued to or with respect to a person other than the possessor for the purpose of complying with ina § 274a ( b ) ( relating to alien employment verification ) or obtaining a benefit under the ina ; prepare , file , or assist another in preparing or filing , any application for benefits under the ina , or any document required under the ina , or any document submitted in connection with such application or document , with knowledge or in reckless disregard of the fact that such application or document was falsely made or , in whole or in part , does not relate to the person on whose behalf it was or is being submitted ; or present before boarding a common carrier for the purpose of coming to the united states a document which relates to the alien's eligibility to enter the united states , and subsequently fail to present such document to an immigration officer upon arrival at a united states port of entry .

persons or entities found to have violated ina § 274c may be ordered to cease and desist engaging in the unlawful activity and be assessed a civil money penalty .

in the case of most first - time offenders , this penalty is between $375 and $3,200 for each fraudulent document or proscribed activity ( and between $275 and $2,200 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) .

for subsequent offenses , the civil penalty is between $3,200 and $6,500 ( and between $2,200 and $5,500 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) .

in the case of first - time offenders under ina § 274c ( a ) ( 5 ) ( relating to the preparation or filing of a fraudulent ina document ) or § 274c ( a ) ( 6 ) ( failing to present entry documents upon arrival in united states ) , the penalty is between $275 and $2,200 for each fraudulent document or proscribed activity ( and between $250 and $2,000 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) .

subsequent offenses are punishable by between $2,200 and $5,000 for each violation ( and between $2,000 and $5,000 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) .

immigration authorities may investigate allegations of document fraud either on their own initiative or upon receiving third - party complaints with a substantial probability of validity .

immigration authorities may issue subpoenas to examine evidence against persons or entities being investigated .

if immigration authorities conclude that a person or entity has violated § 274c , they may issue a notice of intent to fine the alleged offender .

if the alleged offender contests the issuance of the notice of intent to fine , the respondent may request a hearing regarding the alleged violation within 60 days .

hearings are conducted by administrative law judges under the supervision of the chief administrative hearing officer of the department of justice's executive office of immigration review .

if a hearing is not requested within this period , or the respondent otherwise waives the right to a hearing , a final order may be issued by immigration authorities .

if a hearing is requested , an immigration judge may issue a final order imposing civil penalties if the preponderance of evidence indicates that the accused has violated the requirements of ina § 274c .

the civil penalties for violating § 274c may be waived in limited circumstances for aliens who failed to show the same immigration documents to u.s. immigration authorities as were used to board the carrier to travel to the united states , if the alien is granted asylum or withholding of removal .

an alien's unauthorized presence within the united states — that is , being an "illegal alien" — is generally not a crime in and of itself .

however , many types of immigration - related document fraud that may facilitate an alien's entry into or continued presence within the united states are criminal offenses .

the following sections discuss the primary criminal statutes covering immigration - related document fraud , many of which are overlapping in coverage with civil statutes prohibiting immigration - related document fraud .

in addition to these statutes , a number of other criminal statutes can potentially be used to prosecute aliens for document fraud in certain circumstances .

further , persons may be held criminally liable for aiding and abetting or conspiring to commit such offenses .

immigration - related document fraud also bears upon an alien's eligibility to enter or remain in the united states , and in certain circumstances such fraud may make the alien ineligible for certain other immigration - related benefits .

these statutory grounds may be waived by immigration authorities in certain circumstances .

immigration reform is likely to be an issue in the 111 th congress , and it is possible that some legislative proposals will contain provisions addressing immigration - related document fraud .

proposals made in recent years that have received legislative action or significant congressional interest include measures that would amend and rewrite chapter 75 of title 18 of the united states code ( concerning fraud and misuse related to visas , passports , and other travel and immigration documents ) , including by , inter alia , ( 1 ) increasing the maximum sentences available for violations under the chapter ; ( 2 ) establishing new penalties for the unauthorized trafficking of passports or immigration documents ; ( 3 ) making it a crime to defraud any person on a matter that is authorized by or arises under immigration laws ( with specific provisions dealing with persons who knowingly misrepresent themselves as attorneys in immigration matters ) ; ( 4 ) specifying that an attempt or conspiracy to commit a violation of any provision of chapter 75 is punishable to the same degree as is a completed violation of such provision ; ( 5 ) permitting the seizure and forfeiture of any property and / or proceeds traceable to a violation of chapter 75 ; ( 6 ) extending criminal jurisdiction of chapter 75 to cover violations occurring in the u.s. special maritime and territorial jurisdiction as well as ( in many cases ) outside the united states ; and ( 7 ) specifying that material omissions of pertinent facts in the preparation or completion of immigration documents constitute "false statements or misrepresentations" for purposes of chapter 75 ; require the establishment of prosecutorial guidelines to ensure that any prosecution of an alien seeking entry into the united states by fraud is consistent with u.s. international obligations concerning the treatment of refugees and asylum - seekers ; heighten the criminal penalties for persons who knowingly enter into marriages or commercial enterprises for the purpose of evading any provision of the immigration laws , and establish new penalties for certain conduct related to marriage fraud ; and make inadmissible and deportable those aliens who violate certain provisions of chapter 75 of title 18 , u.s. code ( as amended ) , including through immigration document and passport fraud and immigration - related marriage fraud .

