continuing a legislative effort that began in the 107th congress , house and senate confereeson november 17 , 2003 , reached agreement on an omnibus energy bill ( h.r .

6 , h.rept.108-375 ) , which would be the first comprehensive energy legislation in more than 10 years .

onnovember 18 , the house approved the conference report by a vote of 246-180 , but on november 21,a cloture motion to limit debate in the senate failed , 57-40 .

on february 12 , 2004 , senatordomenici introduced a revised version of the bill ( s. 2095 ) with a lower estimated costand without a controversial provision on the fuel additive mtbe .

including tax provisions , s. 2095 is estimated by its supporters to cost less than $14 billion , in contrast to the $31billion estimated for the h.r .

6 conference report .

the two bills contain identical provisions to change the regulatory requirements for thewholesale electric market , including repeal of the public utility holding company act ( puhca ) .

they would also mandate increasing levels of ethanol production through 2012 but allow regionsto opt out under certain conditions .

use of methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) as a domesticgasoline additive would be banned by the end of 2014 , but the president could void the ban and astate could authorize continued use .

under the h.r .

6 conference report , producers ofmtbe and renewable fuels would be granted protection ( a "safe harbor" ) from product liabilitylawsuits , but that provision was dropped in s. 2095 .

both bills would provide $18 billion in loan guarantees for construction of a natural gaspipeline from alaska to alberta , where it would connect to the existing midwestern pipeline system .

royalty reductions would be provided for marginal oil and gas wells on federal lands and the outercontinental shelf .

provisions are also included to increase access by energy projects to federal lands .

several new statutory efficiency standards would be established for consumer andcommercial products and appliances , and other standards could be set by the department of energy ( doe ) .

for motor vehicles , funding would be authorized for the national highway traffic safetyadministration ( nhtsa ) to set corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) levels as provided incurrent law .

the house version of h.r .

6 , which passed april 11 , 2003 , included a keycomponent of the bush administration's energy strategy: opening the arctic national wildliferefuge ( anwr ) to oil and gas exploration and development .

but the senate version , passed july31 , 2003 , did not include the anwr language , and the conference report and s. 2095 would leave anwr off - limits to drilling .

this report summarizes the major non - tax provisions of the h.r .

6 conferenceagreement and notes the changes included in s. 2095 .

table 1 lists annual fundingauthorizations in the bills , which total about $71 billion over 10 years .

 ( the likely cost of thefunding authorizations has not yet been estimated by the congressional budget office. ) .

for adiscussion of the tax provisions in the bills , see crs issue brief ib10054 , energy tax policy .

for a comparison of the house and senate versions of h.r .

6 , see crs report rl32033 , omnibus energy legislation ( h.r .

6 ) : side - by - side comparison of non - taxprovisions .

many provisions in the h.r .

6 conference report are similar to those of anomnibus energy bill that the senate debated but did not pass , s. 14 .

for a comparisonof major provisions of s. 14 and the house and senate versions of h.r .

6 , seecrs report rl32078 , omnibus energy legislation: comparison of major provisions in house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

6 , plus s. 14 .

section 501: short title .

the "indian tribal energy development and self - determinationact of 2003. .

section 502: office of indian energy policy and programs .

title ii of the departmentof energy organization act ( 42 u.s.c .

7131 et .

seq. ) .

would be amended to create the office ofindian energy policy and programs at the department of energy .

section 503: indian energy .

title 26 the energy policy act of 1992 ( 25 u.s.c .

3501 ) would be replaced by this section , which outlines procedures whereby indian tribes would be ableto develop and manage the energy resources located on , and rights - of - way through , tribal land .

within a year of enactment of the bill , the department of the interior ( doi ) would issue regulationson the requirements for approval of tribal energy resource agreements .

under their own tribal energyresource agreements as approved by doi , indian tribes would be able to enter into leases or businessagreements for energy development and grant rights - of - way over tribal land for pipelines or electriclines .

assistance for tribal energy development would be provided through doi by grants andlow - interest loans and through doe by grants and loan guarantees .

federal agencies could givepreference to indian energy when purchasing energy products and byproducts .

doi would be required to undertake a review and make recommendations regarding tribalopportunities under the indian mineral development act of 1982 ( 25 u.s.c .

2101 et .

seq. ) .

thebonneville power administration and western area power administration would be authorized toassist in developing distribution systems that provide power to indian tribes using the federaltransmission system .

doe , in coordination with the army and doi , would conduct a study of thefeasibility of obtaining a marketable , steady electricity source from wind energy generated on triballands connected with hydropower generated by the u.s. army corp of engineers at missouri riverpowerplants .

the language of the conference agreement combines and expands on both the house - andsenate - passed bills with regard to indian energy .

section 504: four corners transmission line project .

the dine power authority , anenterprise of the navajo nation , would be eligible to receive grants and other assistance to developa transmission line from the four corners area to southern nevada , including related generationfacilities .

section 505: energy efficiency in federally assisted housing .

the department ofhousing and urban development ( hud ) would be required to promote energy efficiency and energyconservation in federally assisted housing located on indian land .

this provision would expandcurrent law regarding affordable housing development for native americans to include use ofenergy - efficient technologies and innovations .

 ( 7 ) section 506: consultation with indian tribes .

the secretaries of energy and of theinterior would be required to consult with indian tribes in carrying out this title .

sections 801-809: hydrogen research and development .

title viii of the conferencereport would reauthorize hydrogen fuel research and development at the department of energy ( sec.803 ) .

the title would establish an interagency task force to coordinate federal research ( sec .

804 ) .

further , the title would require the secretary of energy to develop a plan for the development ofhydrogen fuel and fuel cells ( sec .

802 ) , and would establish a hydrogen technical and fuel celladvisory committee to advise the secretary and review the development plan ( sec .

805 ) .

doe'splans for the hydrogen program would be reviewed by the national academy of sciences ( sec .

806 ) ,and the secretary of energy would represent u.s. interests related to hydrogen programs inconsultation with relevant agencies ( sec .

807 ) .

specified authorities of the secretary oftransportation would not be affected ( sec .

808 ) .

a total of $2.15 billion would be authorized forfy2004 through fy2008 ( sec .

809 ) .

 ( definitions are provided in sec .

801 . ) .

policy context .

there has been increased interest in hydrogen as a fuel in transportation,stationary , and mobile applications because of potential environmental and energy security benefits .

in the state of the union address on january 28 , 2003 , president george w. bush announced a newhydrogen fuel initiative to promote research and development on hydrogen and fuel cells .

alongwith the freedomcar initiative ( announced in january 2002 ) , the administration is seeking a totalof $1.8 billion through fy2008 .

this request includes approximately $720 million in new funding .

the conference report would authorize $2.15 billion over the same time frame , slightly higher thanthe president's request .

the house version of h.r .

6 would have authorized fundingat the president's requested level ( $1.8 billion ) , while the senate version would have authorizedsignificantly less ( $420 million ) .

however , before it was replaced with the senate version of h.r.6 , s. 14 would have authorized nearly double the president's request ( $3.0billion ) .

in addition to the above provisions on funding , the senate version of h.r .

6 would have required the secretary of energy to develop a program to promote the availability of100,000 fuel cell vehicles by 2010 and 2.5 million vehicles by 2020 .

neither the house version northe conference report on h.r .

6 contained this provision .

section 901: goals .

doe would be directed to conduct energy research , development,demonstration , and commercial application programs to support federal energy policy .

as part ofeach annual budget request , the secretary of energy would be required to publish measurablefive - year cost and performance - based goals that cover energy efficiency , electricity generation,renewable energy , fossil energy , and nuclear energy programs .

these programs are currently funded .

both the house and senate versions of h.r .

6 had more specific goals , such as toreduce national energy intensity .

section 902: definitions .

for title ix , this section provides several definitions , includingmission , institution of higher education , and national laboratories .

section 1001: additional assistant secretary position .

the doe organization act ( 42u.s.c .

7133 ) would be amended to increase the number of assistant secretary positions from six toseven .

it would be the sense of congress that doe nuclear programs , currently headed by a director,be headed by an assistant secretary .

this provision was taken from the senate bill .

section 1002: other transactions authority .

this would amend section 646 of the doeorganization act ( 42 u.s.c .

7256 ) to allow the energy secretary to enter into additional transactionsfurthering research , development , or demonstration without requiring that title to inventions bevested in the federal government as currently specified by section 9 of the federal nonnuclearenergy research and development act of 1974 ( 42 u.s.c .

5908 ) or section 152 of the atomicenergy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c .

2182 ) .

this section is similar to a provision in the senate versionof h.r .

6 .

section 1101: training guidelines for electric energy industry personnel .

thesecretary of energy , in consultation with the secretary of labor , along with electric industryrepresentatives and employee representatives , would be required to develop model personnel trainingguidelines to support the reliability and safety of the electric system .

section 1102: improved access to energy - related scientific and technical careers .

doe education programs would be required to give priority to activities that encourage women andminorities to pursue scientific and technical careers .

doe national laboratories ( and other doescience facilities if so directed by the secretary ) would be directed to increase the participation ofhistorically black colleges and universities , hispanic - serving institutions , and tribal colleges inactivities such as research , equipment transfer , training , and mentoring .

doe would be required toreport on activities under this section within two years of enactment .

the senate bill included asimilar provision .

section 1103: national power plant operations technology and education center .

doe would establish a national power plant operations technology and education center foron - site and internet - based training of certified operators for non - nuclear electric power generationplants .

section 1104: international energy training .

doe , with the departments of commerce,interior , and state , and ferc , would coordinate training and outreach efforts for internationalcommercial energy markets in countries with developing and restructuring economies .

annualappropriations of $1.5 million for fy2004-fy2007 would be authorized .

title xii of the h.r .

6 conference report deals with electric power issues .

inpart , this title would create an electric reliability organization ( ero ) that would enforce mandatoryreliability standards for the bulk - power system .

all ero standards would be approved by the federalenergy regulatory commission ( ferc ) .

under this title , the ero could impose penalties on a user,owner , or operator of the bulk - power system that violates any ferc - approved reliability standard .

this title also addresses transmission infrastructure issues .

the secretary of energy would be ableto certify congestion on the transmission lines and issue permits to transmission owners .

permitholders would be able to petition in u.s. district court to acquire rights - of - way for the constructionof transmission lines through the exercise of the right of eminent domain .

ferc's standard market design notice of proposed rulemaking would be remanded to thecommission .

the conference report would clarify native load service obligation .

federal utilitieswould be allowed to participate in regional transmission organizations .

the electricity title would repeal provisions of the public utility regulatory policies act ( purpa ) ( 9 ) that requireutilities to purchase power from specified outside sources for a price equal to the cost they wouldhave incurred to generate the additional power themselves , as determined by utility regulators .

thepublic utility holding company act of 1935 ( puhca , 15 u.s.c .

79 et seq. ) .

would be repealed .

ferc and state regulatory bodies would be given access to utility books and records .

ferc would be required to issue rules to establish an electronic system that providesinformation about the availability and price of wholesale electric energy and transmission services .

for wholesale electric rates that the commission finds to be unjust , unreasonable , or undulydiscriminatory , the effective date for refunds would begin at the time of the filing of a complaint withferc but not later than five months after filing of a complaint .

criminal and civil penalties wouldbe increased .

the secretary of energy would be required to transmit to congress a study on whetherferc's merger review authority duplicates other agencies' authority .

the federal power act ( fpa,16 u.s.c .

791 et seq. ) .

would be amended to give ferc review authority for transfer of assets valuedin excess of $10 million .

section 1201: short title .

this title may be cited as the "electric reliability act of 2003. .

sections 1300-1366 .

these sections are not addressed in this report .

for information onthese sections , see crs report rl32042 , energy tax incentives in h.r .

6: theconference agreement as compared with the house bill and senate amendment .

section 1601: study on inventory of petroleum and natural gas storage .

the secretaryof energy would have to report to congress within a year of enactment on the amount of storagecapacity for petroleum and natural gas .

while the oil and gas industry is subject to broad reportingrequirements under a variety of laws , this language would call for a comprehensive study of thenation's storage capability and the role it plays in the marketplace .

the relationship between storagecapacity and price volatility could be significant in the current context of oil and natural gas markets - - which are experiencing another winter price spike .

section 1602: natural gas supply shortage report .

within six months of enactment , thesecretary of energy would be charged with preparing a report on natural gas supply and demand .

thereport should contain recommendations on policies that would maintain the supply - demand balancein a growing market to provide reasonable and stable prices , encourage energy conservation anddevelopment of alternative energy sources , reduce pollution , and improve access to domestic naturalgas supplies .

section 1603: split - estate federal oil and gas leasing and development practices .

the secretary of the interior would conduct a review of how management practices by federalsubsurface oil and gas development activities affect privately owned surface users .

the review woulddetail the rights and responsibilities of surface and subsurface owners , compare consent provisionsunder the surface mining control and reclamation act of 1977 with provisions for oil and gasdevelopment , and make recommendations that would address surface owner concerns .

section 1604: resolution of federal resource development conflicts in the powderriver basin .

the secretary of the interior would report to congress on plans to resolve conflictsbetween development of coal and coalbed methane in the powder river basin .

section 1605: study of energy efficiency standards .

doe would be directed to have thenational academy of sciences study whether the goals of energy efficiency standards are best servedby focusing measurement at the site ( energy end - use ) or at the source ( the full fuel cycle ) .

thisprovision relates to a previous executive order , which found that federal agencies should get credittoward meeting energy efficiency goals even where "source energy use declines but site energy useincreases. .

 ( 16 ) section 1606: telecommuting study .

doe would be directed to study and report on theenergy conservation potential of widespread adoption of telecommuting by federal employees .

inthis effort , doe would be required to consult with the office of personnel management , generalservices administration , and national telecommunications and information administration .

section 1607: liheap report .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) would be directed to report on how the low - income home energy assistance program could beused more effectively to prevent loss of life from extreme temperatures .

in this effort , hhs wouldbe directed to consult with state officials .

section 1608: oil bypass filtration technology .

doe and epa would be required tojointly study the benefits of oil bypass filtration technology in reducing demand for oil and protectingthe environment .

this study would include consideration of its use in federal motor vehicle fleetsand an evaluation of products and manufacturers .

section 1609: total integrated thermal systems .

doe would be directed to study thepotential for integrated thermal systems to reduce oil demand and to protect the environment .

also,doe would study the feasibility of using this technology in department of defense and other federalmotor vehicle fleets .

section 1610: university collaboration .

doe would be directed to report on the feasibilityof promoting collaboration between large and small colleges through grants , contracts , andcooperative agreements for energy projects .

doe would also be directed to consider providingincentives for the inclusion of small colleges in grants , contracts , and cooperative agreements .

thisprovision was in the house bill .

section 1611: reliability and consumer protection assessment .

within five years ofenactment , and every five years thereafter , ferc would be required to assess the effects of electriccooperative and government - owned utilities' exemption from ferc ratemaking regulation undersection 201 ( f ) of the federal power act .

if ferc found that the exemption resulted in adverseeffects on consumers or electric reliability , ferc would be required to make recommendations tocongress .

table 1 .

authorizations in h.r .

6 conference report and s. 2095 ( in millions of dollars ) inthis table , text in italics indicates subcategories .

changes made by s. 2095 are in bold .

source: table prepared by crs using the text of the conference agreement of h.r .

6 .

table notes: this table shows funding that would be authorized including loans but not loan guarantees under the conference agreement for h.r .

6 .

the section number in the far left hand column is location in the bill of the authorizing language .

when an activity is described a separatesection of the bill from where it is authorized , it is indicated in parentheses after the program title in column two .

the fourth column from the right , labeled "fy2004 - fy2008," provides a five - year subtotal for each line .

this column has been included sothat amounts may be compared to similar five - year subtotals shown in the authorization tables for the house and senate bills in crs report rl32033 , omnibus energy legislation ( h.r .

6 ) : side - by - side comparison of non - tax provisions .

items that have been changed in s. 2095 are shown in bold .

in the respective column , the old amount is shown in brackets .

in theendnotes , details that were dropped from s. 2095 are placed in brackets and new information is in bold .

ss .

such sums as may be necessary .

a .

lump sum .

no fiscal year indicated .

endnotes: 1 .

sec .

756 .

funds go to the environmental protection agency .

2 .

sec .

771 .

funds go to the national highway traffic safety administration in the department of transportation .

3 .

sec .

949 .

[plus up to $150 million per fiscal year for fy2004 - fy2013 from federal oil and gas leases issued under the outer continentalshelf lands act ( ocs ) and the mineral leasing act would be deposited into the fund .

revenues fluctuate year - to - year as a result of oil andgas prices and lease sales. .

this provision was dropped in s. 2095 .

4 .

sec .

1401 .

denali commission also would receive up to $50 million per fiscal for fy2004 - fy2013 , [from the federal share of federal oiland gas leases in the national petroleum reserve in alaska ( npr - a ) . .

funding is now subject to appropriations .

5 .

sec .

1412 .

[secure energy reinvestment fund also would be funded from fy2004 to fy2013 by royalties under the outer continental shelflands act. .

an appropriation must be passed before funding may be drawn .

6 .

sec .

1412 .

[coastal restoration and enhancement would also receive 2% of amount deposited into the secure energy reinvestment fundper fiscal year. .

an appropriation must be passed before funding may be drawn .

