many innovations that have become familiar features of modern elections originated at leastin part as a way to reduce election fraud such as tampering with ballots to change the vote count fora candidate or party .

for example , in much of nineteenth century america , a voter typically wouldpick up a paper ballot preprinted with the names of candidates for one party and simply drop theform into the ballot box .

there was no need to actively choose individual candidates .

 ( 3 ) this ticketor prox ballot was subject to fraud in at least two ways .

first , the number and sequence of ballotsprinted was not controlled , so it could be difficult to determine if a ballot box had been stuffed withextra ballots or if ballots had been substituted after votes were cast .

second , an observer coulddetermine which party a voter had chosen by watching what ballot the voter picked up and depositedin the ballot box - - votes could therefore be bought or coerced with comparative ease .

australian secret ballot .

after a series of scandals involving vote - buying in the 1880s , calls for reform led to widespread adoption of theaustralian or mark - choice ballot .

 ( 4 ) such ballots listthe names of all candidates , and the voter marksthe ballot to choose among them .

the ballots are commonly printed with unique , consecutive serialnumbers , facilitating ballot control and thereby helping to prevent ballot stuffing and substitution .

all printed ballots are otherwise identical , and voters typically fill them out in the privacy of a votingbooth .

this ballot secrecy makes it difficult for anyone else to know with certainty what choices avoter has made .

while providing improved security , the australian secret ballot did not eliminatetampering .

ballots could still be removed , spoiled , or altered by corrupt pollworkers , or evensubstituted or stuffed , although with greater difficulty than with prox ballots .

it also did noteliminate the possibility of vote - buying or coercion , but it made them more difficult .

 ( 5 ) mechanical lever machine .

one way to eliminate some means of ballot tampering is to eliminate document ballots .

that became possiblewith the introduction of the lever voting machine in 1892 .

with this system , a voter enters the votingbooth and sees a posted ballot with a small lever near the name of each candidate or other ballotchoice .

the voter chooses a candidate by moving the appropriate lever .

mechanical interlocksprevent voters from choosing more candidates than permitted for an office ( such as two candidatesfor president ) .

after completing all choices , the voter pulls a large lever to cast the ballot , and thevotes are recorded by advances in mechanical counters in the machine .

the lever machine thereforeeliminates the need to count ballots manually .

instead , pollworkers read the numbers recorded bythe counters .

because there is no document ballot , recounts and audits are limited to review of totalsrecorded by each machine .

of course , tampering is also possible with lever machines .

for example,the mechanisms could be adjusted so that the counter does not always advance when a particularcandidate is chosen .

computer - assisted counting ( punchcard and optical scan ) .

another major technological advance in voting - - the first use of computersto count votes - - came with the introduction of the punchcard system , first used in 1964 .

theoptical - scan voting system , which also uses computers for vote - counting , was first used in the 1980s .

in both kinds of voting system , document ballots are fed into an electronic reader and the talliesstored in computer memory and media .

tallying can be done at either the precinct or a centrallocation .

computer - assisted counting of document ballots can be done very rapidly , thus speedingthe reporting of election results .

it is much more efficient for counting large numbers of ballots thanmanual tallying .

it makes some kinds of tampering more difficult than with manual counting , butit does not eliminate them , and it creates possibilities for tampering with the counting software andhardware .

electronic voting machine .

dres ( direct recording electronic systems ) are the first completely computerized voting systems .

they wereintroduced in the 1970s .

dres are somewhat analogous to ( although more sophisticated than ) levermachines .

the voter chooses candidates from a posted ballot .

depending on the equipment used , theballot may be printed and posted on the dre , as it is with a lever machine , or it may be displayedon a computer screen .

voters make their choices by pushing buttons , touching the screen , or usingother devices .

the voter submits the choices made before leaving the booth , for example by pushinga "vote" button , and the votes are then recorded electronically .

there is considerable variability in the design of dres , but they can be classified into three basic types .

the oldest design essentially mimics the interface of a lever machine .

the entire postedballot is visible at once .

instead of moving levers to make choices , the voter pushes a button nextto a candidate's name , or pushes on the name itself , triggering an underlying electronic microswitchand turning on a small light next to the choice .

with the second type , a ballot page is displayed ona computer screen , and the voter uses mechanical devices such as arrow keys and buttons to makechoices on a page and to change ballot pages .

the third type is similar to the second except that ithas a touchscreen display , where the voter makes a choice by touching the name of the candidate onthe computer screen and casts the ballot by pressing a separate button after all choices have beenmade .

in all kinds of dres , when a ballot is cast , the votes are directly stored in a computer memorydevice such as a removable memory card or nonvolatile memory circuit .

as with lever machines,there is no document ballot , although with a dre each cast ballot may also be separately recorded .

touchscreen and other dres using computer - style displays are arguably the most versatile anduser - friendly of any current voting system .

each machine can easily be programmed to displayballots in different languages and for different offices , depending on voters' needs .

it can also beprogrammed to display a voter's ballot choices on a single page for review before casting the vote .

it can be made fully accessible for persons with disabilities , including visual impairment .

 ( 6 ) like levermachines , it can prevent overvotes and ambiguous choices or spoilage of the ballot from extraneousmarks , since there is no document ballot ; but it can also notify voters of undervotes .

 ( 7 ) no other kindof voting system possesses all of these features .

dres and hava .

the popularity of dres , particularly the touchscreen variety , has grown in recent years , ( 8 ) and their use is expected to increasesubstantially under provisions of hava .

three provisions in the act are likely to provide such animpetus .

first , hava authorized $3.65 billion over four years for replacing punchcard and levermachines and for making other election administration improvements , including meeting therequirements of the act .

in fy2003 , congress appropriated $1.48 billion for these purposes ( p.l.108-7 ) , and the administration requested $500 million for fy2004 .

second , beginning in 2006,hava requires that voting systems notify voters of overvotes and permit them to review theirballots and correct errors before casting their votes .

 ( 9 ) third , the act requires , also beginning in 2006,that each polling place used in a federal election have at least one voting machine that is fullyaccessible for persons with disabilities .

dres are the only machines at present that can fulfill theaccessibility requirement .

they can also easily meet the requirements for error prevention andcorrection .

security concerns about dres .

one thing that distinguishes dres from document ballot systems is that with dres , the voter does not see theactual ballot , but rather a representation of it on the face of the machine .

with few exceptions,current dres do not provide a truly independent record of each individual ballot that can be usedin a recount to check for machine error or tampering .

the ballot itself consists of redundantelectronic records in the machine's computer memory banks , which the voter cannot see .

this isanalogous to the situation with mechanical lever voting machines , where casting the ballot movescounters that are out of view of the voter .

in a lever machine , if the appropriate counters do notmove correctly when a voter casts the ballot , the voter will not know , nor would an observer .

similarly , with a dre , if the machine recorded a result in its memory that was different from whatthe voter chose , neither the voter nor an observer would know .

 ( 10 ) the same is true with a computerized counting system when it reads punchcards or optical scan ballots .

even if the ballot is tabulated in the precinct and fed into the reading device in the presenceof the voter , neither the voter nor the pollworker manning the reader can see what it is recording inits memory .

however , with such a reader , the ballot documents could be counted on anothermachine or by hand if there were any question about the results .

lever machines also do not have an independent document ballot .

that has led some observers to distrust those machines , but most who use them appear confident that tests and other proceduralsafeguards render them sufficiently safe from tampering .

is the same true for dres ? .

somecomputer experts think not , arguing that the software could be modified in ways that could alter theresults of an election and that would be very difficult to detect .

this concern appears to stem largelyfrom three factors: malicious computer code , or malware , can often be written in such a way that it is very difficult to detect .

 ( 11 ) dre software is moderately complex , and it is generally accepted that the morecomplex a piece of software is , the more difficult it can be to detect unauthorized modifications .

 ( 12 ) most manufacturers of dres treat their software code as proprietaryinformation and therefore not available for public scrutiny .

consequently , it is not possible forexperts not associated with the companies to determine how vulnerable the code is to tampering .

 ( 13 ) voting system standards and certification .

concerns such as those described above have been voiced by some experts at least since the 1980s .

 ( 14 ) thedevelopment of the voluntary voting systems standards ( vss ) by the federal election commission ( fec ) in 1990 , and the subsequent adoption of those standards by many states , helped to reducethose concerns .

the vss were developed specifically for computer - assisted punchcard , optical scan,and dre voting systems .

they include a chapter on security , which was substantially expanded inthe updated version , released in 2002 .

 ( 15 ) alongwith the standards , a voluntary testing andcertification program was developed and administered through the national association of stateelection directors ( nased ) .

in this program , an independent test authority ( ita ) chosen bynased tests voting systems and certifies those that comply with the vss .

 ( 16 ) testing is done of bothhardware and software , and the tested software and related documentation is kept in escrow by theita .

 ( 17 ) if questions arise about whether thesoftware used in an election has been tampered with , thatcode can be compared to the escrowed version .

systems that receive nased certification may alsoneed to go through state and local certification processes before being used by an electionjurisdiction .

hava creates a new mechanism for the development of voluntary voting system standards .

it creates the election assistance commission ( eac ) to replace the fec's office of electionadministration and establishes three bodies under the eac: a 110-member standards boardconsisting of state and local election officials , a 37-member board of advisors representing relevantgovernment agencies and associations and fields of science and technology , and a 15-membertechnical guidelines development committee chaired by the director of national institute ofstandards and technology ( nist ) .

this last committee is charged with making recommendationsfor voluntary standards ( called guidelines in the act ) , to be reviewed by the two boards and theeac .

 ( 18 ) hava also requires the eac to provide for testing , certification , and decertification of voting systems and for nist to be involved in the selection and monitoring of testing laboratories .

theeac is also required to perform a study of issues and challenges - - including the potential for fraud - - associated with electronic voting , and periodic studies to promote accurate , secure , andexpeditious voting and tabulation .

hava also provides grants for research and development onsecurity and other aspects of voting systems .

the voting system requirements in the act do notspecifically mention security but do require that each voting system produce a permanent paper auditdocument for use as the official record for any recount .

this requirement is for the system , not foreach ballot .

for example , most dres can print a tally of votes recorded and therefore can meet thisrequirement .

the caltech / mit study .

the problems identified after the november 2000 federal election prompted wide public concern about voting systems and led toseveral major studies ( 19 ) with recommendations,many of which were incorporated in hava .

themost extensive examination of security was performed by scientists at the california institute oftechnology and the massachusetts institute of technology .

their report identified four mainsecurity strengths of the electoral process that has evolved in the united states: the openness of theelection process , which permits observation of counting and other aspects of election procedure ; thedecentralization of elections and the division of labor among different levels of government anddifferent groups of people ; equipment that produces "redundant trusted recordings" of votes ; and thepublic nature and control of the election process .

 ( 20 ) the report expressed concern that current trendsin electronic voting are weakening those strengths and pose significant risks , but that properlydesigned and implemented electronic voting machines can improve , rather than diminish , security .

the california task force report .

the concernsexpressed by the caltech / mit study and others were partially addressed by hava , but as statesbegan to acquire dres , and the appointment of eac members was delayed , ( 21 ) some observers beganexpressing concerns that states were purchasing flawed machines with no federal mechanism inplace for addressing the problems .

in response to such concerns , the california secretary of stateestablished a task force to examine the security of dres and to consider improvements .

the report ( 22 ) recommended changes to how voting systems are tested at the federal , state , and local levels , as wellas other changes in security for software and for vendor practices .

it also recommended theimplementation of a voter - verified audit trail - - that is , a mechanism , whether paper - based orelectronic , that produces an independent record of a voter's choices that the voter can verify beforecasting the ballot and that can be used as a check against tampering or machine error .

until such asystem can be implemented , the task force recommended the use of "parallel monitoring," in whicha selection of machines are tested while in actual use on election day to determine if they arerecording votes accurately .

the hopkins study .

until recently , the concerns raised about dre vulnerabilities were considered by many to be largely hypothetical .

however , inearly 2003 , some election - reform activists discovered ( 23 ) an open website containing large numbersof files relating to voting systems of diebold election systems , a major voting system vendor whichhad recently won contracts with georgia and maryland to provide touchscreen dres .

activistsdownloaded and posted many of those files on internet sites , and the authors of the hopkins studyused some of those files to analyze computer source code that "appear[ed] to correspond to a versionof diebold's voting system. .

 ( 24 ) their analysisconcluded that the code had serious security flaws thatcould permit tampering by persons at various levels , including voters , election workers , internet"hackers," and even software developers .

diebold quickly rebutted those claims , ( 25 ) arguing that theywere based on misunderstanding of election procedures and of the equipment within which thesoftware was used , and that the analysis was based on an "inadequate , incomplete sample" ofdiebold's software .

some computer scientists , while agreeing that the code contained security flaws,also criticized the study for not reflecting standard election procedures .

 ( 26 ) shortly after the hopkins study was released , maryland governor robert ehrlich ordered that the contract with diebold be suspended pending the outcome of an independent security analysis .

that analysis , ( 27 ) while agreeing with several ofthe criticisms of the hopkins study , found that thediebold system , as implemented in the state , had serious security flaws .

the report concludesoverall that this voting system , "as implemented in policy , procedure , and technology , is at high riskof compromise" and made many recommendations for improvements .

 ( 28 ) the maryland state boardof elections has developed a plan to implement those recommendations .

 ( 29 ) the extent to which the risks identified in the maryland study may apply to other states or to other dres may be worth examination by state officials .

in ohio , which has also been consideringthe purchase of diebold dres , secretary of state kenneth blackwell has also initiated a securityevaluation of electronic voting devices from four v endors .

 ( 30 ) .

elections are at the heart of the democratic form of government , and providing sufficientsecurity for them is therefore critical to the proper functioning of a democracy .

there has been somedisagreement among experts about the seriousness of the potential security problems with dres and,therefore , what is needed to ensure sufficient security .

while it is generally accepted that tamperingis possible with any computer system given enough time and resources , some experts believe thatcurrent security practices are adequate .

others believe that substantial additional steps are needed .

to determine the nature and extent of the problem and what solutions might be considered requiresan understanding of some general concepts in computer security , which are discussed in this section,along with their applicability to computer - assisted voting systems .

the discussion is organized alongfour themes: threats , vulnerabilities , defense , and response and recovery after an incident occurs .

the term threat can be used in several different ways , but in this report it refers to a possible attack - - what could happen .

descriptions of threats often include both the nature of the possibleattack , those who might perpetrate it , and the possible consequences if the attack is successful .

vulnerability usually refers to a weakness that an attack might exploit - - how an attackcould beaccomplished .

analysis of threats and vulnerabilities , when combined , can lead to an assessmentof risk .

statements of risk often combine both the probability of a successful attack and somemeasure of its likely consequences .

 ( 31 ) defense refers to how a system is protected from attack .

response and recovery refer to how , and how well , damage is mitigated and repaired andinformation and functionality are recovered in the event of a successful attack .

the several methods proposed to address the verifiability issue - - ranging from printing paperballots to new electronic ways of voting - - each have different strengths and weaknesses , makingit difficult to determine at present whether any of these approaches should be adopted .

at the sametime , many observers would agree that finding ways to increase the verifiability and transparencyof electronic voting is desirable .

dre technology is clearly evolving fairly rapidly and has not yetbecome settled , as witnessed by the diversity of available devices and features in comparison to otherkinds of voting systems .

 ( 121 ) this environmentmay promote developing improved security and otherdesirable properties of the technology .

at the same time , as jurisdictions continue to adopt dresin response to hava and other factors , pressures to resolve security issues quickly may increase .

while a defense - in - depth approach would appear to be generally desirable for addressing security questions with dres , as discussed above , any attempt to implement such an approach needsto take into account potential problems that can be associated with making substantial changes inthe way an election is administered .

for example , when a voting system is replaced in a jurisdiction,the proportion of residual votes and problems administering the election may actually increaseinitially , at least in part because neither voters nor pollworkers are familiar with the new system .

inaddition , there are no proven cases of tampering with dres or other computer - assisted votingsystems in public elections .

 ( 122 ) for these andother reasons , some observers argue that any changesto current technology and procedures should be incremental .

others , however , state that given theevolving threat environment and the concerns that have been identified , an incremental approach isnot sufficient to prevent undetected tampering that could change the outcome of an election .

policymakers will need to weigh such differences in determining what if any actions to take inresponse to this set of issues .

three general approaches are discussed below for addressing the issues raised in this report .

first , action could be left to state and local jurisdictions that administer elections .

second , the eaccould address the issues .

third , congress could take any of several possible actions .

theseapproaches and options , which are not mutually exclusive , are discussed in turn below .

states .

elections are administered by state and local governments , with the federal government playing a circumscribed role .

although that rolewas substantially enhanced with the enactment of hava , the law stipulates that methods ofimplementation of its requirements are to be left to the discretion of the states ( sec .

305 ) .

states maytherefore address these issues individually , as , for example , california , maryland , and ohio havealready been doing .

 ( 123 ) the availability offederal funding under hava to improve electionadministration by state and local governments , as well as the creation of an independent federalagency whose purpose is to assist those governments in election administration , should improve theability of those governments to ensure the security of elections .

leaving action to the states wouldallow them to react to the issues in a timely fashion and in ways that are most responsive to theirindividual circumstances and could lead to a variety of options being tested by different states,making it easier to determine which approaches work best .

however , this approach might also leadto a patchwork of responses , which could be challenging for vendors to meet and could lead to somestates being more vulnerable to tampering than others .

eac .

the election assistance commission created by hava will have some responsibilities to provide guidance and to perform studies andresearch specifically relating to the security of voting systems .

its work in this area will involvenist and others with experience in computer security .

the eac and its supporting boards andcommittees may provide an effective venue for addressing fundamental questions regarding votingsystem security and helping states meet their needs and responsibilities in this regard as well asissues relating to voter confidence in the security of dres .

one option would be that the eac couldperform an independent security review of current dres .

this might be especially useful if it couldbe done in cooperation with a selection of states exhibiting a range of security policies andprocedures .

however , to address the issue , the eac must first form the relevant boards andcommittees , and any study would require a significant amount of time to complete .

the eac maynot , therefore , be able to resolve the controversy before states need to make decisions about whichkinds of voting systems to acquire .

congress .

among the possible actions that congress might consider are hearings , funding to address the controversy , and revisions to hava .

congress could choose to hold hearings on the issue for several purposes , such as clarifying issuesand options , providing guidance to the eac , or exploring funding and legislative options .

it couldalso use other means , such as legislative report language or direct communication from congressionalleaders , to encourage the eac to address the controversy in an expedited manner .

given the range of proposals for addressing dre security issues , and the uncertainties associated with those proposals , congress might also consider supporting research and development ( r&d ) in this area to identify the most appropriate solutions .

in the past , economic incentives forprivate investment in such r&d have been weak , given the small , fragmented nature of the marketfor voting systems and the relatively low demand for sophisticated security for those systems .

withthe funding for new voting systems that hava provides , the evolving threat environment , and otherfactors , that situation may be changing .

hava also authorized grants for r&d to improve securityand other aspects of voting technology ( sec .

271 ) , but congress has not appropriated fundsspecifically for that program .

presumably , the eac could use some of its general operating fundsfor such work , or congress could appropriate funds specifically for it .

several options for revising hava might be considered for a legislative response to the controversy: ( 124 ) a specific security provision could be added to the voting system requirements , stipulating , for example , that voting systems must adhere to security requirements for federalcomputer systems as required under current law , ( 125 ) or requirements or a mechanism to develop themthat is specified in the provision .

the voting system audit requirement in the act could be revised to require avoter - verifiable paper ballot ( 126 ) or some othersystem of voter verifiability .

voting systems could be required to use open - sourcesoftware .

the act could specify a security review and certification process for all votingsystems .

the act could specify that experts in security be represented on the technicalguidelines development committee .

the eac could be directed to provide security consultation services to stateand local jurisdictions .

the deadlines for meeting relevant requirements , such as for accessibility ofvoting systems , could be delayed pending resolution of the controversy .

federal funding could be provided for upgrades or replacements for drespurchased under hava if they are shown subsequently to have significant securitydefects .

some of the above options would themselves be controversial , as discussed earlier in this report with respect to voter verifiability and use of open source software .

in addition , creating additionalrequirements would further increase the federal role in election administration , which may beopposed by those who believe that it should be left to the states as much as possible .

options thatwould strengthen the ability of the eac to help address this controversy may themselves be lesscontroversial but might not lead to a timely resolution of the issues .

delays in meeting havarequirements are also likely to be controversial , and , some would argue , may not be necessary if thecontroversy can be resolved before 2006 .

finally , additional funding authorization andappropriations may be difficult to enact in a constrained budget environment .

the purpose of this report has been to explain the controversy about the security of dres andto lay out the issues raised and options for addressing them .

the report does not attempt to resolvethe controversy .

however , some conclusions can be drawn with respect to the questions asked atthe beginning of the report .

do dres exhibit genuine security vulnerabilities ? .

if so , could those vulnerabilities be exploited to influence an election ? .

given the worsening threat environment for information technology and the findings of several studies and analyses discussed in this report , at least some current dres clearly exhibit securityvulnerabilities .

those vulnerabilities pose potential but not demonstrated risks to the integrity ofelections , in that no proven cases exist involving tampering with dres .

observers differ in theirviews about whether these potential risks are significant enough that they need to be addressedurgently or whether they can be addressed incrementally .

to what extent do current election administration procedures and other security measures protect against threats to and vulnerabilities of dre systems ? .

the answer to this question is a central point of contention in the controversy , with vendors and election administrators generally claiming that current measures are sufficient and certain otherexperts , most notably many computer scientists , and some activists claiming that they are not .

thesedifferences of opinion appear to be based in part on differences in philosophical perspective .

proponents of approaches such as voter verifiability believe that elections should rely for securityon openness , transparency , and observability of the entire election process , and that currently toomuch trust is placed in the behavior and capabilities of vendors , election officials , and other involvedparties .

many election administrators and vendors , and some other observers , believe that the viewsof such proponents are based on misunderstandings of how voting systems work and how electionsare administered .

they also believe that approaches such as a voter - verifiable paper ballot wouldnot be of net benefit to the proper functioning of elections .

resolution of such fundamentaldifferences may require - - if it is in fact achievable - - that those on both sides of this controversydevelop better understanding of the bases for the views of the other side .

finding an effectivesolution may be easier if concerned computer scientists understand in detail how elections are run ( perhaps by working directly with administrators ) and if election administrators understandcybersecurity more clearly ( perhaps by working with computer scientists ) .

in any case , as indicated by some of the studies discussed in this report , significant improvements in the security of dres may be found through careful analysis of current systems andhow they are implemented and administered , without requiring voter verifiability or other substantialchanges .

however , such improvements in current systems are not likely to address the fundamentalconcerns raised by proponents of voter verifiability .

do those threats and vulnerabilities apply to computer - assisted voting systems other than dres ? .

the potential threats and vulnerabilities associated with dres are substantially greater than those associated with punchcard or optical scan readers , both because dres are more complex andbecause they have no independent records of the votes cast .

however , document - ballot readers arepotentially subject to malware that could affect the count , to vulnerabilities associated withconnection to other computers , and some other kinds of tampering .

therefore , the security ofsystems using readers might also benefit from some of the same kinds of approaches that have beenproposed for dres , such as improvements to current security policies and procedures , use of modernsoftware engineering techniques , and use of strong cryptographic protocols .

what are the options for addressing any threats and vulnerabilities that do exist , and what are the relative strengths and weaknesses of the different options ? .

the report discusses seven proposals for addressing the security issues raised about dres .

they include using current procedures and security mechanisms , with improvements as necessary ; improving standards for the development and certification of voting systems ; using open - sourcesoftware for voting systems ; and several methods to improve the transparency and verifiability ofelections , including voter - verified paper ballots and an electronic version of that approach , use ofmodular electronic voting architecture that physically separates the voter interface from the castingand counting functions ; and a system that uses cryptographic protocols to permit voters to verify thattheir ballots were cast as intended and that no votes were improperly changed , omitted , or added .

these proposals vary in ease of implementation , the degree to which they have been tested inapplication , and the level of contention about both their ability to resolve the controversy and theiroverall desirability .

most of the public debate has centered around whether to rely on current procedures and mechanisms or adopt voter - verifiable paper ballots .

however , these are clearly not the only options,and the debate might benefit from fuller consideration of other possibilities such as those discussedabove .

in addition , several of the proposals discussed are not mutually exclusive , and a resolutionof the controversy may involve elements of several proposals .

three policy approaches , which are also not mutually exclusive , were discussed .

the matter could be left to state and local governments , which administer elections ; some states have alreadytaken action .

the newly formed eac could address the issues through its convening power andresponsibilities in the development of voluntary guidelines for and certification of voting systems .

congress could decide to use hearings or other mechanisms to provide guidance on the issues , or itmight decide that a legislative solution is necessary .

several legislative options exist , ranging fromfunding for research on the issue to adding requirements on dre security to hava .

the benefitsand disadvantages of these approaches depend on many factors , and a legislative solution maybecome more attractive if the controversy cannot be resolved through other means .

