the u.s. military is supported partly by civilian high technology services and products , most often in the form of communications systems and computer software .

in future conflicts that involve cyberwarfare between nations , the distinction between u.s. military and civilian targets may be blurred and civilian computer systems may increasingly be seen as viable targets vulnerable to attack by adversaries .

computer networking technology has also blurred the boundaries between cyberwarfare , cybercrime , and cyberterrorism .

officials in government and industry now say that cybercrime and cyberattack services available for hire from criminal organizations are a growing threat to national security as well as to the u.s. economy .

new and sophisticated cybercrime tools could operate to allow a nation state or terrorist group to remain unidentified while they direct cyberattacks through the internet .

many experts point out that past incidents of conventional terrorism have already been linked with cybercrime , and that computer vulnerabilities may make government and civilian critical infrastructure systems seem attractive as targets for cyberattack .

some experts argue that the government of estonia may have already experienced this type of cyberattack directed against their systems and websites in april , 2007 .

this report explores the possible connections between cybercriminals and terrorist groups that want to damage the u.s. economy or national security interests .

the report also examines the effects of a coordinated cyberattack against the u.s. critical infrastructure , including use of cybercrime tools that could possibly take advantage of openly - publicized cyber vulnerabilities .

trends in cybercrime are described , showing how malicious internet websites , and other cybercrimes such as identity theft are linked to conventional terrorist activity .

congress may wish to explore the possible effects on the u.s. economy and on the u.s. military that could result from a coordinated attack against civilian and military computers and communications systems , whether due to cybercrime or cyberterrorism .

congress may also wish to explore the difficulties associated with establishing doctrine for selecting an appropriate military or law enforcement response after such an attack .

it is clear that terrorist groups are using computers and the internet to further goals associated with spreading terrorism .

this can be seen in the way that extremists are creating and using numerous internet websites for recruitment and fund raising activities , and for jihad training purposes .

several criminals who have recently been convicted of cybercrimes used their technical skills to acquire stolen credit card information in order to finance other conventional terrorist activities .

it is possible that as criminals and terrorist groups explore more ways to work together , a new type of threat may emerge where extremists gain access to the powerful network tools now used by cybercriminals to steal personal information , or to disrupt computer systems that support services through the internet .

policy issues for cybercrime and cyberterrorism include a need for the following: increase awareness about changing threats due to the growing technical skills of extremists and terrorist groups ; develop more accurate methods for measuring the effects of cybercrime ; help to determine appropriate responses by dod to a cyberattack ; examine the incentives for achieving the goals of the national strategy to secure cyberspace ; search for ways to improve the security of commercial software products ; explore ways to increase security education and awareness for businesses and home pc users ; and find ways for private industry and government to coordinate to protect against cyberattack .

congress may also wish to consider ways to harmonize existing federal and state laws that require notice to persons when their personal information has been affected by a computer security breach , and that impose obligations on businesses and owners of that restricted information .

h.r .

1525 — the internet spyware ( i - spy ) prevention act of 2007 , proposes penalties for unauthorized access to computers , or the use of computers to commit crimes .

on may 23 , 2007 , this bill was received in the senate and referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

1684 — the department of homeland security authorization act for fiscal year 2008 establishes within the department of homeland security an office of cybersecurity and communications , headed by the assistant secretary for cybersecurity and communications , with responsibility for overseeing preparation , response , and reconstitution for cybersecurity and to protect communications from terrorist attacks , major disasters , and other emergencies , including large - scale disruptions .

the bill directs the assistant secretary to do the following: establish and maintain a capability within the department for ongoing activities to identify threats to critical information infrastructure to aid in detection of vulnerabilities and warning of potential acts of terrorism and other attacks .

conduct risk assessments on critical information infrastructure with respect to acts of terrorism .

develop a plan for the continuation of critical information operations in the event of a cyber attack .

define what qualifies as a cyber incident of national significance for purposes of the national response plan .

develop a national cybersecurity awareness , training , and education program that promotes cybersecurity awareness within the federal government and throughout the nation .

consult and coordinate with the under secretary for science and technology on cybersecurity research and development to strengthen critical information infrastructure against acts of terrorism .

on may 11 , 2007 , this bill was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.r .

3221 — the new direction for energy independence , national security , and consumer protection act proposes establishment of the grid modernization commission to facilitate the adoption of smart grid standards , technologies , and practices across the nation's electricity grid .

the bill was passed in the house on august 4 , 2007 .

on october 19 , 2007 , there was a unanimous consent request to consider h.r .

3221 in the senate , but objection was heard .

h.r .

3237 — the smart grid facilitation act of 2007 , proposes to modernize the nation's electricity transmission and distribution system to incorporate digital information and controls technology .

"smart grid" technology functions will include the ability to detect , prevent , respond to , or recover from cyber - security threats and terrorism .

the new grid modernization commission is directed to undertake , and update on a biannual basis , an assessment of the progress toward modernizing the electric system including cybersecurity protection for extended grid systems .

on august 24 , 2007 , the bill was referred to house subcommittee on energy and environment .

