this report provides an overview of the process for filling positions to which the president makes appointments with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) .

it also identifies , for the 108 th congress , all nominations to full - time positions requiring senate confirmation in 38 organizations in the executive branch ( 25 independent agencies , six agencies in the executive office of the president ( eop ) , and seven multilateral banking organizations ) and four agencies in the legislative branch .

it excludes appointments to executive departments and to regulatory and other boards and commissions , which are covered in other reports .

the federal emergency management agency , formerly an independent agency covered by earlier versions of this report , became part of the department of homeland security when that department was established in 2003 ; it is not covered by this report .

another government organization , the millennium challenge corporation , came into existence early in the 108 th congress after it was established by the millennium challenge act of 2003 .

a profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations , providing information on senate activity ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nomination and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) .

the profiles also identify , for each agency , positions requiring senate confirmation , the incumbents in those positions as of january 3 , 2005 , dates they were confirmed , dates their terms expire , if applicable , and pay levels .

appendix a. alphabetical listing of nominees and appointees , january 3 , 2003 - january 3 , 2005 appendix b .

appointment action during the 108 th congress , by agency grouping appendix c. agency abbreviations independent agencies arc — appalachian regional commission bbg — broadcasting board of governors cia — central intelligence agency cncs — corporation for national and community service csosa — court services and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia dra — delta regional authority epa — environmental protection agency fema — federal emergency management agency fmcs — federal mediation and conciliation service gsa — general services administration mcc — millennium challenge corporation nara — national archives and records administration nasa — national aeronautics and space administration nfah — national foundation on the arts and humanities nsf — national science foundation oge — office of government ethics onhir — office of navajo and hopi indian relocation opic — overseas private investment corporation opm — office of personnel management osc — office of special counsel pc — peace corps sba — small business administration ssa — social security administration sss — selective service system tda — trade development agency usaid — united states agency for international development executive office of the president ( eop ) cea — council of economic advisers ceq — council on environmental quality omb — office of management and budget ondcp — office of national drug control policy ostp — office of science and technology policy oustr — office of u.s. trade representative multilateral banking organizations afdb — african development bank asdb — asian development bank ebrd — european bank for reconstruction and development iadb — inter - american development bank ibrd — international bank for reconstruction and development ijc — international joint commission , u.s. and canada imf — international monetary fund legislative branch agencies ac — architect of the capitol gao — government accountability office gpo — government printing office lc — library of congres .

