many situations have focused congressional attention on the adequacy of the science supporting implementation of the endangered species act ( esa ) .

while most science - based actions under esa are unchallenged , opponents of some actions under esa accuse agencies of using "junk science," while others assert that decisions that should rest on science are instead being dictated by political concerns .

legislation to address the use of science in implementing esa has been introduced in each congress since the 107 th congress , but no measures have been enacted .

the esa was enacted to identify species at risk of extinction , to provide means to help such species recover , and to protect the ecosystems of which declining species are a part .

listings and other actions under the esa may affect land uses and development .

endangered species are likely to reflect stressed resources or ecosystems , with various interests on all sides of the resource issues .

there are multiple examples , such as protecting salmon in the klamath river basin or northern spotted owl habitat in the pacific northwest , where economic and social disputes have resulted from actions taken to list , protect , and recover species under the esa .

as a result , the protective posture of the esa and the use of science in its implementation have received renewed attention .

by law , esa decisions must be based on the best science available , but this requirement can mean different things to different people .

the agencies that administer the esa , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior , and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) in the department of commerce , have procedures and policies in place to ensure the objectivity and integrity of the science that underpins agency decisions .

in addition , the information quality act ( iqa ) resulted in guidelines from the office of management and budget ( omb ) in 2001 that also relate to the quality of agency information .

the agencies have responded to the iqa with additional esa - related guidelines , and fws , like the rest of the department of the interior , has adopted a new scientific integrity policy .

at issue has been how science is used in the esa processes for listing species , consulting on federal actions , designating critical habitat , and developing recovery plans .

for example , oversight hearings have focused on whether more scientific rigor is necessary in implementing the esa .

a later hearing concerned doi efforts to avoid more instances of documented modification of scientific conclusions through political manipulations by senior officials .

beginning with the 107 th congress , bills have been introduced to require empirical or field - tested data as well as independent scientific reviews , science review boards , and increased public involvement .

questions have also been raised on how to handle situations when the available science is not extensive .

some suggest that considerations other than species conservation should prevail ; others seek to change the current posture of the law by changing the role of science .

for still others , efforts to amend the esa in these areas are seen as an attempt to undermine the esa , which they assert struck a reasonable balance on these issues , and they question whether an amendment concerning science is advisable or practical .

these considerations are complicated by the costs and time required to acquire more extensive data , particularly in connection with many lesser - known species .

many rare and endangered species are little studied because they are hard to find or because it is difficult to locate enough of them to support scientific research .

in addition , restrictions on activities that might affect listed species could discourage some research .

this report approaches the issues surrounding "sound science" by discussing ( 1 ) controversies over the last decade ; ( 2 ) the role of science in general — what science is , and what it can and cannot do — as background for assessing the adequacy of science in esa implementation ; ( 3 ) the role of science in the legal and policy esa context ; ( 4 ) current requirements on the quality and use of information and science by fws and nmfs ; and ( 5 ) legislation to address concerns relating to esa science .

several situations have focused congressional attention on concerns about the adequacy of esa science .

examples illustrating a range of different types of scientific concerns include ( 1 ) allegations of sample tampering in population surveys for canada lynx ; ( 2 ) concerns over how to treat surplus hatchery - propagated salmon ; ( 3 ) steller sea lion protection and its conflicts with north pacific fishery management ; and ( 4 ) eastern gray wolves .

"science" or "sound science" is held up as desirable by all sides of the esa debate .

some studies are seen as supporting a certain action by one party , and as insufficient for decision - making by another .

and at times , other studies are held up as supporting opposing sides .

with these apparent contradictions , it is useful to examine , in an esa context , ( a ) what is "science ; " ( b ) what is the scientific method ; and ( c ) how do science and public policy interact ? .

for some obscure groups of organisms ( eg , freshwater clams , small freshwater fish species , and many insects ) , it may prove difficult to find sufficient experts to provide peer reviews , and these specialists often have other duties and may not be available ( or willing ) to serve governmental regulators in a timely manner .

also , there is the issue of compensating scientists who participate in peer reviews: currently , academic scientists reviewing documents for their eligibility for grants or for publication receive little , if any , compensation .

reviews are generally accomplished by mail , and are ( by design ) normally anonymous .

grafting such a system onto a contentious area which may require extensive meetings , lost time from primary research and teaching activities , and potentially the polar opposite of academic anonymity could prove difficult , or further limit the pool of willing reviewers .

in addition , achieving peer review by impartial , scientists may also be an issue if the listing or action being reviewed could involve major economic factors in which the scientists have an interest ( eg , research funding , employment , etc. ) .

in 1998-1999 , the society for conservation biology ( scb ) , in cooperation with fws , performed a national review of 135 recovery plans , covering 181 species listed under the esa .

the national center for ecological analysis and synthesis at the university of california , santa barbara , reviewed the database resulting from this study .

it found among other things that a relatively low proportion ( 30% - 40% ) of recovery criteria were clearly based on biological information , that inclusion of academic scientists on recovery teams led to more explicit use of biological information in recovery plans , and that recovery plans developed with federal scientists only were less likely to reflect adequate attention to species biology .

fws responded to this study with 10 action items to strengthen recovery planning by increasing efforts to expand the diversity of recovery plan contributors , improving the internal consistency of recovery plans , continuing to expand ties to academic and professional communities , etc .

as a general matter , judicial review can help ensure that agency decisions and use of scientific data are sound .

under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , a court may set aside an agency's decision if it is "arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion or otherwise not in accordance with law. .

the supreme court has described circumstances in which a rule would normally be found arbitrary and capricious: "if the agency has relied on factors which congress has not intended it to consider , entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem , offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency , or is so implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise. .

the agency must "examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action including a rational connection between the facts found and the choice made. .

in reviewing an agency action , the courts generally are "highly deferential" to the agency .

this is especially true with respect to matters , such as scientific issues , that involve the agency's particular expertise , but the presumption of agency expertise may be rebutted where the agency decision is not reasoned and the agency fails to articulate a rational relation between the facts found and the decision made .

in the esa context , the apa standards may require that regulations or agency actions be rationally related to the problems causing the decline of a species , especially when other interests are adversely affected .

courts have elaborated on the use of science in general , and on the best data available language within the esa .

one court has held that the statutory phrase does not require , and hence a court cannot order , fws or nmfs ( the services ) to conduct additional studies to obtain missing data , and that the agency must rely on even inconclusive or uncertain information if that is the best available at the time of a listing decision .

the relevant agency cannot ignore available biological information , especially if that information is the most current or is scientifically superior to that on which the decision - maker relied .

a federal agency requesting consultation under section 7 of the esa cannot refuse to provide fws with the "most relevant scientific data available from reputable scientists on the ground that it was not perfect" or its methodology could be criticized , because doing so would eviscerate the statutory requirement that the best available science be used .

however , if there is a lack of science , the agency cannot rely on data that its own scientists unanimously agree is inaccurate .

courts have addressed how the services should consider future actions in listing decisions .

a service may not postpone listing a declining species until it is on the brink of extinction in reliance on uncertain , future actions of another agency .

the services must rely on existing regulatory mechanisms in their listing determinations , and not on future , uncertain , or voluntary actions to justify a decision not to list a species , although cooperative efforts may be considered .

a court also has said that "the 'best scientific and commercial data available' is not a standard of absolute certainty , and [is] a fact that reflects congress' intent that the fws take conservation measures before a species is 'conclusively' headed for extinction. .

if fws does not base its listings on speculation , or disregard superior data , the fact that the studies on which it does rely are imperfect does not undermine those authorities as the best scientific data available — "the service must utilize the best scientific ... data available , not the best scientific data possible " ( emphasis added ) .

on the other hand , an agency's response must be appropriate to the problem that needs to be solved .

one case struck down regulations that totally banned duck hunting in an area to protect one species of duck .

another case stated that low numbers of a particular species alone did not necessarily warrant listing — other factors must be considered , such as the reasons for the low numbers , whether the numbers are declining , and how experts view the population numbers .

another court stated that the bar fws has to clear in terms of evidence is very low , but it must at least clear it .

in the context of issuing incidental take permits under section 10 of the esa , this means the service must demonstrate that a species is or could be in an area before regulating it , and must establish the causal connection between the land use being regulated and harm to the species ; mere speculation of potential harm is not sufficient .

one court held that a biological opinion that was not "coextensive in scope" with the agency action failed to consider important aspects of the problem and was therefore arbitrary and capricious .

in the last decade , several bills have been introduced to address the role of science in esa decisions .

although committee hearings have been held and some bills have been reported , none have been enacted .

some bills address very specific aspects of science in the esa context ; others concern the fundamental treatment of scientific matters under the esa .

no bills have been introduced to date in the 113 th congress to amend the esa .

in the 112 th congress , among the bills addressing specific science questions , h.r .

909 , s. 706 , and s. 1720 would have prohibited consideration of the climate change - related impact of a greenhouse gas upon any species of fish , wildlife , or plant .

h.r .

1837 would have prohibited the secretaries of the interior and commerce from distinguishing between natural - spawned and hatchery - spawned , or otherwise artificially propagated strains of a species , in making any determination under esa that relates to any anadromous fish species that are present in the sacramento and san joaquin rivers or their tributaries .

other bills take on more generic matters , though few recent bills have taken this broader approach .

proponents of "sound science" legislation believe that esa amendments are necessary to rein in the perceived extremism of the esa that allowed federal agencies to use "shoddy science. .

furthermore , supporters believe amendments are needed to help those who have to deal with an "unreasonable" esa .

they claim that private property rights would be helped by these proposals because a species would have to actually be endangered to be listed and that the proposals would make it more difficult to use falsified data , which they charged was being done by government agencies .

also , they see this legislation as improving recreational and commercial access to public lands .

they claim that access to public lands is improved when esa decisions use peer - reviewed science to protect "truly endangered species. .

opponents voice concerns that "sound science" legislation is a misnomer and would substantially weaken the "best available science" used to implement the esa and undermine the precautionary approach to protecting imperiled plants and animals .

they are concerned that such legislation might weaken the esa by putting in place requirements for studies and processes that are impossible to achieve , radically weakening america's ability to protect its threatened and endangered species and wildlands .

they further believe that legislation , using the mask of "sound science," would result in special rights for industry , and increase the costs , delays , and bureaucracy associated with implementing the nation's most important wildlife conservation law .

they further claim widespread support among scientists for their views .

in july 2002 , a letter from more than 300 scientists was sent to members of congress requesting that the "current debate over science in the esa not lead to changes that could weaken the esa's provisions to stem the loss of biological resources. .

they were concerned that adding requirements would cause additional delays and increase bureaucratic procedures for crucial decisions , that added peer review requirements were unnecessary , that new statutory limits on the use of scientific methods ( eg , analysis of population viability ) for the collection and analysis of scientific data would reduce protection , and that policy - makers should follow the precautionary principle and take "the most prudent course of action by choosing alternatives that are not likely to harm listed species. .

fws raised concerns about "sound science" legislation when testifying before the 107 th congress: [w]e have concerns with the structural and budgetary impacts of enacting this legislation .

we also believe that the department has existing authority to implement improvements that will greatly enhance the science we use.... we believe that the additional processes added by the two bills would be costly to implement.... we are concerned that the considerable new process required in both bills will impact the fish and wildlife service's ability to provide consultations and other decisions in a timely manner and , in some cases , may compromise the fish and wildlife service's ability to meet statutory deadlines .

the application of science under the esa is periodically controversial in debates over the act .

yet of the thousands of science - based decisions involved in administration of the law , relatively few become controversial or generate headlines .

when they do , there are those who argue that actions by fws or nmfs provide more protection than necessary at some cost to economic welfare ; others assert that insufficient attention is paid to science , resulting in insufficient or delayed protections of species that warrant more concern .

to date , the relatively low number of actions judged under the two agencies' scientific integrity policies suggests that outright scientific misconduct is exceedingly rare .

whether all the remaining science - based actions ( both controversial and non - controversial ) under esa reach a substantially higher standard is uncertain ; the debate concerning under - or over - protection based on science continues .

