scientific documentation of the ecological condition of the oceans , such as the reports recently issued by the united states commission on ocean policy and the pew oceans commission , has been cited as evidence of deteriorating aquatic conditions .

the president responded to these reports by creating the committee on ocean policy within the white house council on environmental quality .

the bush administration has also released a u.s .

ocean action plan , a report setting forth administration support for development of a global ocean observing system ; various state , local , and federal partnerships in ocean stewardship and management ; individual fishing quotas and greater use of market - based systems for fisheries management ; development of an ocean research priorities plan and implementation strategy ; and a national freight action agenda to ensure a safe , reliable , efficient , and competitive freight transportation system .

the plan also indicates that the president will pursue coral reef local action strategies , u.s. accession to the un convention on the law of the sea , and passage of legislation to more clearly define the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) responsibilities within the department of commerce .

recently there has been debate over whether the development of a more comprehensive system of marine resource preservation is appropriate .

currently , a number of u.s. marine sites have been designated for and receive special protections under laws specifically aimed at preserving ocean resources , such as the national marine sanctuary program , established in 1972 by the marine protection , research and sanctuaries act ; the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ; and the coastal zone management act .

executive order 13,158 , issued by president clinton and retained by the bush administration , made marine protected area ( mpa ) designation and management a national priority .

that order defined an mpa as "any area of the marine environment that has been reserved by federal , state , territorial , tribal or local laws or regulations to provide lasting protection to part or all of the natural or cultural resources therein. .

under executive order 13,158 , federal agencies are directed to strengthen general protections for existing mpas and to prevent federal actions from resulting in harm to these areas .

agencies are also directed to improve management efforts , in part through establishing a comprehensive national mpa system .

the executive order does not clarify where ( i.e .

which zone of u.s. jurisdiction ) mpas can be created or what laws authorize their creation .

it should be noted , however , that executive order 13,158 does not confer new designation or management authority on the federal agencies , stating that "[e]ach federal agency whose authorities provide for the establishment or management of mpas shall take appropriate actions to enhance or expand existing mpas and establish or recommend , as appropriate , new mpas. .

additionally , the order states that when designating mpas , federal agencies must "act in accordance with international law and with presidential proclamation 5928 of december 27 , 1988 , on the territorial sea of the united state of america , presidential proclamation 5030 of march 10 , 1983 , on the exclusive economic zone of the united states of america , and presidential proclamation 7219 of september 2 , 1999 , on the contiguous zone of the united states. .

in september of 2006 , the national marine protected areas center , a division of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , issued its draft framework for developing the national system of marine protected areas .

after an extensive comment period , the national marine protected areas center produced a revised version of this document in march of 2008 ( referred to herein as the draft framework ) .

the draft framework provides guidance for a collaborative effort among federal , state , tribal , and local governments and other stakeholders to develop an effective national system of marine protected areas , building on existing programs .

however , as the draft framework acknowledges , "[n]either the [mpa] national system nor [executive order 13,158] establish any new legal authorities to designate or manage mpas , nor do they alter any existing federal , state , local , or tribal mpa laws or programs .

each mpa or program that participates in the national system will continue to be independently managed by its respective agency or agencies , as will any new sites that eventually may be established. .

as the draft framework states , the new national system is intended to be a "system of sites and systems" coordinating the various existing programs with legal authority to establish mpas .

this report analyzes various sources of legal authority to assess their possible application to marine environments and will outline the protection and management system each might support .

international law recognizes that coastal nations have legal authority to manage certain ocean resources within their jurisdiction .

the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos iii ) recognizes general zones within which signatory nations may regulate exploitation of marine resources .

unclos iii recognizes a region extending up to twelve "nautical miles" from a nation's coast , the territorial sea of that nation , in which the coastal nation may claim full ownership and sovereignty over the waters , seabed , and the subsoil .

coastal nations can further regulate beyond the territorial sea up to 24 nautical miles from the coast , the contiguous zone , in so far as necessary to protect the territorial sea and to enforce its customs , fiscal , immigration , and sanitary laws .

further , unclos iii allows for an exclusive economic zone ( eez ) , which extends two hundred nautical miles from the coast .

in its eez , the coastal nation has sovereign rights to explore , exploit , conserve , and manage marine resources .

many elements of the jurisdictional scheme under unclos iii reflect long - standing practice and may be considered customary international law , a position the united states appears to have taken when it proclaimed its own eez jurisdiction .

although the united states has signed the most current version of the unclos iii agreement , it has yet to ratify the treaty ; consequently , the united states is not a formal party .

even absent ratification , however , the u.s. has claimed jurisdiction over zones virtually identical to those contemplated by unclos iii via a series of presidential proclamations .

several federal laws explicitly apply to u.s. waters , including the territorial sea , contiguous zone , and eez .

additionally , certain resource protection and management frameworks now in place might also be applied to ocean resources in the territorial sea , the contiguous zone , and the eez should congress or the president designate such areas for protection .

generally , congress has broad constitutional authority to "dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states...." also , any portions of the u.s. - claimed waters and resources that might not be fairly characterized as "territory" or "property" might nonetheless fall under congressional authority to "regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states , and with the indian tribes...." among others .

the president , even if not explicitly granted regulatory authority by statute , may also have constitutional authority to impose regulations on the use of ocean resources claimed by the united states .

for instance , the constitution grants the president broad authorities regarding the foreign relations , national defense , and treaties of the united states .

additionally , should unclos iii be ratified , its many marine habitat provisions , which require parties to protect and preserve the marine environment , may provide the president and congress with additional authority for the regulation of marine resources in order to execute the treaty obligations of the u.s .

the president and congress may also have authority to protect ocean resources under the auspices of implementing current u.s. treaty obligations .

under the protocol amending the 1916 convention for the protection of migratory birds , for instance , the government of a signatory nation is directed to "use its authority to protect and conserve habitats essential to migratory bird populations. .

this might authorize the protection of ocean resources to the extent necessary to implement the purpose of the underlying treaty .

the current extent of the authority of the u.s. government in each zone is complex and must be considered in two contexts: the federal government vis - à - vis the international community and the federal government vis - à - vis the states .

an overview of the relative authorities in each zone follows .

in light of the recent publication of the revised draft framework for developing the national system of marine protected areas and the introduction of h.r .

21 in the 110 th congress , it is important to understand the statutory and regulatory background for the designation of mpas .

a series of statutory authorities exist for the creation and management of mpas .

the national marine sanctuaries act would appear to be directly aimed at the creation of mpas , although , in practice , the protections provided areas designated under its authority have not necessarily been extensive .

other legislation , such as the coastal zone management act and the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act , also have the potential to protect marine resources in a fashion similar to mpas .

more general preservation laws may also be an option for the protection and management of marine resources .

the antiquities act , the national park service organic act , and the national wildlife refuge system administration act appear to generally allow the designation of marine resources as national monuments , national parks , or national wildlife refuges .

however , use of these various conservation authorities for the creation of an mpa would carry concerns peculiar to each particular statute and would be limited by the extent of u.s. jurisdiction over offshore lands and waters .

their application to the territorial sea would generally appear permissible .

application beyond the territorial sea is less certain .

