after the 1991 demise of the soviet union , many analysts grew concerned that nuclear weaponsmight be lost or stolen , or that some might be launched by accident or without authorization byresponsible officials .

many of these weapons were located outside russia , but have since beenreturned to storage areas in russia .

the united states has offered , through efforts such as the nunn - lugarcooperative threat reduction program , to enhance safety and security at nuclear facilities inrussia .

concerns about the long - term effects of economic hardship and the increasing age of soviet - era systemscontinue to prompt questions about the security of russia's nuclear weapons andmaterials .

this report provides background information on the location of nuclear weapons at the time of the demise of the soviet union and their subsequent relocation to storage and deployment areas inrussia .

it also provides a description of the safety , security , and control issues raised in 1991 andin more recent years .

it includes a brief listing of the cooperative programs and assistance theunited states has provided to russia and the other former soviet states in an effort to addressconcerns about the safety and security of nuclear weapons and materials .

 ( 1 ) .

the united states and the former soviet states have cooperated in many ways over the yearsto address the concerns described above .

the united states provides nearly $1 billion per year inassistance , through programs in the state department , energy department , and defense department,to help the former soviet states secure and eliminate nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons , tohelp secure and eliminate the materials used in these weapons , and to help provide alternativeemployment for the scientists and engineers who had been a part of the soviet union's weaponscomplex .

these programs , which have provided nearly $7 billion in funding in the past 12 years,are designed to reduce the risk that weapons , materials , or scientists from the former soviet unionmight provide useful to other nations seeking their own weapons of mass destruction .

they havemet with many challenges over the years , but most analysts agree that these cooperative efforts havehelped reduce potential threats from former soviet weapons of mass destruction .

the followingsection briefly describes some of these programs .

 ( 8 ) .

in november 1991 , congress allocated $400 million in department of defense funds to help the former soviet republics secure their nuclear weapons .

the funds were to provide russia,ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan assistance in 1 ) the transportation , storage , safeguarding anddestruction of nuclear , chemical and biological weapons and the dismantlement of missiles andlaunchers ; 2 ) the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; and , 3 ) theprevention of diversion of weapons - related scientific expertise .

although some members havequestioned the benefits and administration ctr program , congress has consistently supported itscentral objectives , allocating between $300 and $475 million each year since the program'sinception .

during its first decade , the ctr program allocated most of its funds to projects that were designed to help russia , ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan eliminate strategic offensive nuclearweapons limited by the start treaty .

it has also helped improve the safety and security of nuclearwarheads in transit and in storage .

the program has also provided funding to help russia build afacility to dispose of its chemical weapons ; this project has proven far more controversial incongress than projects aimed at the elimination of strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

forexample , congress denied funding for this project in fy2000 and fy2001 .

the bush administration conducted a wide - ranging review of u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia during its first year in office .

many analysts expected thisreview to lead to reductions in funding and the elimination of some projects .

the administration,however , concluded that the programs did serve u.s. national security interests ; it identified severalefforts that would receive added funding .

at the same , time , though , the administration altered thestated objectives of the program .

past legislation had stated that the ctr program should providerussia , ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan assistance in the transportation , storage , safeguarding anddestruction of nuclear , chemical and biological weapons and the dismantlement of missiles andlaunchers , the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; and the prevention ofdiversion of weapons - related scientific expertise .

the program's new objectives are to dismantleweapons of mass destruction and their associated infrastructure in the former soviet union ; consolidate and secure weapons of mass destruction and related technologies and materials ; increasetransparency and encourage higher standards of conduct , and support defense and militarycooperation with the objective of preventing proliferation .

although these new objectives may notalter ctr priorities in the near - term , the potential exists for significant changes in the future .

inparticular , funding may shift away from the transportation , storage , and elimination of nuclearweapons towards efforts to secure and eliminate chemical and biological weapons .

furthermore , the new emphasis on encouraging "higher standards of conduct" confirms that administration's added interest in conditioning u.s. assistance on policies and activities pursuedby the recipient nations .

this focus was evident in bush administration policies in early 2002 whenthe administration stated that it would not certify that russia was committed to its arms controlobligations under the chemical weapons and biological weapons conventions .

the law states thatthis certification is necessary for a recipient nation to receive assistance under the ctr program orthe state department nonproliferation programs .

the administration indicated that russia had notcooperated fully with the united states in sharing information relevant to the implementation ofthese treaties .

it then asked congress to waive the requirement for the certification , so that theunited states could emphasize its concern with russian compliance without interrupting fundingfor the ctr program .

some observers criticized the administration's certification policy , noting thateven the administration agrees that these programs serve u.s. security interests , and that theirsuspension could undermine u.s. nonproliferation policy .

the state department funds several nonproliferation programs in russia and the other former soviet states .

several of these are designed to help with border and export controls , to reduce therisk that nuclear materials might be smuggled out of the former soviet territory .

the statedepartment also administers the international science and technology center in moscow and thescience and technology center in ukraine .

these centers are designed to provide research andpeaceful employment opportunities for nuclear scientists and engineers .

the centers beganoperations in 1992 and have , thus far , funded around 450 projects at a cost of $145 million .

morethan 17,000 scientists and engineers have participated in istc projects .

many continue to work attheir primary jobs in russia's research facilities .

but , because most have not received their fullsalaries at their primary jobs , the grants from the istc permit them to support their families withoutcontemplating selling their knowledge to nations seeking nuclear weapons .

the bushadministration has recommended expanding the science centers , in part due to concerns about thepotential risk that biological weapons scientists might be lured to programs in other nations .

itsbudget for fy2003 contained $52 million for a program that combines the science centers and thestate department's program for redirecting biological weapons scientists in the former soviet union .

although the nunn - lugar ctr program , in its early years , focused on securing nuclear weapons , it did include some funding for materials control and protection .

but government - to - governmentnegotiations with russia and the other republics proceeded slowly , so projects atfacilities with these materials did not begin until 1994 .

in a parallel effort that sought to reduce thesedelays , experts from the u.s. nuclear laboratories also began , in 1994 , less formal contacts with theircounterparts in russia to identify and solve safety and security problems at russian facilities .

together , the government - to - government and lab - to - lab projects constitute the material protection,control and accounting ( mpc&a ) program , which is funded through the u.s. department ofenergy .

the mpc&a program began with less than $3 million in the fy1993 nunn - lugar budget ; it had grown to more than $220 million per year by fy2003 .

these funds are used to help upgradesecurity and monitoring systems at facilities that house nuclear materials in russia and the otherformer soviet states , and to help secure naval nuclear weapons in russia .

by early 2003 , doe hadhelped upgrade security at buildings that contained about 38% of the 603 metric tons that doebelieved were at risk of theft .

these upgrades include the installation of improved security systemsthat use modern technology and strict material control and accounting systems .

the program has alsoprovided security training for russian nuclear specialists .

doe officials have noted that the programhad has experienced some problems and results have been limited because most of the materials arein russia's closed nuclear cities and nuclear weapons complex .

minatom , which is responsiblefor these facilities , has been slow to provide doe with information about and access to thesefacilities because of the sensitive nature of the nuclear weapons complex .

the department of energy also implements two programs that are designed to discourage russian nuclear weapons scientists from selling their knowledge to other nations .

the first of these,the initiatives for proliferation prevention ( ipp ) program , funds projects with non - militaryapplications that have commercial value for both the united states and the former soviet republics .

the program has coordinated lab - to - lab contacts that sought to identify technologies at formersoviet weapons facilities that might have commercial applications .

it also matches u.s. governmentfunds with funds provided by u.s. companies in projects that seek to commercialize thesetechnologies .

congress has authorized approximately $20-$30 million for this program each yearsince fy1994 .

 ( 9 ) the second program , the nuclear cities initiative ( nci ) is designed to bring commercial enterprises to russia's closed nuclear cities , so that scientists and engineers will not be tempted tosell their knowledge to nations seeking nuclear weapons .

it seeks to promote nonproliferation goalsby helping to redirect the work of nuclear weapons scientists , engineers , and technicians and todevelop commercial opportunities in those cities .

for example , it helped finance a computing centerin sarov , formerly known as arzamas - 16 , that will produce software for sale around the world .

theclinton administration had requested and received $30 million for nci in fy2001 .

the bushadministration , however , cut funding for the nci program sharply , requesting $6.6 million forfy2002 .

with this low level of funding , the program would have to withdraw from two of the threenuclear cities that participate .

the administration has also indicated that it would like to eliminatethe nci program and merge its remaining projects into the ipp program .

in the conference reporton the fy2002 defense authorization bill , congress approved the merger of the two programs , intoa new russian transition initiative , but , at the senate's insistence , required that doe continue toplan for and fund the nci programs separately .

it also increased funding for the combined programfrom the president's request of $28.8 million to $42 million in the energy and water appropriationsbill and an additional $15 million in the emergency supplemental appropriations bill .

the bushadministration has requested and received $39 million for this combined program in its budget forfy2003 .

it has requested approximately the same amount for fy2004 , with $17 million allocatedto nci and $23 million allocated to ipp .

however , the nci program ended in late 2003 because theunited states and russia have been unable to complete a new implementing agreement .

theyremain at odds over liability protections .

agreement on the disposition of weapons - grade plutonium .

in september 1998 , presidents clinton and yeltsin agreed that eachnation would convert 50 metric tons of weapons - grade plutonium to a form that could not bereturned to nuclear weapons .

clinton administration officials estimated that this amount wasapproximately half of the u.s. stockpile and perhaps 25% of russia's stockpile .

the agreementhighlighted two means for converting the plutonium - - the parties could either convert it to fuel fornuclear power reactors or mix it with other nuclear wastes and dispose of it in a way the wouldpreclude its use in nuclear weapons .

this agreement is designed to ease concerns about the possibletheft or diversion of weapons - grade plutonium by nations or others seeking to develop their ownnuclear weapons .

congress allocated $200 million for this program in the omnibus appropriationsact passed at the end of the 105th congress .

after its review of u.s. nonproliferation programs withrussia , the bush administration indicated that it would seek an alternative plan , that would be lesscostly and less complex , to address concerns with russia's stockpile of weapons - grade plutonium .

under the new plan , the two nations will each convert plutonium to mox fuel .

but u.s. assistanceto russia for the construction of its mox plant ended in late 2003 because the united states andrussia have been unable to complete a new implementing agreement .

they remain at odds overliability protections for u.s. companies and individuals participating in the program .

during the 1990s , the united states and russia also participated in bilateral discussions , in several fora , that sought to identify and resolve issues related to the potential loss of control overrussia's nuclear weapons and materials .

the bush administration continues to pursue discussionsamong u.s. and russian working groups , even though it has continued the specific high - levelmeetings on these issues .

the u.s. - russian commission on economic and technologicalcooperation ( the gore - chernomyrdin commission ) .

in 1993 , presidents clintonand yeltsin established the u.s. - russian commission on economic and technological cooperation,chaired by vice president gore and russia's prime minister chernomyrdin .

vice president gore andprime minister chernomyrdin often used their meetings to address issues , such as arms control andmissile defense cooperation , on the agenda for upcoming presidential summits .

for example , in1994 , the commission announced that the two sides would cooperate in building a storage facilityat mayak ( described above ) for plutonium removed from russia's nuclear weapons .

vice presidentgore and prime minister chernomyrdin also signed the agreement that established the programthrough which the united states will purchase 500 metric tons of uranium removed from russiannuclear weapons for use in nuclear power reactors .

the also signed an agreement requiring theshutdown of nuclear reactors that produce plutonium for nuclear weapons in russia , beginning aprocess that evolved over the years , and remains on the agenda for u.s. and russian cooperation .

during their june 24 , 1998 meeting , vice president gore and prime minister kiriyenko signed twoagreements on nuclear issues .

the united states agreed to provide russia with assistance inconverting plutonium from nuclear weapons to fuel for nuclear reactors .

in the second agreement,the united states pledged $3.1 million for 9 projects that are designed to help scientists in russia'sclosed nuclear cities convert their efforts to peaceful civilian endeavors , a project known as thenuclear cities initiative .

the strategic stability working group ( sswg ) .

in late 1993 , the united states and russia established an experts working group to discuss ways toimprove strategic stability , increase mutual confidence , and relax the cold war nuclear forcepostures .

one of the first topics the sswg addressed was ballistic missile "detargeting. .

in anagreement that took effect on may 30 , 1994 , the two nations agreed that no country would betargeted by any strategic forces on either side .

many observers praised this agreement as an overduesign that the united states and russia no longer consider each other enemies .

some also saw it asa move away from the nuclear hair - trigger and a concrete step to reduce the risk of accidental missilelaunches .

others , however , argued that its benefits were strictly symbolic because both sides couldquickly retarget missiles during a crisis .

many also noted that the measure was not verifiable , soneither side could be sure that the other's missiles were actually detargeted .

as was noted above , many analysts in the united states have expressed concerns about the possible inadvertent launch of russian nuclear weapons resulting from russia's weakened ballisticmissile early warning system .

in response to these concerns , presidents clinton and yeltsin agreedin september1998 that the united states and russia would share early warning data for all spacelaunches and ballistic missile launches world wide .

they agreed to share data on a continual basis,in real time ( rather than providing it annually or biannually ) ; they agreed that data would includeinformation on strategic , theater , and intermediate range missiles , and on space launches ; they agreedthe data would be derived from early warning satellites and ground - based radars ; and they agreedto establish a multilateral pre - launch notification system that would be open to all nations whoagreed to share data prior to missile or space launches from their territories .

the clintonadministration emphasized that this agreement would strengthen stability and protect against thepossibility of a nuclear launch triggered by false warning of an attack .

administration officials havealso highlighted the cooperative nature of this endeavor ; this center will provide the first opportunityfor u.s. and russian military personnel to be permanently involved in a joint military operation .

in mid - december 2000 , the united states and russia signed an agreement outlining the types of information that would be exchanged in the newly - formed joint data exchange center ( jdec ) near moscow .

this agreement establishes a pre - launch and post - launch notification system forballistic missile and space launches and designed to reduce the risk that a test , experiment , or spacelaunch , could be misread as a ballistic missile attack .

some critics of the planned center argued itwould hinder u.s. access to space by requiring that notifications before launches , but the militaryspace community reportedly reviewed all the provisions and approved of the plan because it allowsfor exceptions to the notification requirement in the interest of national security .

most experts hopedthe center , which is to be based in an old school building near moscow , would begin operations in2001 .

however , the building's renovations have not yet begun .

disagreements between the unitedstates and russia about tax issues , along with a general cooling in the relationship between the twocountries , have been cited as reasons for the delay .

congress authorized funding for the jdec in2002 , but withheld 50% of the funds until russia and the united states reach a cost - sharingagreement and an agreement on taxes and liability for u.s. participants .

in a joint declarationsigned during their summit meeting in moscow in may 2002 , presidents bush and putin emphasizedthat they remain committed to opening the center .

however , progress stopped in 2002 because thetwo sides remained at odds over taxation and liability issues .

