central to a global strategy for combating terrorism is defining the threat and understandingwho the enemy is .

"terrorism" as a generic concept is too vague and amorphous to design a strategyagainst .

moreover , terrorism , though often perceived as a threat , is perhaps better characterized asa tactic or a process .

an important point made by the 9 / 11 commission is that the strategic threatfaced by the united states and its allies is from an enemy consisting of certain groups and with aspecific ideology and with stated objectives .

in the words of the commission: "the enemy goesbeyond al qaeda to include the radical ideological movement , inspired in part by al qaeda , that hasspawned other terrorist groups and violence .

thus our strategy must match our means to two ends:dismantling the al qaeda network and , in the long term , prevailing over the ideology that contributesto islamist terrorism. .

 ( 1 ) a comprehensive national anti - terror strategy must address many issues .

included are theappropriate roles for military force , law enforcement , intelligence , diplomacy , economicdevelopment , education , promotion of social and political equality , and nation and institutionbuilding within the context of policies promoting national security .

tactically , in the short term,how does one employ the wide portfolio of tools available to policymakers to reduce pressing andimmediate threats ? .

strategically , in the long term , how does one win "hearts and minds" ? .

inaddition , a strategy ideally attracts allies .

how does one both maximize international "buy - in" andnational effectiveness ? .

the national strategy for combating terrorism addresses these issues .

 ( 2 ) the recommendations of the9 / 11 commission , as they relate to strategy content and implementation , appear consistent with , andsupportive of , the national strategy .

 ( 3 ) .

on july 22 , 2004 , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states["9 / 11 commission"] issued its final report .

 ( 21 ) included are forty - one recommendations for changing the waythe government is organized to combat terrorism and how it prioritizes its efforts .

many of thecommission's recommendations are consistent with elements of the administration's february 14,2003 national strategy for combating terrorism ( 22 ) , such as diplomacy and counter - proliferation efforts , preemption,intelligence and information fusion , winning hearts and minds - - including not only publicdiplomacy , but also policies that encourage development and more open societies , law enforcementcooperation , and defending the homeland .

 ( 23 ) the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations generally fall into the categories of ( 1 ) preemption[attacking terrorists and combating the growth of islamic terrorism] ; ( 2 ) protecting against andpreparing for attacks ; ( 3 ) coordination and unity of operational planning , intelligence and sharingof information ; ( 4 ) enhancing , through centralization , congressional effectiveness of intelligence andcounter - terrorism oversight , authorization , and appropriations ; ( 5 ) centralizing congressionaloversight and review of homeland security activities ; and ( 6 ) increasing fbi , dod , and dhscapacity to assess terrorist threats and their concomitant response strategies and capabilities .

thereport specifically recommends confronting openly problems in the u.s. - saudi relationship , readby some to include such issues as terrorist financing and the issue of ideological incitement .

thereport also recommends sustaining aid to pakistan and afghanistan , which are perceived to be vitalgeo - strategic allies in the global war on terror .

prominent in the report are specific recommendations calling for ( 1 ) creation of a moreunified congressional committee structure for oversight , authorization , and appropriations involvingintelligence and counterterrorism ( eg , a joint committee or separate committees in each chamber - - possibly combining authorizing and appropriating authorities ) ; ( 2 ) creation of a single principalpoint of congressional oversight and review for homeland security ; ( 3 ) creation of a position ofnational intelligence director ( nid ) in the office of the president ; and ( 4 ) creation of a nationalcounterterrorism center .

the national intelligence director , as envisioned by the 9 / 11commission , would exercise some degree of control of intelligence agencies across the federalgovernment , propose and execute a unified intelligence budget , and serve as principal intelligenceadviser to the president .

 ( 24 ) the national counterterrorism center , in the view of thecommission , should be the central office for intelligence gathering , analysis , and overallcounterterrorism operations .

mirroring commission recommendations , on august 2 , 2004 , president bush urged congressto create the position of a national intelligence director - - a position separate from that of ciadirector - - to be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate , and to serveat the pleasure of the president .

the director would serve as the president's principal intelligenceadvisor , overseeing and coordinating the foreign and domestic activities of the intelligencecommunity .

the president also announced plans to establish a national counter - terrorism center - - a move envisioned as building on the analytical work of the terrorist threat integration center .

the new center is envisioned as serving as a central knowledge bank for information about knownand suspected terrorists and would be charged with coordinating and monitoring counter - terrorismplans and activities of all government agencies , and preparing the daily terrorism threat report forthe president and senior officials .

 ( 25 ) on december 17 , 2004 , president bush signed the intelligence reform and prevention actof 2004 ( s. 2845 , p.l .

108-458 ) establishing the position of national intelligencedirector ( a position separate from that of the cia director ) to serve as the president's principalintelligence advisor , overseeing and coordinating the foreign and domestic activities of theintelligence community .

established as well is a national counterterrorism center designed toserve as a central knowledge bank for information about known and suspected terrorists and tocoordinate and monitor counterterrorism plans and activities of all government agencies .

the centerwill also be responsible for preparing the daily terrorism threat report for the president .

some , however , are concerned that the newly created national intelligence director ( nid ) ,as an integral part of the president's team , might be more vulnerable to political pressure .

 ( 26 ) central to this debate isa desire to maintain the independence of objective intelligence from administration policygoals .

 ( 27 ) as theproposed national intelligence director would have access to both domestic and foreignintelligence , another concern is the overall power wielded by the proposed position and its potentialfor abuse .

 ( 28 ) .

given the potential access by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction , designing effectiveresponses to terrorism may well be the greatest challenge facing governments today .

bedevilingpolicymakers is how to combat effectively this growing global phenomenon with sufficientintelligence support and at a sustainable level of economic , social , and political cost .

inherent in thispolicy debate are two overarching issues: ( 1 ) how to ensure protection of civil liberties whileenhancing security , and ( 2 ) how to deal with the seemingly unending costs of enhancingsecurity .

 ( 29 ) critical toboth these issues is the development of a methodology to measure the adequacy of antiterrorismefforts , an issue not addressed in the 2003 national strategy , or in the 9 / 11 commission reportrecommendations .

in this regard , some raise concern that creation of positions or structures in government wheredomestic and foreign intelligence are coordinated or fused - - such as the national intelligencedirector and national counter - terrorism center - - will result in encroachments on civil liberties .

clearly as a nation , they say , the united states does not seek to defend freedom abroad and ignoreit at home .

on the other hand , others counter that providing security in today's increasinglyborderless world is a basic responsibility of governments to their citizenry .

without intelligencegathering and analysis that adequately detects an increasingly intertwined continuum of threats ofboth foreign and domestic origin , they say , policymakers may find themselves at a majordisadvantage in implementing strategies to counter such threats .

concern also exists over the potential for seemingly limitless economic costs of securityassociated with homeland defense .

no sizeable nation can afford the cost of fortifying every squareinch of its territory from terror attacks , so as the 9 / 11 commission recommends , both strategy andimplementation policies must wisely prioritize allocation of resources for counterterrorism andhomeland defense .

 ( 30 ) complicating these efforts , governments and terrorists may be fighting "different" wars .

policymakers often view success against terrorism in terms of minimizing physical damage - - death,injury , and destruction of property - - and concentrate their energy and resources in this area .

on theother hand , terrorists , while seeking physical damage , may also view success in abstract orideological terms .

for example , what is the impact of an action on recruitment ? .

how does it affectgovernment policies or the stability of the government in power ? .

what is the impact of an act ofterrorism on the economy of a nation or on global economic networks ? .

what is the impact onbehavioral patterns of a target population ? .

might the public pressure government to pursue policiesthat appease terror ? .

the question arises , how long can democratic governments pursue policies thatpressure terrorists if such policies are seen as bringing on terrorist retaliation ? .

breaking orweakening this political will is likely to be a central terrorist goal .

some well thought out strategies promote holding the line on terrorism or setting it back .

but a potential danger in formalized strategies such as the national strategy for combatingterrorism ( 31 ) is that thestrategy may rigidly dictate the response instead of the threat dictating the response - - as the threatis often rapidly evolving .

one option for policymakers charged with combating terrorism is todesign flexibility into strategies , organizational structures , and funding utilization .

while strategies or changes in governmental organizational structures such as thoserecommended for the intelligence community by the 9 / 11 commission may accelerate successagainst global terrorism , other factors are equally critical as well .

strong national leadership and ahigh quality of rank - and - file personnel and technology are central , as is the strong political will ofleadership and the general population .

hence , one potential pitfall of relying on strategies andreforms involving restructuring of government organizations is that a focus on implementingstrategies or administrative changes may overshadow other important factors such as quality ofpersonnel and technology .

in particular , this human factor may warrant more attention in anenvironment where organizations may feel pressed to find personnel to fill a plethora of newlycreated counter - terror related positions .

overall , the 9 / 11 commission recommendations share many features of the administration'snational strategy for combating terrorism .

the theme of using a portfolio of "all elements ofnational power" resounds in both documents .

both documents emphasize the core importance oftimely and actionable intelligence .

both emphasize a need for pre - emptive strategy , for attackingterrorists and their organizations , for international cooperation , for foreign economic assistance , forwinning hearts and minds , for strengthening counter - proliferation efforts , for attacking terroristfinancing , for denying sanctuaries , and for border security .

 ( 32 ) pursuit of governmentpolicies that draw potential recruits away from terrorist agendas is a core recommendation of the9 / 11 commission report .

 ( 33 ) some , however , see certain commission recommendations as incomplete , if not flawed .

they suggest that the commission is often focused on the "last war" and not a future one , and likenthe commission's recommendations to picking the "low hanging fruit on the tree while avoidinggoing after the higher - - more difficult to reach , yet richer - - clusters. .

 ( 34 ) for example , thecommission , as its first recommendation , suggests identifying and prioritizing terrorist sanctuarieswith a focus on failed states .

some assert , however , that terrorists increasingly return to theirpolitically stable home countries for sanctuary where they blend into local communities , where theirtraining camps are in civilian housing complexes , and where their bomb factories are in privateresidences .

in another recommendation , the commission suggests that vigorous efforts to trackterrorist financing remain front and center , yet does not address the prickly , and growing , issue ofuse of the hawalah system by terrorist networks .

 ( 35 ) a number of the commission's recommendations fall within the category of preventing thegrowth of islamist extremism and both the 2003 national strategy and the 9 / 11 commission reportto a large degree equate the terrorist threat with al qaeda and affiliated groups .

however , a validquestion is the degree to which , if at all , such a single - minded approach detracts attention fromindividuals or groups with other motivations that may soon appear on the horizon .

another issuecentral to combating islamist extremism , not addressed in the 2003 national strategy or the 9 / 11commission recommendations , is that of confronting incitement to terrorism when promoted,countenanced , or facilitated by the action , or inaction , of nation states .

 ( 36 ) although , the 2003 national strategy and the 9 / 11 commission both support the use offoreign assistance as a means of taking away fertile breeding ground for the nurturing of terroristgroups , the question of a correlation between standard of living levels and terrorism is open todebate .

 ( 37 ) nevertheless , there is a growing recognition in u.s. anti - terrorism strategy that poverty can breedignorance and despair and that despair can be exploited to support terrorist goals .

 ( 38 ) .

