as the global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) completes the last of its five planned years in fy2009 , the 111 th congress has begun consideration of continued funding through this program for training foreign military and police forces , and for other purposes .

for fy2010 , the obama administration has requested $96.8 million for gpoi .

this request follows the decision of the george w. bush administration's white house to continue the program .

in october 2008 , the national security council's deputies committee approved a five - year renewal of gpoi's mandate .

the obama administration affirmed this decision once it took office , according to a state department official .

previous congresses have generally endorsed the concept of this program , but also have questioned whether the program is as well - managed as possible and whether it will achieve its goals .

the 111 th congress may wish to consider whether its concerns , stated in past legislation , have been met .

on june 10 , 2009 , the house passed the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 ( h.r .

2410 ) , which contains a provision authorizing the secretary of state to carry out and expand gpoi programs and activities ( section 1108 ) .

before mid - 2004 , the united states provided peacekeeping capacity - building assistance to foreign militaries primarily under two programs , the african contingency operations training and assistance program ( acota ) and its predecessor program , and the enhanced international peacekeeping capabilities program ( eipc ) .

both acota and epic have been subsumed under the gpoi budget line .

acota is still the term used to refer to the africa component of gpoi , however , and is implemented by the state department's africa bureau .

overall responsibility for gpoi rests with the state department bureau of political - military affairs' office of plans , policy , and analysis ( pm / ppa ) .

 ( information about gpoi is available at http: / / www.state.gov / t / pm / ppa / gpoi . ) .

pm / ppa works closely with dod offices to plan and carry out the program .

impetus for gpoi came from the department of defense ( dod ) , where officials in the office of special operations and low - intensity conflict ( so / lic ) worked with the state department for over a year and a half to develop the proposal .

officials in so / lic's section on peacekeeping developed the plan as a means to expand and improve the acota program — with more and better exercises and more equipment — as well as to extend the program beyond africa to other parts of the world .

policymakers hoped that the availability of peacekeeping training would encourage more countries to participate in peacekeeping operations , enable current donors to provide a greater number of troops , and increase the number of countries which potentially could serve as lead nations , according to some analysts .

the gpoi budget is part of the foreign operations appropriations peacekeeping ( pko ) account , also known as the "voluntary" peacekeeping account , under the military assistance rubric .

the pko account funds activities carried out under section 551 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa ) .

section 551 authorizes the president to provide assistance for peacekeeping operations and other programs to further u.s. national security interests "on such terms and conditions as he may determine. .

 ( this provides some flexibility to the president , but is not tantamount to the discretion that he can exercise when funding is provided "notwithstanding any other provision of law." ) .

in his september 21 , 2004 address to the opening meeting of the 59 th session of the u.n. general assembly , president bush asserted that the world "must create permanent capabilities to respond to future crises. .

in particular , he pointed to a need for "more effective means to stabilize regions in turmoil , and to halt religious violence and ethnic cleansing. .

a similar rationale prompted the clinton administration to formulate the acri training program in 1996 and underlies the current search for new strategies and mechanisms to prevent and control conflicts .

funding for gpoi totaled $374.46 million from fy2005 through fy2008 .

initial dedicated funding of $96.7 million in fy2005 was contained in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 ( h.r .

4818 / p.l .

108-447 ) , split between the department of state ( almost 20% ) and the dod ( 80% as funds to be transferred to state ) budgets .

for fy2006 , the state department allocated $100.4 million to gpoi , which was slightly more than half of the total pko account , but some $14 million below the president's request .

for fy2007 , the administration requested $102.6 million for gpoi funding .

house and senate action signaled some discontent with the program .

the final continuing resolution that funded most government operations and programs through fy2007 , including gpoi , left the decision on the amount of gpoi funding for fy2007 largely to the state department , albeit in the context of a reduced availability of funds .

the state department's fy2007 gpoi obligations totaled $81 million ( i.e. , $1 million less than provided for in the house - passed fy2007 foreign operations bill , h.r .

5522 ) .

 ( an earlier version of the continuing resolution had set the house - passed amount as the level for fy2007 gpoi funding. ) .

for fy2008 , congress fully funded the bush administration's budget request for $92.5 million in gpoi funding .

 ( this funding was contained in the omnibus consolidated appropriations act , 2008 [ h.r .

2764 , division j ; p.l .

110-161 , signed into law december 26 , 2007] ) .

the state department allocated almost $4 million more .

state department allocations for gpoi for fy2009 total $105.95 million from pko funds and an expected additional amount of some $3 million from incle funding ( see table 1 and notes , below ) .

the state department allocated these funds from appropriations in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 , signed into law march 11 , 2009 ) .

the bush administration's fy2009 budget request called for $106.2 million in pko funds for gopi .

in its may 2009 budget request for fy2010 , the obama administration has requested $96.8 million for the global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) .

according to budget request documents , the fy2010 funds "will continue to provide training , equipment , and sustainment of peacekeeping troops," but the program emphasis will shift to "strengthening partner country capabilities to train their own peacekeeping units. .

to that end , gpoi will focus on developing indigenous peacekeeping trainer cadres , peacekeeping training centers , and on other programs , events , and activities to encourage self - sufficiency .

through fy2010 funds , the united states will continue to provide lift and sustainment to peacekeeping troops worldwide , and to support the evaluation of gpoi , including measures of effectiveness .

as in previous years , funding for gpoi is requested under the state department peacekeeping operations ( pko ) account .

in its first action on gpoi during the 111 th congress , the house passed legislation which would authorize the secretary of state to carry out and to expand gpoi programs and activities .

section 1108 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 ( h.r .

2410 ) , as passed by the house on june 10 , 2009 , specifies eight gpoi functions , including five that gpoi has carried out since its inception and three new functions .

in support of this proposed authorization , section 1108 finds that the united states has "a vital interest in ensuring" that u.n. peacekeeping operations are successful because countries in conflict threaten u.s. national security and economic interests , and because conflicts result in deplorable human suffering .

section 1108 also finds that the united states benefits from u.n. peacekeeping because , in general , the costs of u.n. operations are lower than the potential cost of a similar u.s. peacekeeping operation .

of the three new functions that section 1108 would authorize , two reaffirm the state department's concept of gpoi's future direction .

these functions are ( 1 ) "enhancing the capacity of regional and sub - regional organizations to plan , train for , manage , conduct , sustain and obtain lessons - learned from" peace operations ; and ( 2 ) helping partner nations become self - sufficient in developing and sustaining peacekeeping capabilities , as well as in furnishing troops and equipment for and carrying out peace operations ( see section 1108 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) .

the third new gpoi function that section 1108 , as passed by the house , would authorize is financing the refurbishment of helicopters for use in u.n. peacekeeping operations or u.n. security council - authorized regional peacekeeping operations .

a sense of congress statement ( section 1108 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) would direct the secretary of state to prioritize helicopter refurbishment , to set a goal of refurbishing no fewer than three helicopters by the end of fy2011 , and to seek additional refurbishment funds from other countries .

in the report accompanying h.r .

2410 ( h.rept .

111-136 ) , the house foreign affairs committee ( hfac ) states that the addition of helicopter refurbishment to gpoi's functions is intended to respond to current critical shortfalls in air assets in ongoing peacekeeping operations in darfur , the democratic republic of congo , and chad , as well as to potential new operations "which would likely face similar shortfalls ... " ( p. 167 ) the bill finds that a shortfall of over 50 helicopters critically hampers those three peacekeeping operations .

h.r .

2410 , as reported by the committee and passed by the house , does not authorize a specific funding amount for gpoi programs and activities , including helicopter refurbishment .

instead , section 1108 would authorize the appropriation of the funds necessary in fy2010 and fy2011 to carry out that section .

in h.rept .

111-136 , hfac encourages appropriators "to allot such funds as may be necessary above the president's request" of $96.8 million in order to refurbish helicopters .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the cost of refurbishing one medium - lift utility helicopter is about $2 million , and that the total cost of implementing gpoi programs and activities over the fy2010-fy2014 period , including the refurbishment of three helicopters by the end of 2011 , would be about $195 billion .

 ( h.rept .

111-136 , p. 103 ) .

over the past few years , the state department responded to concerns of the 109 th and the 110 th congresses to strengthen gpoi .

its steps included producing a strategic plan ( the executive summary of which is publically available ) , facilitating procedures to speed planning and implementation , and implementing an evaluation program .

as of 2008 , congress requested that the government accountability office ( gao ) investigate a number of remaining issues: the gao expressed several concerns about gpoi performance and management in a june 2008 report .

among the points the congress requested the gao to address were ( 1 ) the extent to which contributing and participating countries maintain records and databases ; ( 2 ) the quality and sustainability of the training of individuals and units ; ( 3 ) the extent to which those trained are equipped and remain equipped to deploy in peace operations ; ( 4 ) participating countries capacity to mobilize those trained ; ( 5 ) the extent to which trained individuals are deployed ; and ( 6 ) the extent to which contractors are used and the quality of their results .

the committee also requested an assessment of whether gpoi is achieving its goals and recommendations as to whether a country's participation in gpoi "should require reciprocal participation. .

in its june 2008 report , the gao doubted , based on information available to it in its investigation , that gpoi would be able to reach its goal of training 75,000 peacekeepers by 2010 .

the gao stated , however , that it could not evaluate information that the state department subsequently provided to demonstrate that gpoi would reach its goal .

as of february 2008 , gpoi officials are stating that 75,000 will be trained by early 2010 .

gpoi officials also state that the program will , as recommended by the gao , ensure that plans for extending gpoi activities beyond 2010 identify the necessary resources for developing long - term peacekeeping skills and infrastructure in africa .

they point to plans to concentrate on building infrastructure in any post - 2010 program .

the gao made several recommendations to improve human rights vetting , program management , and training content .

the following bullets note the recommendations and the steps that gpoi is taking to meet them .

congress may wish monitor progress on the gao recommendations .

noting that a number of foreign military troops who received gpoi training had not been properly vetted , the gao recommended that the secretary of state develop a system for monitoring all gpoi vetting activities and for ensuring that all individuals are vetted .

according to gpoi officials , the recommendation applies not only to gpoi , but to state department vetting in general .

to improve the vetting system , according to those officials , the department has secured funding to establish a database that will facilitate record - keeping and access to past vetting cases .

gpoi program implementers will use the system when it is available .

judging that gpoi was unable to account for the delivery and transfer of nonlethal training equipment to partner countries , the gao recommended that the secretary of state monitor implementation , on an ongoing basis , of new procedures to account for delivery and transfer of nonlethal training equipment to partner countries .

according to gpoi officials , the state department gpoi evaluation team had identified this accountability problem before the gao investigation .

the acota program has instituted a sole - source logistics contract to improve the entire logistics process from acquisition to delivery , and is establishing a mechanism with its african partners to manage joint inventories .

the state department is developing procedures with other stakeholders to better account for equipment that is commercially acquired through the state department's office of acquisition management's regional procurement support offices .

similarly , new procedures have been developed by the state department and the defense security cooperation agency to account for training equipment provided through the foreign military sales system , with the u.s. government retaining title to and custody of defense articles until a designated u.s. government agent confirms and documents delivery of gpoi material to a recipient country's authorized representative or agent .

in order to improve training , gao recommended that the secretary of state develop , in consultation with dod a training program for gpoi that uses standard military task lists and related training standards in order to establish program - wide criteria for evaluating the quality of training and measuring trainee proficiency .

according to gpoi officials , a gpoi contractor , detica , is working in close collaboration with key stakeholders and others , including the u.n. department of peacekeeping operations , to develop a set of essential tasks for peace operations and corresponding training standards to improve training programs .

in regard to u.s. support to coespu , gao recommended that the state department work with dod in order to help italy staff key unfilled positions in order to better evaluate progress and monitor results .

gao also suggested that gpoi provide additional guidance to u.s. missions to help the united states and italy collect data on the training and deployment of coespu graduates .

the state department is looking into the possibility of using gpoi funds to provide additional staff at coespu who would help with evaluation and monitoring , including the development of an alumni database , outreach materials , and tracking mechanisms .

also , according to gpoi officials , u.s. embassy staff and others have been asked to help administer a survey regarding the training activities and deployments of coespu graduates .

the results may be available by mid - 2009 .

section 1108 of h.r .

2410 calls for a report ( within 180 days of enactment ) that would provide information related to monitoring progress on these recommendations .

