securing foreign contributions to the military effort in iraq , and the follow - on stabilization and reconstruction effort , has been a major priority for u.s. policymakers since before the launch of operation iraqi freedom in march 2003. international participation has been sought to support the initial major combat operations , the follow - on stabilization operations , the training and equipping of iraqi security forces , and the provision of financial support to reconstruction efforts .

for many countries , the passage of united nations security council resolution 1511 on october 6 , 2003 , marked an important milestone in establishing the legitimacy of the post - war international presence in iraq .

resolution 1511 authorized a multinational force under unified ( interpreted as u.s. ) command to assist iraqis in securing their country and in training their security forces .

security council resolution 1546 of june 8 , 2004 reaffirmed this authorization and established the current u.n. mandate under which the u.s. - led multinational force is responsible for "[contributing] to the maintenance of security and stability in iraq. .

that mandate has since been extended for twelve month periods by resolution 1637 ( november 11 , 2005 ) , resolution 1723 ( november 28 , 2006 ) , and resolution 1790 ( december 18 , 2007 ) .

on november 26 , 2007 , iraqi prime minister nuri al - maliki and president bush signed a "declaration of principles," expressing the decisions of both governments to work , by july 2008 , to codify a long - term bilateral "strategic framework agreement" intended to replace the current u.n. mandate .

the roles of u.s. and coalition forces in combat operations and the training of iraqi security forces are likely to be key topics in the strategic framework negotiations .

in particular , most observers agree that training is one of the activities most likely to be continued under any continuing u.s. or coalition presence in iraq .

the outcome of the u.s. - iraqi negotiations is likely to shape the size , structure , and focus of the u.s. military presence in iraq .

any changes to the u.s. mission , and any new iraqi government positions concerning the roles of coalition forces , could easily affect both the need for and the perceived legitimacy of , foreign contributions to stabilization operations and training efforts .

this report characterizes foreign contributions to iraq in terms of personnel and resources , including trends over time , based on best - available information .

the first section addresses financial contributions , including pledged grants and loans , and related debt relief .

the second section describes troop contributions to the multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) .

the third section addresses contributions to the iraqi security forces training effort .

these sections are followed by a detailed chart that includes both financial and personnel contributions , and by a chronology of significant coalition - related events .

the report will be updated as events warrant .

in october 2003 , the world bank and united nations development group ( undg ) , in conjunction with the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) , estimated that the potential cost of iraqi reconstruction needs would amount to $55 billion over a four year period from 2003 through 2007 .

this figure reflected the sum total of a joint world bank / undg needs assessment of 14 sectors of the iraqi government and economy — $36 billion — combined with a $19.4 billion coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) projection for security , oil , and other sectors not covered by the world bank / undg assessment .

these amounts , calculated in mid - 2003 , did not take into account the significant costs created by the instability and security disruptions that have occurred since that time .

shortly after the passage of un security council resolution 1511 in october 2003 , an international donors' conference for iraq was held in madrid , spain .

at that event , members of the international community , excluding the united states , pledged approximately $13.5 billion for reconstruction assistance to iraq , including roughly $10 billion in loan pledges .

as of october 2007 , roughly $2.9 billion in additional pledges had been made , bringing the pledge total to approximately $16.4 billion .

loan pledges represent $10.8 billion of this total , and iraq has accepted $2.2 billion in pledged loan assistance to date .

of the $5.6 billion pledged for grants , iraq has received $4.8 billion .

according to the international reconstruction fund facility for iraq , $1.766 billion of the pledged assistance has been channeled to the world bank iraq trust fund and undg iraq trust fund .

the undg fund had committed close to $800 million for planned projects by the end of october 2007 .

to date , the united states congress has appropriated nearly $43 billion for reconstruction programs in iraq .

many observers credit persistent security problems and iraqi government capacity deficiencies for the slow rate at which pledged international assistance has been committed and disbursed .

iraq's ministry of planning has established a donor assistance database "to record donor assistance , analyze donor activities , and monitor the implementation of donor - funded projects. .

iraq also has pursued debt relief through negotiations with members of the paris club as well as in the context of the international compact with iraq ( ici ) , which was launched at a summit in sharm al - sheikh , egypt , on may 3 , 2007 .

as of december 2006 , iraq's government owed its international creditors $89 billion .

during 2007 , roughly $28.9 billion in further loan forgiveness has been pledged .

four countries participated directly and openly in the major combat phase of operations in iraq: the united states , the united kingdom , australia and poland .

dozens of other coalition partners sent troops to iraq in the immediate aftermath of major combat operations , and total troop contribution numbers reached their zenith in the early stabilization phase .

the u.s. - led military command in iraq has been known since may 2004 as the multinational force - iraq ( mnf - i ) , and is headed by u.s. gen. david petraeus .

more recently , coalition troop contribution numbers have experienced an overall decline .

some countries have withdrawn their contingents altogether , while others — in a common pattern — have withdrawn the bulk of their contingent , leaving a relatively small number of staff officers at headquarters within mnf - i .

since the fall of saddam hussein's regime , coalition forces in iraq have made contributions to efforts to train and equip iraqi security forces .

most pre - war planning assumed that at the end of major combat , iraqi police forces would be available to help provide security , and some iraqi military forces would be available for recall .

instead , members of local police forces largely "went to ground" and disappeared .

the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) , the executive authority for iraq at the time , dissolved all iraqi military services .

initial development of new iraqi police and military forces took place under cpa auspices .

meanwhile , in september 2003 , as a stop - gap measure , coalition forces , by cpa direction , launched the formation of the iraqi civil defense corps , a "security and emergency service agency for iraq. .

