small business owners in general have long been praised within the united states for their contributions to the economy , especially their impact on job growth and innovation .

thus , the federal income tax burden on small firms and its effects on their formation and growth have been perennial issues for congress .

many regard small firms as a vital source of job creation and technological innovation .

small firms have also been celebrated as effective vehicles for advancing the economic status of minorities , immigrants , and women .

at the same time , some view the federal income tax as an obstacle to the formation and growth of small firms , while others see it as a policy tool for boosting their rates of formation and growth .

going back to the 111 th congress , seven bills have been enacted that established completely new tax preferences for small firms and extended ( and in some cases modified ) existing ones: american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-240 ) , tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) , american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) , tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) , protecting americans from tax hikes act of 2015 ( division q of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , and p.l .

115-97 ( the tax revision act of 2017 ) .

small business tax benefits ( or preferences ) raise three potential policy issues for congress .

first , what is the appropriate definition of a small business in the context of public policy ? .

two considerations seem paramount in finding an answer to that question: ( 1 ) choosing the appropriate size measure ( eg , employment , assets , or receipts ) and ( 2 ) determining whether that measure should apply to all small business tax benefits , as well as other forms of federal assistance for small businesses .

second , is there a sound economic justification for supporting small firms ? .

if no such rationale can be found , then government support for small businesses may do more harm than good by distorting the allocation of domestic economic resources .

third , are tax benefits the most cost - effective way for the federal government to assist small firms ? .

small business tax preferences entail the following economic costs: ( 1 ) the foregone revenue and any interest charges from federal borrowing to offset that revenue loss , ( 2 ) the resources required to comply with the rules governing the use of the tax benefits and to enforce compliance with those rules , and ( 3 ) the opportunity cost of the foregone revenue and the resources devoted to tax compliance and enforcement .

other policy options for assisting small firms entail similar costs .

this report is intended to shed light on the first two issues by identifying the main nonagricultural small business tax preferences , determining the foregone revenue associated with them , and examining the economic arguments for and against them .

an assessment of the relative cost - effectiveness of existing federal small business tax benefits is beyond the scope of the report .

the report begins by exploring the challenges associated with crafting a uniform definition of a small business for public policy purposes .

it then describes existing small business tax preferences and reviews what is known about the economic contributions of small firms in general .

it concludes with a discussion of the arguments for and against government policies to support small businesses .

in principle , all business income is subject to federal taxation , but the reality is more complicated , as the federal tax code does not treat all business income equally .

the tax burden on business income depends on several factors .

one is whether or not a firm is organized for tax purposes as a c corporation or as a passthrough entity ( i.e. , partnerships ( including limited liability companies , or llcs ) , s corporations , and sole proprietorships ) .

corporate profits are taxed twice: once at the firm level and a second time at the shareholder level when any profits are distributed as dividends or long - term capital gains .

by contrast , the net income of passthrough entities is taxed only at the owner or shareholder level .

furthermore , the taxation of business income depends on whether or not the owner of a passthrough entity pays the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

corporations were also subject to an amt from 1987 to 2017 ; p.l .

115-97 repealed the tax , starting in 2018 .

passthrough business owners paying the amt may or may not be taxed at lower rates than they would be under the regular income tax .

firm size also plays a role in determining a company's federal tax burden .

some tax provisions offer benefits to smaller firms that are not available to larger firms .

there is no formal distinction between the taxation of small and large firms in the tax code .

rather , small business tax benefits are scattered throughout the sections of the code dealing with business taxation .

most come in the form of deductions , exclusions , exemptions , credits , deferrals , and preferential tax rates whose main effect is to reduce the cost of capital for investments and increase a firm's cash flow .

the federal tax benefits targeted at smaller firms with the broadest reach outside agriculture are discussed below .

excluded from the list are subsidies available only to small firms in particular industries , such as life insurance , banking , and energy production or distribution .

nor does the list include tax benefits that may be claimed by many small firms but are available to firms of all sizes , such as the section 41 research tax credit and the section 168 ( k ) 100% expensing allowance .

table 1 summarizes the key features of each of these tax benefits .

as a result of the enactment of h.r .

1 ( p.l .

115-97 ) in december 2017 , the current lineup of small business tax benefits differs somewhat from the 2017 lineup .

under previous tax law , the graduated corporate income tax ( whose rates ranged from 15% to 35% ) was considered a small business tax benefit .

p.l .

115-97 permanently replaced those rates with a single corporate tax rate of 21% , starting in 2018 .

the act repealed a second small business tax benefit from 2017: the rollover of gains from the sale of publicly traded securities into specialized small business investment companies under section 1044 .

in addition , by repealing the corporate amt , the act also did away with another small business tax benefit: an exemption under section 55 ( e ) from the amt for corporations whose average annual gross receipts did not exceed $5 million in their first three tax years and $7.5 million in each succeeding three - year period .

the current lineup makes no reference to the taxation of passthrough businesses .

some have argued that the tax rates that apply to this income should be considered a small business tax benefit when the returns to passthrough business investment are taxed at lower rates than the returns to corporate business investment .

such a difference existed under the tax law that was in effect in 2017 .

p.l .

115-97 reversed this difference by setting a corporate tax rate that is 8.6 percentage points lower than the top effective income tax rate for passthrough entities: 29.6% .

there is another reason why it is inadvisable to regard the taxation of passthrough business income in general as a small business tax preference , regardless of the differences between corporate and noncorporate income tax rates .

among c corporations and passthrough entities , there are very small and very large companies , and they differ in their economic roles .

according to data from the internal revenue service , in 2014 , for example , relatively small companies ( those with $500,000 or less in receipts ) accounted for 68% of c corporation tax returns , 70% of s corporation returns , 89% of partnership returns , and 98% of sole proprietorship returns .

by contrast , relatively large companies ( those with more than $50 million in receipts ) represented 91% of total c corporation receipts , 40% of s corporation receipts , and 71% of partnership receipts in 2014 ; large firms made only a small contribution to total sole proprietorship receipts .

these figures show that not all passthrough firms are small and not all c corporations are large , regardless of the size standard .

it is not known how much revenue is lost because of tax benefits shown in table 1 .

nevertheless , a recent estimate by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) indicates that their revenue cost could exceed $17 billion in fy2018 ( see table 1 ) .

to put this amount in the proper context , the budget for the sba in fy2018 totals $887 million .

available data indicate that small firms play a major role , on the whole , in domestic economic activity .

for example , according to figures published by the sba , firms with fewer than 500 employees accounted for 99.9% of all domestic firms , 99.7% of firms with paid employees , and 48.0% of private - sector employment in 2013 .

these indicators of economic importance raise the question of why government assistance is needed when small firms typically account for substantial shares of employment and output and make important contributions to technological innovation over time .

the answer to this question is no trivial matter .

small firms could receive more than $17 billion in federal tax benefits in fy2018 — in addition to the subsidies they obtain through other federal programs targeted at small businesses .

as with any public expenditure , this support carries an opportunity cost in the form of alternative uses of these funds and their potential economic effects .

if it turns out that there is no sound economic justification for existing federal government support for small business , then one could argue that the u.s. economy would be better off using the funds going to small firms for other purposes with significant economic effects , such as investing in infrastructure expansion and modernization , research and development , or deficit reduction .

this section describes the chief arguments for and against government support ( including tax preferences ) for small businesses .

available economic data indicate that small firms make significant contributions to the u.s. economy .

the magnitude of the contributions depends , of course , on how a small firm is defined .

if a small business is defined as a firm with fewer than 500 full - time employees , then it can be said that small businesses account for a majority of private - sector jobs and about half of private - sector output , generate many technological innovations , and serve as agents of renewal and structural change in a variety of industries .

but if the threshold were set at fewer than 100 employees , the small business shares of output and employment would be smaller .

the economic contributions of small businesses , however defined , appear to explain part of the longstanding bipartisan support in congress for government programs to assist small firms .

some of this support is in the form of tax preferences ( or expenditures ) available to many small firms .

the combined revenue loss from these expenditures may top $17 billion in fy2018 ( see table 1 ) .

current federal small business tax benefits serve one or more of the following four purposes: ( 1 ) improving access to equity capital , ( 2 ) simplifying tax compliance , ( 3 ) promoting capital investments , and ( 4 ) achieving other policy objectives .

supporters of these benefits and other federal programs to support small businesses argue that they are needed to eliminate or reduce barriers to the birth , survival , and growth of small businesses , which , in their view , make invaluable contributions to the growth and transformation of the u.s. economy .

they point to the vital role played by small firms in job creation and in technological innovation as proof of the special economic importance of small businesses in general .

the biggest barrier , they say , is the difficulties many small start - up companies experience in raising the financial capital they require to fund operations , including r&d .

yet the findings of some studies and recent changes in federal policy toward start - up firm financing raise questions about the accuracy of this economic rationale .

in particular , they suggest that current federal support for small businesses may be less effective , on the whole , than it could be in promoting faster job growth and increased investment in such firms .

a 2010 study by economists john haltiwanger , ron jarmin , and javier miranda from the u.s. census bureau used data from the census bureau business dynamics statistics and longitudinal database to test the widely held belief that net job growth over time is negatively related to firm size .

when the researchers did not consider the ages of the firms , the results indicated that smaller firms had faster rates of net job growth than larger firms from 1976 to 2005 .

but when they considered the age of firms , that relationship fell apart .

what emerged instead was a strong correlation between gross and net job creation and the age of firms .

more specifically , the results showed that start - ups had disproportionately high rates of both job creation and job destruction over the first 10 years of their existence .

a 2011 study by economists erik hurst and benjamin pugsley , using a database composed of individuals in the process of starting a business , found that most small business owners are not the entrepreneurs that economic models and lawmakers tout as the prolific job creators and intrepid innovators who open up new pathways for economic growth by accelerating the demise of older technologies .

instead , their research showed that relatively few small firms bring new ideas to the marketplace , and that most small business owners are content to sell existing products or services to buyers in local established markets .

hurst and pugsley also discovered that relatively few small business owners have a strong desire to grow large and innovate .

this disposition was consistent with the main characteristics of the industries in which the majority of small businesses operated: skilled craftsmen , lawyers , real estate agents , doctors , small shop owners , and restaurateurs .

it is also consistent with another key finding by hurst and pugsley: for about half the people who started a new business in 2004 , the primary motivations were nonpecuniary , especially being one's own boss and having flexible work hours .

the findings from the two studies raise questions about the justification for current federal policy toward small businesses .

specifically , the findings suggest that most of the job growth and technological innovation by small firms is likely to come from the activities of a relatively small number of new companies .

therefore , congress may consider whether new ways to target federal support at small start - up companies would help more of them raise financial capital .

identifying these companies is itself a significant challenge for public policy .

hurst and pugsley suggested as one option having the sba work with venture capitalists to find new entrepreneurial small firms that might benefit from early - stage federal financial assistance .

they also maintained that a better understanding of the costs and benefits of current federal support for small businesses may help lawmakers determine which current programs address the needs of those firms and which should be jettisoned as unnecessary and ineffective .

most economists believe that departures from uniform or neutral taxation of the returns to capital are warranted only to correct identifiable market failures .

this raises the question of whether existing federal government support for small firms is intended to remedy any market failure .

for example , in light of the contributions of start - up firms to employment growth and technological innovation , one might argue that too few such firms are being formed , largely because of barriers in debt and equity markets to small business startup financing .

is there evidence that too few small entrepreneurial firms are being formed ? .

imperfections in capital markets arguably prevent some individuals from getting the funds they need to start a new business and grow it .

this can happen for a variety of reasons , including asymmetric information between aspiring entrepreneurs and lenders or investors , and excessive caution on the part of lenders and investors .

a 2010 study by alicia m. robb and david t. robinson of the financing choices of firms in their first year of business indicated that most of the firms in their sample relied much more on external debt than family and friends to obtain start - up capital .

they found that the start - up capital for over 80% of those firms was split evenly between bank debt and owner equity .

the findings suggested that well - functioning credit markets are critical to the formation and success of new small firms .

the federal government is using several measures to improve access to capital for new businesses , including sba loan guarantees , tax preferences for investment in small startup firms and business startup costs , and the recent dismantling of regulatory obstacles to using a method of raising equity capital known as "crowdfunding. .

under this method , aspiring small business owners can raise small amounts of money from a large pool of investors , usually through the internet , without running afoul of federal securities laws .

congress might consider whether additional measures could accelerate the rate of new entrepreneurial business formation and growth .

