the united states and europe share a long and intertwined history .

 ( 1 ) u.s. - european political,security , and economic relations that today comprise the broad transatlantic relationship have theirmodern origins in post - world war ii efforts to deter the soviet threat and bring security to europe .

nato , which was created in 1949 , and the european union ( eu ) , the latest stage in a process ofeuropean integration begun officially in 1952 , are the two main pillars upon which the transatlanticrelationship still rests .

nato was founded upon a shared commitment to protect common valuesof democracy , individual liberty , and the rule of law ; in practice , it sought to do this by providingcollective defense against soviet expansion through a mutual security guarantee for the united statesand its european allies .

the european integration project was meant to promote peace , politicalstability , and economic prosperity in europe by entrenching democratic systems and free markets .

the u.s. congress and successive u.s .

administrations have strongly supported both natoand the eu , believing that both organizations have helped foster democracy , reliable military allies,and strong trading partners .

the united states also views the organization for security andcooperation in europe ( osce ) as an important transatlantic forum for promoting democracy andhuman rights both in europe and in europe's wider neighborhood , including russia , ukraine,belarus , and the countries of the caucasus and central asia .

the united states and europeannations also share membership in other major international organizations such as the world tradeorganization ( wto ) and the united nations .

since the end of the cold war , both nato and the eu have evolved along with europe'schanged strategic landscape .

while nato's collective defense guarantee remains at the core of thealliance , members have also sought to redefine its mission as new security challenges have emergedon europe's periphery and beyond .

at the same time , eu members have moved beyond economicintegration and have taken steps toward political integration with decisions to develop a commonforeign policy and a defense arm .

both organizations have also enlarged in recent years toencompass many central and east european states , bringing the number of nato and eu membersto 26 and 25 respectively .

the united states was a key proponent of nato expansion and a firmbacker of eu enlargement , viewing these twin efforts as serving u.s. interests by consolidating a"europe whole and free , at peace with itself and with the world. .

meanwhile , the u.s. - european economic relationship has continued to grow .

the unitedstates and the eu share the largest trade and investment relationship in the world .

annual two - wayflows of goods , services , and foreign direct investment exceed $1.1 trillion .

the total stock oftwo - way direct investment is estimated to be over $1.6 trillion , making this huge investment positionperhaps the most significant aspect of the relationship .

although some prominent u.s. - eu tradedisputes exist , the vast portion of this bilateral economic relationship is harmonious .

some analystsestimate that trade tensions involve only 1-2% of transatlantic commerce .

 ( 2 ) despite the shared history and close economic ties , the transatlantic partnership has beenfundamentally challenged in recent years .

the september 11 terrorist attacks on the united statesprompted an initial display of transatlantic solidarity , but much of the goodwill has since dissipatedas numerous trade and foreign policy disputes have emerged .

the crisis over iraq is most notable,but the list of disagreements is wide and varied .

although europeans are not monolithic in theirviews , most states - - including those such as the united kingdom , spain , italy , and poland thatsupported the u.s. intervention in iraq - - object to at least some elements of u.s. policy on a rangeof issues , including the israeli - palestinian conflict , the treatment of al qaeda prisoners atguantã¡namo bay and the u.s. practice of rendition , missile defense , genetically - modified food , andthe u.n. kyoto protocol on climate change .

the bush administration says it will make mendingtransatlantic relations - - in both nato and the eu - - a priority in its second term .

nevertheless , a debate is reemerging in policymaking and academic circles on the value andpurpose of the u.s. - european relationship .

while many would argue that much still binds the twosides of the atlantic , others worry that the relationship is in trouble .

some u.s. critics question theextent to which the european allies share u.s. threat perceptions of the challenges posed by islamistterrorism or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

even if the allies agree onthe necessity of tackling such problems , u.s. and european tactics are often at odds ; europeangovernments remains firmly wedded to managing international crises through multilateralinstitutions , while the united states views this approach as only one option .

the bushadministration and members of congress are also concerned that deficient european militarycapabilities hinder the allies' ability to share the security burden with the united states .

otherssuggest that u.s. actions in the prosecution of the war on terrorism and in iraq have prompted someto question whether the two sides of the atlantic still share enough values and interests to make thetransatlantic partnership work .

this report assesses the present state of the u.s. - europeanrelationship and reasons for current frictions , and provides , for the purpose of analysis , a spectrumof options for u.s. policymakers in considering the future shape of the political and strategicdimensions of the transatlantic partnership .

the constellation of reasons outlined above for current u.s. - european frictions and arelationship in flux are also driving the emerging debate on the future of the transatlantic partnership .

the question arises , however , what forces might transform this theoretical debate into a true policydebate , and prompt serious and sustained u.s. consideration about reorganizing or reinvigoratingthe transatlantic relationship .

some suggest that it may simply be a natural evolution , followingfrom the structural changes since the end of the cold war and the events of september 11 .

othersposit that much will depend on the perspective and vision of leaders on both sides of the atlantic,and the degree to which they are supported by their respective legislatures and publics in embarkingon a new course .

the extent to which each side perceives the need for a new course will also likelydepend on future events , in particular , if another catastrophic terrorist event occurs .

for example,some suggest that a terrorist attack in europe similar in scale to the 2001 attacks on the united statesmight prompt a change in european thinking about the use of force and help bridge certaintransatlantic gaps .

other pundits , including many critics of the bush administration , say a drivingforce may be the decline in u.s. influence in the world and the growing realization that the unitedstates cannot manage all aspects of all conflicts alone .

for the purpose of analysis , the following five possible options offer different scenarios forthe future transatlantic partnership ; they focus primarily on the political and strategic dimensions ofu.s. - european relations .

despite some trade and economic frictions , it would be nearly impossibleand in neither side's interest to actively pursue less robust trade and investment relations .

thus , theoptions below touch upon the economic aspects of the partnership only to the extent that they haveimplications for transatlantic trade and investment .

additionally , the options are meant to beillustrative guideposts in considering the future direction of u.s. - european relations , rather thandefinitive , exhaustive predictions or stark choices .

they should be viewed along a spectrum ; thefuture transatlantic relationship , in reality , will likely evolve over time and fall somewhere betweenany two given options , or combine different elements from more than one scenario .

although these selected options are presented as choices for the united states , the futureshape of the u.s. - european relationship is not solely a u.s. decision .

much will also depend onoutside circumstances , european assessments about europe's new strategic reality and the value ofits partnership with the united states , as well as on the eu's evolution and its future ambitions .

u.s. - european security and economic relations represent areas of long - standingcongressional interest .

many members of congress share the overarching goal of successiveadministrations of a "europe whole and free. .

traditional congressional concerns have focusedmostly on the degree to which the european allies are willing and able to share the security burdenwith the united states .

members of congress have strongly supported the two most recent roundsof nato enlargement in 1998 and 2003 as a means to promote european stability and bolsterdemocracy in central and eastern europe ; they also welcomed the eu's enlargement on may 1,2004 .

congress has been actively engaged in the evolving nato - eu relationship , and hassupported eu ambitions to build a defense arm as a way to improve european defense capabilities,provided that the eu project remains tied to nato .

members of congress have also encouragedeu efforts to enhance its counterterrorism capabilities and to improve cooperation in the police andjudicial fields with the united states since september 11 .

issues in the u.s. - eu trade andinvestment relationship - - such as aircraft subsidies , genetically - modified food products , the eu'scommon agricultural policy ( cap ) , e - commerce and data privacy , and harmonizing regulatory andcompetition policies - - also frequently occupy the attention of u.s. lawmakers .

in the aftermath of the transatlantic crisis over iraq , some members have also taken aninterest in the broader shape of the future transatlantic relationship .

hearings on this issue were heldin 2003 , 2004 , and most recently in february 2005 .

 ( 33 ) on november 5 , 2003 , the house passed h.res .

390 ( introduced by representative doug bereuter , october 2 , 2003 ) recognizing the continuedimportance of the transatlantic relationship and reaffirming the need for a continued and meaningfuldialogue between the united states and europe ; on may 11 , 2004 , the house passed h.res .

577 ( introduced by representative doug bereuter , march 25 , 2004 ) celebratingthe 50th anniversary of u.s. - eu relations and encouraging enhanced u.s. - eu strategic discussionsand international cooperation .

in considering any significant reorganization of the transatlantic relationship , ensuringcontinued and close u.s. - european economic relations and counterterrorism cooperation wouldlikely be two areas of concern for congress .

members would also likely want assurances that anyefforts to enhance the transatlantic partnership , especially those that may entail u.s. politicalcompromises , would result in more robust european military capabilities and a strengthenedeuropean commitment to work with the united states to tackle global challenges .

many members,in any "new bargain" approach , may desire a european recognition that a transatlantic "consensus"provides sufficient "legitimization" and a u.n. mandate should not be a prerequisite for action ; congress would probably resist any efforts to make u.s. soldiers subject to the internationalcriminal court's proceedings .

members of congress could play a role in shaping the transatlantic debate over the future ofu.s. - european relations through discussions with european counterparts in the existing natoparliamentary assembly , the osce parliamentary assembly , and the u.s. congress - europeanparliament transatlantic legislator's dialogue ( tld ) .

on february 9 , 2005 , representative jo anndavis introduced h.res .

77 recognizing the 10th anniversary of the new transatlanticagenda , acknowledging the continued importance or the transatlantic partnership , and promotingnew initiatives to strengthen the partnership , including by enhancing the dialogue between the u.s.congress and the european parliament through the tld .

in may 2005 , members of congressestablished a congressional caucus on the eu to promote a better understanding of the eu andincrease dialogue and other exchanges with a wide range of eu officials .

on june 20 , 2005 , senatorrobert bennett introduced s.res .

178 on the occasion of the u.s. - eu summithighlighting the importance of u.s. - eu cooperation and calling for expanded political and securitydialogue between the congress , the european parliament , and the eu more broadly ; s.res.178 passed the senate on the same day by unanimous consent .

in addition , several congressional caucuses focus on bilateral u.s. - european relations anddifferent aspects of the broader transatlantic relationship ; examples include the congressional frenchcaucus , the congressional caucus on central and eastern europe , and the congressional caucuson turkey and turkish americans .

members of the u.s. senate and house of representatives arealso active on the commission on security and cooperation in europe that monitors and encouragescompliance with osce political and human rights commitments .

such forums may provide usefulopportunities for enhancing transatlantic dialogue on where the u.s. - european relationship stands,in what ways u.s. - european interests coincide or diverge , and what direction should be pursued inthe future in order to continue to promote security and prosperity on both sides of the atlantic .

appendix a: membership in nato and the europeanunion appendix b: spectrum of possible options for u.s. policy toward europ .

