medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care .

medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered .

historically , eligibility was generally limited to low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and people with disabilities ; however , recent changes will soon require coverage for individuals under the age of 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level .

the federal government pays a share of each state's medicaid costs ; states must contribute the remaining portion in order to qualify for federal funds .

this report describes the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) calculation used to reimburse states for most medicaid expenditures , and it lists the statutory exceptions to the regular fmap rate .

in addition , this report discusses other fmap - related issues , including state fiscal conditions , the temporary fmap rate increase , the exclusion of certain employer contributions , fmap changes in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) , the medicaid proposal included in the house budget resolution , and other federal deficit reduction proposals .

the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

an enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for both services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip .

when a state expands its medicaid program using chip funds ( rather than medicaid funds ) , the enhanced fmap rate applies and is paid out of the state's federal allotment .

the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% .

the fmap rate is also used in determining the phased - down state contribution ( "clawback" ) for medicare part d , the federal share of certain child support enforcement collections , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds , a portion of the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , and foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act .

on april 5 , 2011 , house budget committee chairman paul ryan released the chairman's mark of the fy2012 house budget resolution together with his report entitled the path to prosperity: restoring america's promise , which outlines his budgetary objectives .

the house budget committee considered and amended the chairman's mark on april 6 , 2011 , and voted to report the budget resolution to the full house .

h.con.res .

34 was introduced in the house april 11 , 2011 , and was accompanied by the committee report ( h.rept .

112-58 ) .

on april 15 , 2011 , the house passed h.con.res .

34 by a vote of 235-193 .

the committee report includes illustrative examples to achieve budget savings , such as a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs and the repeal of many of the provisions in aca .

one of the proposals would restructure the medicaid program from an individual entitlement to a block grant , starting in fy2013 .

according to cbo's long - term analysis of the proposal , when compared to long - term estimates of current law , federal spending for medicaid would be 35% lower in fy2022 and 49% lower in fy2030 .

proponents of the block grant model suggest that this design would make federal medicaid spending more predictable and provide states with stronger incentives to control the cost of their medicaid programs .

additionally , this design could relieve some of the cost burden to states by removing certain federal medicaid requirements .

however , this proposal would shift the responsibility for the growth in medicaid spending over the federal block grant amount to states .

according to cbo , the magnitude of the federal medicaid spending reductions under this proposal would make it difficult for states to maintain their current medicaid programs .

as a result , states would have to weigh the impact of maintaining current medicaid service levels against other state priorities for spending .

they could choose to constrain medicaid expenditures by reducing provider reimbursement rates , limiting benefit packages , or restricting eligibility .

these types of programmatic changes could also impact access to and the quality of medical care for medicaid enrollees .

in a typical year , the federal government funds roughly 57% of the total cost for medicaid , and federal medicaid expenditures account for almost 8% of all federal spending .

in fy2012 , federal medicaid payments to states are estimated to amount to $260 billion .

federal medicaid payments are anticipated to grow significantly beginning in fy2014 due to the expansion of medicaid eligibility provided in the aca .

as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , federal medicaid expenditures are expected to increase from about 1.9% of gdp in fy2011 to 2.5% of gdp in fy2021 .

as a result , controlling federal medicaid spending has been a focus of federal deficit reduction proposals , such as the house budget resolution ( discussed above ) and the national commission on fiscal reform .

the national commission on fiscal reform final report included savings from medicaid totaling $58 billion over 10 years .

the savings came from eliminating states' ability to fund medicaid through provider taxes , covering dual - eligibles under managed care arrangements , and giving states additional fiscal responsibility for administrative costs .

additionally , in february 2012 , the president's fy2013 budget was released , and the budget proposal included a number of medicaid provisions estimated by the administration to reduce federal medicaid expenditures by $55.7 billion over the next 10 years .

the medicaid provisions include limiting states' ability to utilize provider taxes in financing the state share of medicaid expenditures ; replacing the current federal medicaid financing structure with a blended fmap rate ; limiting medicaid reimbursement of durable medical equipment ; re - basing medicaid disproportion share hospital ( dsh ) payments ; expanding state flexibility to provide benchmark benefit packages ; extending transitional medical assistance ; and establishing hold harmless for federal poverty guidelines .

in addition , the president's fy2013 budget includes a number of program integrity proposals that are estimated to reduce federal medicaid expenditures by $3.2 billion from fy2013 through fy2022 .

to the extent federal medicaid expenditures are reduced , in most cases , states would need to increase the state share of medicaid to maintain their current medicaid programs .

this will be difficult for states that are already struggling to fund their current share of medicaid expenditures , due to the adverse impacts of the recession on state budgets .

faced with this situation , states would have to weigh the impact of maintaining current medicaid service levels against other state spending priorities .

this appendix includes three tables showing the state - by - state regular and temporary increase fmap rates for various fiscal years .

table a - 1 shows regular fy2005-fy2013 fmap rates calculated according to the formula described in the text of the report ( see " how fmap rates are calculated " ) .

table a - 2 and table a - 3 show the temporary fmap rate increase provided under arra , and extended by p.l .

111-226 , for fy2009 , fy2010 , and the first three quarters of fy2011 .

the temporary fmap rate increased ended june 30 , 2011 , so the third quarter of fy2011 was the last quarter the temporary fmap rate increase was available to states .

table a - 1 shows regular fmap rates for fy2013 which range from 50% ( 14 states ) to 73% ( mississippi ) .

from fy2012 to fy2013 , regular fmap rates will decrease for 24 states , increase for 12 states , and remain the same for 14 states and the district of columbia .

all of the 14 states for which the fmap rates do not change have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and the fmap rate for the district of columbia is statutorily set at 70% .

the quarterly temporary fmap rate increases for fy2009 , fy2010 , and fy2011 are shown in table a - 2 .

in fy2009 , the lowest fmap rate any state or the district of columbia received in any quarter was 56.20% and the highest fmap rate was 84.24% .

then , in fy2010 , the lowest fmap rate any state or the district of columbia received in any quarter was 61.12% and the highest fmap rate was 84.86% .

in total , the temporary increase in fmap rates provided states and the district of columbia with an additional $32.5 billion in fy2009 and $42.2 billion in fy2010 .

in fy2011 , the temporary fmap rate increase phased down each quarter from the original arra levels in the first quarter to regular fmap rates in the fourth quarter of fy2011 ( the temporary fmap rate increase ended on june 30 , 2011 ) .

mississippi received the highest fmap rate in all four quarters of fy2011 , with 84.86% in the first quarter , 82.03% in the second quarter , 80.15% in the third quarter , and 74.73% in the fourth quarter .

eleven states received the lowest fmap rates for all four quarters of fy2011 , with 61.59% in the first quarter , 58.77% in the second quarter , 56.88% in the third quarter , and 50.00% in the fourth quarter .

as shown in table a - 3 , in fy2011 , 27 states are held harmless from any decline in their regular fmap rates .

also shown in the table , for the third quarter of fy2011 , 43 states and the district of columbia were in the highest tier for the unemployment adjustment .

north dakota was the only state that did not receive an unemployment adjustment because its unemployment rate did not exceed its lowest unemployment rate ( for any three month period since january 1 , 2006 ) by at least 1.5 percentage points .

