administrations have frequently asked congress to give the department of defense flexibilityin allocating funds to cover costs of military operations .

most recently , on may 12 , 2004 , the whitehouse requested $25 billion in a "contingent emergency reserve fund" for fy2005 to cover costs ofoperations in iraq and afghanistan during part of the fiscal year .

although the request setsillustrative ceilings by appropriation accounts within the total , as written , dod could transfer the$25 billion for dod's expenses for iraq and afghanistan to any appropriation account and in anyamount after notifying congress five days in advance .

the issue for congress is to determine howmuch flexibility the defense department may need to carry out operations congress intends tosupport , while also ensuring that funds are used in amounts and for purposes that congress hasapproved .

faced with the challenge of balancing dod's need for flexibility to respond to the uncertainties of military operations with congressional oversight responsibilities , congress has responded tosimilar requests for dod in different ways in recent years .

before the september 11 , 2001 , terroristattacks , congress generally balked at proposals to provide blanket authority for the defensedepartment to finance military operations without specific , advance congressional approval .

since9 / 11 , however , congress has been more willing to provide the administration with considerableflexibility to allocate funds for the "global war on terrorism" without detailed congressionaloversight .

since then , congress has continued to provide the administration with fundingflexibility , but it has gradually pared back the amount of funding placed in flexible accounts , and ithas also imposed a variety of reporting requirements .

this report ( 1 ) briefly reviews the administration's request for flexibility in the $25 billion contingent emergency reserve fund that it has requested forfy2005 ; ( 2 ) discusses options congress has to provide flexible funding for military operations based on precedents discussed in more detail later in thereport ; ( 3 ) reviews standard peacetime procedures governing reprogramming of defense funds as a benchmark against which to assess flexibility congress hasoften provided for wartime or contingency operations ; ( 4 ) reviews congressional responses to administration requests for funding flexibility from the first persian gulf war in 1990 through post - 9 / 11 wartimeappropriations to date ; and ( 5 ) analyzes congressional action and current issues .

although congress has provided most of the dod funding requested by the administration for the "global war on terrorism," congress has not provided most of that funding in flexible accountsdespite administration requests .

of the $173 billion that the administration has requested for iraq,afghanistan and enhanced security for defense installations since the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , theadministration requested $104 billion in flexible funds and the remaining $69 billion in regularappropriation accounts .

in response , congress appropriated a total of about $165 billion including$40 billion in flexible accounts and $124 billion in regular accounts ( see appendix a ) .

the current request for $25 billion in a flexible account is larger than any amount that dod has received thus far .

since 1990 , dod has received between $2 billion and $14 billion in monies in any individual bill that can be moved after enactment for war and war - related funding , with theremainder of the funding placed in regular appropriation accounts .

 ( 1 ) in the most recent fy2004emergency supplemental , congress provided $2 billion in flexible funding requested by dod , orabout 3% of the total in the bill .

 ( see appendix a ) .

appendix a includes tables comparing the amounts that congress has provided for military operations since 9 / 11 in flexible spending accounts and in regular appropriations accounts .

appendix b provides a list of legislation with flexible accounts .

the discussion below and table 1 analyze the administration's request and congressional action on the fy2004 administration request .

both the authorization and appropriation bills rejectthe administration's request for broad discretion and set allocations for most of the $25 billionrequested , as well as require additional reporting of how funds are spent , with advance notificationof spending of unallocated funds and after - the - fact reporting of funds allocated in appropriationaccounts or titles .

congress is likely to vote on the conference version of the fy2005 dod appropriations bill , h.r .

4613 , before going on recess on july 26 , 2004 but is not likely to address thefy2005 dod authorization until after the recess .

see the section on congressional action belowfor an update of provisions on funding and monitoring of the $25 billion for iraq and afghanistanin the conference version of h.r .

4613 and a comparison of the house and senate versionof the authorization bills .

on may 12 , 2004 , the white house sent congress an amendment to its fy2005 budget request,asking congress to appropriate $25 billion as "contingent emergency funds" in the iraq freedomfund ( iff ) , a transfer account that congress established in the fy2003 emergency supplemental,to be available until expended ( see text in next section ) .

 ( 2 ) within the total in the iff , theadministration proposed the following illustrative ceilings by appropriation account: $14 billion for operation and maintenance , army ; $1 billion for operation and maintenance , navy ; $2 billion for operation and maintenance , marinecorps ; $1 billion for operation and maintenance , air force ; $2 billion for operation and maintenance , defense - wide ; and $5 billion for other appropriations or dod funds or classifiedprograms .

after consultation with the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , however , the secretary of defense could transfer funds to other accounts or to classified programs aslong as thedefense authorizing and appropriations committees were notified five days in advance .

if enacted , this language would give the secretary of defense complete discretion to transfer $25 billion among appropriation accounts to fund operations in iraq and afghanistan , or relatedactivities .

although the language sets illustrative ceilings by appropriations account within the $25billion total , the secretary of defense could alter those ceilings , with the approval of omb and fivedays after notifying the defense committees .

the language also provides that up to $5 billion ofappropriations could be transferred to any appropriation account or classified activity , presumablyincluding intelligence agencies .

the language also permits the secretary of defense to transfer anyfunds not needed back to the iff , to be available for subsequent retransfer .

there is no time limiton the availability of the funds .

once transferred , funds would be available for the same purposes and for the same periods of time as the accounts to which they were transferred , and these transfers would not count againstdod's overall annual limits on general transfer authority - - standard language for transfer accounts .

the request requires the white house to submit an official budget request to congress for the fundsand designate the funds as emergency .

other than the five - day notification to congressional defensecommittees before transferring funds , no reports to congress are required either before or aftertransfers take place ( see below ) .

the administration does not plan to submit any justificationmaterials for the $25 billion until that official budget request is submitted .

 ( 3 ) .

since 1990 , congress has periodically given dod discretion to allocate appropriated fundsafter enactment by placing funds in flexible transfer accounts , with the remaining funding providedin regular appropriations accounts .

for flexible transfer accounts , congress has sometimes requiredadvance notification for transfers ranging from 5 days to 15 days .

for funding in regular accounts,congress generally requires that dod follow standard reprogramming practices under which dodmust receive prior approval for transfers above specified thresholds .

based on precedents since 1990 , and going from least restrictive to most restrictive , congress could apply the following options to the fy2005 $25 billion budget amendment for iraq that iscurrently under consideration .

option 1: provide extensive flexibility as after 9 / 11 .

this option parallels the provisions governing the initial $20 billion providedin the emergency terrorism response supplemental passed on september 18 , 2001 , in theimmediate aftermath of the terrorist attacks ( p.l .

107-38 ) .

that measure required only that thepresident consult with the chairmen and ranking minority members of the appropriations committeesbefore transferring funds , that $10 billion of the amount could not be transferred until 15 days afternotifying the appropriations committees , and that the office of management and budget ( omb ) report on funding allocations quarterly to the appropriations committees .

option 2: split funding between a transfer account and regularappropriations with brief notification period .

this approach was followed , withsome variations , in the fy2003 iraq emergency supplemental ( p.l .

108-11 ) , and in the mainappropriation of supplemental funding for the first gulf war ( p.l .

102-28 ) .

both measures providedfunding in regular appropriations accounts for those expenses that could be predicted , but providedrelatively large amounts ( $10.0 billion to $11.0 billion in the fy2003 supplemental and $8 billionin the fy1991 desert storm supplemental ) in a flexible transfer account for less predictableexpenses .

both also required 5- or 7-day advance notification to the congressional defensecommittees for transfers from the flexible account and quarterly after - the - fact reporting to the fourdefense committees .

option 3: put most funds in regular accounts with longer notification and more extensive reporting .

this approach parallels some featuresof the persian gulf conflict supplemental authorization and personnel benefits act of fy1991 ( p.l .

102-25 ) and the fy2004 emergency supplemental ( p.l .

108-106 ) .

the fy2004 supplementalprovided just $2 billion of the $65 billion for the defense department in a flexible transfer accountwith the remainder in regular appropriations accounts .

both measures on the first persian gulf warrequired extensive reports on strategy , force levels , time lines , and monthly reporting on transfersand allied contributions .

recent supplementals have required quarterly reporting to the fourcongressional defense committees .

option 4: provide all funds in regular accounts with someflexibility , longer notification , and require planning assumptions .

congresscould provide additional general transfer authority and could create special higher reprogrammingthresholds that would allow dod to make changes to funding after enactment more easily .

fundingcategories could reflect current reporting on the costs of iraq , afghanistan and enhanced security fordefense installations ( operation noble eagle ) .

this also reflects some features of the fy2004emergency supplemental ( p.l .

108-106 ) , which provided most funds in regular appropriationsaccounts and provided $3 billion in general transfer authority .

legislative measures for the first gulfwar and recent legislation on contingencies required that dod provide its planning assumptions.reporting could be provided to the congress as a whole .

option 5: provide all funds in regular accounts with someflexibility , require longer notification , planning assumptions and extensivereporting .

under this approach , standard peacetime reprogramming restrictionswould apply , and dod would have to submit extensive , monthly reports on the cost and planningassumptions underlying costs in categories similar to current reporting on contingency and war costs,and provide 15-day advance notice of transfers to congress as a whole .

table 2 below summarizes flexible funding , notification , and reporting requirements enacted by congress for war , war - related , and contingency operations since 1990 , and standardreprogramming rules , all of which serve as the basis for the options above .

table 2 .

precedents for funding war , occupation and contingencies , fy1990-fy200 .

in providing flexibility for war and war - related spending , current restrictionsapplying to regular peacetime dod spending may serve as a baseline .

for mostfunds that are provided in regular appropriation bills , dod can move monies afterenactment but only within the bounds of restrictions that are established partly bystatute , partly by language in congressional reports on annual defense funding bills,and partly by understandings with congressional defense committees that arereflected in department of defense financial management regulations .

in general , dod must get prior approval from the congressional defense committees to move funds between accounts , and , for certain purposes and abovecertain threshold amounts , to change funding levels within appropriations accounts .

for other changes to funding levels within accounts , dod issues internalreprogramming reports .

since 1990 , congress has provided dod with substantial amounts of flexiblefunding - - ranging from $2 billion most recently to $14 billion in the first post 9 / 11supplemental - - using various special accounts , and has used a variety of tools foroversight of those funds , including prior notification of transfers ranging from 5 daysto 15 days and various after - the - fact reporting in varying levels of detail .

typically,administrations have requested broad discretion , which congress has rejected evenin the midst of combat operations as was the case during the first persian gulf war .

in the two and a half years since the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , thedepartment of defense ( dod ) has received $165 billion in supplemental funding forthe war and occupation of iraq and afghanistan and enhanced security for defenseinstallations ( referred to by dod as operation noble eagle ) .

the administrationrequested much of this funding for the "global war on terror" in flexible accounts,emphasizing the difficulties of predicting the cost of combat operations andoccupation costs .

amount of flexible funding in post 9 / 11 supplementals .

although congress has provided most of the dodfunding requested by the administration for the "global war on terrorism," congresshas not provided most of that funding in flexible accounts despite administrationrequests ( see table a1 ) .

of the $173 billion that the administration has requestedfor operations in iraq and afghanistan and for enhanced security for defenseinstallations since the 9 / 11 attacks , the administration requested $104 billion inflexible funds and the remaining $69 billion in regular appropriation accounts .

inresponse , congress appropriated $44 billion in flexible accounts and $127 billion inregular accounts .

table a1 .

extent of dod flexibility in supplementals since 9 / 11 attacks: funding amounts ( inbillions of dollars ) notes and sources: includes effects of later rescissions .

crs calculations based onrequests and enacted levels .

share of flexible funding in post 9 / 11 supplementals .

in previous supplementals , the administration requested that between 80% and 100% of dod's funding be provided in a flexiblefund ( see table a2 below ) .

while congress has generally provided the amount offunds requested , with the exception of the p.l .

107-38 , the supplemental passed inthe aftermath of the attacks , and the fy2002 emergency supplemental ( p.l.107-206 ) , congress , has not been willing to provide the degree of flexibilityrequested .

since then , congress has pared back dod's requests , providing about 20% in a flexible account in the fy2003 supplemental ( p.l .

108-11 ) and 3% in the fy2004supplemental ( p.l .

108-106 ) .

table a2 .

extent of dod flexibility insupplementals since 9 / 11 attacks: share of total funding ( aspercent of total ) notes and sources: includes effects of later rescissions .

crs calculations based onrequests and enacted levels .

p.l .

101-403 , october 1 , 1990 ( h.j.res .

655 ) making continuing appropriations for the fy1991 , supplemental appropriationsfor "operation desert shield" for the fy1990 , and for other purposes .

p.l .

102-25 , april 6 , 1991 ( s. 725 ) persian gulf conflict supplemental authorization and personnel benefits actof 1991 .

p.l .

102-28 , april 10 , 1991 ( h.r .

1282 ) making supplemental appropriations and transfers for "operation desertshield / desert storm" for the fiscal year ending september 30 , 1991 , and for otherpurposes .

p.l .

104-134 , april 26 , 1996 ( h.r .

3019 ) omnibus consolidated rescissions and appropriations act of 1996 .

p.l .

107-38 , september 18 , 2001 ( h.r .

2888 ) 2001 emergency supplemental appropriations act for recovery from andresponse to terrorist attacks on the united states .

p.l .

107-117 , january 10 , 2002 ( h.r .

3338 ) department of defense and emergency supplemental appropriations forrecovery from and response to terrorist attacks on the united states act , 2002 .

p.l .

107-206 , august 2 , 2002 ( h.r .

4775 ) 2002 supplemental appropriations act for further recovery from andresponse to terrorist attacks on the united states .

p.l .

107-248 , october 23 , 2002 ( h.r .

5010 ) department of defense appropriations act , 2003 .

p.l .

108-7 , february 20 , 2003 ( h.j.res .

2 ) consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 .

p.l .

108-11 , april 16 , 2003 ( h.r .

1559 ) emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act , 2003 .

p.l .

108-87 , september 30 , 2003 ( h.r .

2658 ) department of defense appropriations act , 2004 .

p.l .

108-106 , november 6 , 2003 ( h.r .

3289 ) emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense and for thereconstruction of iraq and afghanistan , 2004 .

