a commission to assess the threat from high altitude electromagnetic pulse ( emp commission ) was established by congress in fy2001 after several experts expressed concern that the u.s. critical infrastructure and military were vulnerable to emp attack .

on july 20 , 2008 , the commission presented a report to the house armed services committee ( hasc ) assessing the effects of an emp attack on u.s. critical national infrastructures .

the 2008 report contained analysis of results of tests for modern electronics and telecommunications equipment for public networks supported by the power grid and by temporary isolated power supplies , including cell phones , computer servers , and internet routers and switches .

the report also made recommendations for preparation , protection , and recovery of u.s. critical infrastructures from emp attack .

the commission reported that the ubiquitous dependency of society on the electrical power system , coupled with the emp's particular damage mechanisms , creates the possibility of long - term , catastrophic consequences for national security .

comparison was made to hurricane katrina in 2005 , where the protracted power blackout exhausted the limited fuel supplies for emergency generators .

however , in the case of an emp attack , a widespread collapse of the electric power grid could lead to cascading effects on interdependent infrastructures , possibly lasting weeks or months .

the commission stated , "should significant parts of the electrical power infrastructure be lost for any substantial period of time ... many people may ultimately die for lack of the basic elements necessary to sustain life in dense urban and suburban communities ... [and] the federal government does not today have sufficiently robust capabilities for reliably assessing and managing emp threats. .

at a prior hearing , on july 22 , 2004 , panel members from the emp commission stated that as u.s. military weapons and control systems become more complex , and as portions of the military's administrative communications systems continue to rely on the u.s. civilian infrastructure for support , they may be increasingly vulnerable to the effects of emp .

the consensus of the commission in 2004 was that a large - scale , high - altitude emp attack could possibly cause widespread damage to unprotected civilian and military electronic equipment for an extended period .

however , the consensus of the emp commission in 2008 was that the united states need not remain vulnerable to catastrophic consequences of an emp attack , and that the nation's vulnerability can be reasonably reduced by coordinated and focused effort between the private and public sectors .

the committee stated that the cost for improved security in the next three to five years would be modest , especially when compared with the costs associated with the war on terror and the value of the national infrastructures threatened .

the emp commission's reports in both 2004 and 2008 focused only on the effects of high altitude emp ( hemp ) , and not necessarily the effects high power microwave ( hpm ) devices , which are non - nuclear radio - frequency ( rf ) weapons that can also produce damaging emp , but with different characteristics and covering a smaller geographic area .

both types of emp are discussed below .

the widely published vulnerability of u.s. civilian and some military electronics to emp , along with technical accessibility and lower cost , could make smaller - scale hpm weapons attractive in the future as weapons for terrorist groups .

also , some observers argue that unless the united states openly describes how it is taking action to reduce emp vulnerabilities within critical infrastructures , perceived inaction will increase the likelihood that a rogue nation will seek to employ the asymmetric effects of hemp against our computer systems .

p.l .

110-181 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , requires the department of homeland security to coordinate efforts with the commission for work related to electromagnetic pulse attack on electricity infrastructure , and protection against such attack .

funding by provided by the department of defense to the commission for preparation and submission of the final report is limited to $5,600,000 .

the deadline for the submission of the final report of the commission has been extended to november 30 , 2008 .

crs report rl32114 , botnets , cybercrime , and cyberterrorism: vulnerabilities and policy issues for congress .

crs report rl32411 , network centric operations: background and oversight issues for congress .

crs report rs21528 , terrorist " dirty bombs " : a brief primer .

crs report ib92099 .

nuclear weapons: comprehensive test ban treaty .

