the bush administration notified congress on february 12 , 2004 , that it intends to begin free trade agreement ( fta ) negotiations with thailand .

this notification , which follows an october 19 , 2003 announcement by president bush and former thai prime minister thaskin of their agreement to launch negotiations , allows for talks to begin within 90 days or by mid - may 2004 , after required consultations with congress .

two negotiating sessions took place in 2004 , and a third was held april 4-8 , 2005 , in thailand .

the fourth and fifth sessions were held july 15 , 2005 , in montana , and september 26-30 , 2005 , in hawaii .

the sixth was held in thailand from january 10-13 , 2006 .

but thailand suspended negotiations on february 24 , 2006 , when it was decided that a new election would be held in april .

since the april election , no decision has been made yet to resume the negotiations due to ongoing political turmoil ( the april election was invalidated by the constitutional court and a new general election is to take place this fall ) .

in the notification letter sent to the speaker of the house and the senate majority leader , then - u.s. trade representative robert zoellick put forth an array of potential commercial and foreign policy gains that could be derived from the agreement .

at the same time , mr. zoellick alluded to sensitive issues that require attention: trade in automobiles , protection of intellectual property rights , and labor and environmental standards .

zoellick's letter states that an fta would be particularly beneficial to u.s. agricultural producers who have urged the administration to move forward , as well as to u.s. companies exporting industrial goods and services .

for agricultural producers , by eliminating or reducing thailand's high tariffs and other barriers , the fta offers the opportunity to significantly increase export sales to thailand .

in 2005 , thailand was the 16 th largest market for u.s. farm exports .

the administration also argued that an fta would help boost u.s. exports of goods and services in sectors such as information technology , telecommunications , financial services , audiovisual , automotive , and medical equipment .

in 2005 , u.s. companies exported to thailand $7.4 billion in goods and over $1 billion in services .

maintaining preferential access for u.s. investors in thailand is also a top priority for u.s. business .

given that thailand is a relatively small economy compared to the united states ( 1 / 100 th "the size" ) , the agreement by itself will have limited effects on the overall u.s. economy .

from the standpoint of u.s. foreign policy interests , the administration views the proposed fta as strengthening cooperation with thailand in bilateral , regional , and multilateral fora .

bilaterally , the fta is seen as strengthening thailand's position as a key military ally , particularly in the war on terrorism .

regionally , the fta is viewed as advancing president bush's enterprise for asean initiative ( eai ) .

the goal of the eai is to negotiate a network of bilateral trade agreements with the 10 members of asean .

multilaterally , thailand plays a key leadership role in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

an fta could encourage thailand to actively cooperate with the united states in supporting multilateral trade negotiations under the aegis of the doha development agenda , particularly in the area of agricultural liberalization .

as for thailand , similar broad economic and political calculations explain its interest in an fta .

in economic terms , thailand is very concerned that its exports to the united states have been losing market share in recent years to countries such as mexico and china .

by eliminating u.s. tariff and non - tariff barriers to thai exports , an fta could help increase the competitiveness and market share of thai products in the u.s. market .

thailand also does not want to be excluded from fta benefits the u.s. has negotiated with other countries , particularly the potential of an fta to increase u.s. investment in thailand .

modernization of the services economy and diffusion of higher levels of technology , know - how , and labor management skills are essential for the thai economy to advance beyond the competition from lower - wage emerging market economies such as china , vietnam , and laos .

in addition , a closer political and economic relationship with the united states could provide thailand with more leverage to play a larger role in southeast asia .

general opposition to the fta in both countries is expected from workers and companies in import - competing industries that bear the brunt of the adjustment costs of a trade agreement .

despite the welfare gains to society as a whole ( e.g .

more efficient resource allocation , lower priced imports , and greater selection of goods ) , those industries subject to increased competition face additional pressure to cut costs , wages , and prices .

some companies may not be able to withstand these pressure and may be forced out of business , accompanied by a loss of jobs .

under these circumstances , certain stakeholders , as a matter of self - interest , may oppose trade agreements that accelerate competition and structural changes in an economy .

specific opposition in thailand has arisen from stakeholders in the agricultural and services sectors .

given that close to 50 percent of the thai labor force is employed in agriculture , liberalization of this sector has been contentious .

similarly , in a number of services sectors , thai companies feel they are at a competitive disadvantage in opening up to u.s. competitors .

thailand's banking and financial services industry , in particular , is wary of further liberalization after the financial crisis of 1997 .

thai stakeholders are also particularly wary , given the high incidence of aids infections , in u.s. efforts to secure data exclusivity for patented pharmaceuticals .

in addition , a number of thai business interests reportedly are concerned over potential u.s. investment in newly privatized companies such as the electricity generating authority of thailand and the mass rapid transit authority .

opposition in the united states may arise from groups concerned about the impact of the trade agreement on labor and environmental standards .

often joined by anti - globalization activists , these interest groups question whether trade agreements enhance the social welfare of participating countries .

other issues such as transparency in government decision - making , human rights , and freedom of the press could also be raised .

increased market access for thai agricultural products such as rice and sugar , as well as a reduction of the 25% u.s. tariff on lightweight pick - up trucks , is already controversial .

in addition , thailand is a persistent opponent and critic of u.s. trade remedy laws , which many u.s. interests groups don't want to see weakened .

in short , competing viewpoints have surfaced regarding the desirability of an fta .

as in most ftas that the united states has negotiated , the distribution of gains and losses would depend on the details of the provisions .

as background for congressional oversight , this report examines thailand's economy and trade orientation , the scope and significance of the u.s. - thai commercial relationship , and the likely top issues in the negotiations .

the report concludes with a short summary of the congressional role and interest in the fta .

thailand was severely affected by the asian financial crisis , which hit the thai economy in july 1997 and subsequently affected several other east asian economies .

the economic crisis in thailand was characterized by a significant depreciation of its currency ( the baht ) , depletion of nearly all of thailand's foreign exchange reserves , a decline in the stock market , bankruptcies among a number of major thai banks and corporations , and a sharp deterioration of property prices .

the combination of these shocks led to a sharp economic downturn .

ten years prior to the 1997 crisis , thailand had been one of the world's fastest growing economies .

between 1990 and 1996 , gross domestic product ( gdp ) averaged 8.6% , fueled in large part by rapid export growth .

however , in 1998 , gdp fell by 10.5% while , exports and imports dropped by 6.7% and 33.0% , respectively , over 1997 levels ( see table 1 ) .

in addition , the unemployment rate rose from 3.2% in 1997 to 7.3% in 1998 , and living standards ( measured according to per capita gdp measured on a purchasing power parity basis ) , plummeted by 11% .

thailand's economy was stabilized by a $17.2 billion loan from the international monetary fund .

real gdp grew by 4.4% in 1999 and by 4.8% in 2000 , but slowed to 2.2% in 2001 .

public dissatisfaction in thailand with the way the government was handling economic restructuring brought about the election of a new coalition government in 2001 ( headed by the thai rak thai party ) with thaksin shinawatra as prime minister .

he launched a series of economic initiatives designed to stabilize the economy , boost domestic demand , encourage the growth of small and medium - sized businesses , and improve rural incomes .

thailand's economy experienced relatively strong growth from 2002-2004 ; real gdp growth averaged 6.2% .

real gdp growth was more modest in 2005 at 4.5% , due to a number of factors , including the december 2004 tsunami , higher energy prices , rising inflation , concerns over the avian influenza ( bird flu ) , and domestic insurgencies .

global insight , an international economic forecasting firm , estimates thailand's real gdp will rise by 4.6% in 2006 and 5.2% in 2007 .

major economic challenges include reducing the high level of corporate debt and the amount of non - performing loans held by the banking sector .

thailand's economy is heavily dependent on international trade and foreign investment .

in 2005 , the value of thailand's merchandise exports was equal to 63% of its gdp .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is an important source of exports , employment , and access to new technologies and processes .

thailand's top five trading partners in 2005 were asean , japan , the european union , the united states , and china ( see table 2 ) .

the united states was thailand's second largest export market and its fifth largest supplier of imports .

thailand's major exports ( 2004 data ) included machinery and mechanical appliances ( mainly computers and computer parts ) , electrical apparatus for electrical circuits , and electrical appliances .

major imports included mineral and metal products , electronic parts , and crude oil .

annual fdi flows to thailand have been relatively flat over the past few years , averaging about $1.5 billion annually from 2002 to 2005 .

some analysts contend that china may be drawing fdi away from thailand and other east asian countries .

countries that form ftas agree at a minimum to phase out tariff and non - tariff barriers ( ntbs ) on mutual trade in goods in order to enhance market access between trading partners .

most u.s. ftas , including nafta and agreements with chile and singapore , are more comprehensive .

because the u.s. - thailand fta is being modeled on the singapore fta , no sector , product , or functional issue can expect to be excluded from the liberalization process .

this approach is favored by many members of congress .

as a result , the negotiation is covering trade in goods and services , agriculture , investment , and intellectual property rights , as well as other issues such as government procurement , competition policy , and customs procedures .

the u.s. - thailand fta negotiations are of interest to congress because ( 1 ) an agreement would require passage of implementing legislation to become operational ; ( 2 ) an agreement could increase u.s. exports of goods , services , and investment ; ( 3 ) an agreement could increase competition for u.s. import - competing industries such as textiles and apparel and pick - up trucks ; and ( 4 ) if an agreement is implemented , thailand would become the second asian fta partner ( the first was singapore ) for the united states .

many members of congress support an aggressive fta strategy because of the potential to open foreign markets further to u.s. exports and investment .

while the administration's policy of negotiating multiple ftas has not been very controversial , some members have expressed concerns that the administration's criteria for deciding on fta partners has relied too heavily on foreign policy considerations .

in the case of thailand , however , the same members welcomed the announcement of the thailand fta because thailand represents a relatively large market that offers significant commercial gains , particularly to u.s. agricultural producers .

at the same time , some congressional concern has surfaced in regard to automotive trade , centered on the impact that a reduction of the current 25% u.s. tariff on pick - up trucks could have on imports and u.s. jobs .

auto companies based in thailand produce more than 500,000 pick - ups a year , making the country the world's second largest producer .

none of these vehicles , however , are exported to the united states , but the united auto workers argue that if the 25% tariff were removed , some 80,000 auto jobs would be jeopardized .

 ( more than a million pick - ups are currently produced in the united states. ) .

senators george voinovich ( r - oh ) and carl levin ( d - mi ) , co - chairs of the senate auto caucus , in a november 12 , 2003 letter , urged the bush administration to retain the 25% tariff out of concern that its elimination would open the door for japan to export trucks from thailand to the united states .

a similar letter was signed by the chairs of the house auto caucus , representatives dale kildee ( d - mi ) and fred upton ( r - mi ) .

on the senate side , a group of 40 senators ( 36 democrats and 4 republicans ) sent a similar letter to u.s. trade officials on march 18 , 2005 .

a different approach to this concern is embodied in s.con.res .

90 introduced by senators levin and voinovich on february 23 , 2004 , and h.con.res .

366 , introduced february 24 , 2004 , by representatives kildee , quinn , and levin .

because japan and other countries could benefit from bilateral concessions agreed to between the united states and thailand , the resolutions maintain that negotiations affecting access to the u.s. automotive market should only take place if all major automobile producing countries participate .

one house ways and means committee member phil english announced on june 8 , 2006 that he would not support the fta if it were brought to congress .

english said that "thailand continues to demonstrate that it does not share common views with the united states with respect to the world trade organization and a country's right to police its markets effectively from predatory or illegally traded imports. .

other members of congress may wish to consider how a u.s. - thai fta could affect u.s. commercial relations in asia in general , particularly in light of the trend among asian countries for bilateral trade agreements .

china's growing economic role in asia and its quest for new markets , materials , and trade deals is pushing almost every other major asian country , including japan and south korea , to consider ftas with each other .

given the increased competition , the u.s. - asean business council has called for a vigorous timetable for the completion of the u.s. - thai fta talks and designation of the next asean country with which the united states will seek an fta .

accordingly , u.s. trade strategy toward the ten - nation asean grouping , which is the third largest market for u.s. exports , could be an important congressional consideration .

