on december 30 , 2005 , president bush signed the fy2006 department of defenseappropriations bill into law ( p.l .

109-148 ) .

that bill included a provision ( section 3801 ) rescindingone percent of all non - emergency federal discretionary funding for fy2006 .

the bill also provided$2.8 billion in supplemental funding to the department of transportation for response to theconsequences of hurricanes katrina , rita and wilma .

on november 30 , 2005 , president bush signed h.r .

3058 into law ( p.l.109-115 ) .

the bill had been passed by congress on november 18 .

 ( 1 ) the bill provided $60.7 billionin net budgetary resources for the department of transportation , less than either the house or senateversions , but $1.0 billion ( 1.6% ) more than the fy2005 enacted level and $2.4 billion ( 4.1% ) morethan the administration requested .

on november 2 , 2005 , the house committee on appropriations published a revisedsuballocation of budget allocations for fy2006 ( h.rept .

109-264 ) .

among the changes made bythis report were a reduction in the suballocation ( "302 ( b ) allocation" ) for the house appropriationscommittee transportation - treasury - hud - the judiciary - dc subcommittee .

the revisedsuballocation for discretionary budget authority was $65.9 billion , $1 billion less than the previoussuballocation ( and $1 billion less than the discretionary funding level in the house - passed versionof the fy2006 transportation appropriations bill , which also funds several other federal agencies ) .

most transportation appropriations funding comes from trust funds , and for budgetary purposes isnot considered discretionary spending .

however , a portion of aviation and transit funding , and allrail funding ( including amtrak ) , comes from discretionary funds .

on october 20 , 2005 , the senate passed h.r .

3058 , the fy2006 departmentsof transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district ofcolumbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill .

the senate provided $64.2 billion for thedepartment of transportation , $4.2 billion over the fy2005 enacted level and $5.9 billion over theadministration's request for fy2006 .

the senate bill provided $1.45 billion for amtrak , for whichthe administration had requested no funding , and also included several provisions affecting amtrakoperations .

on august 10 , 2005 , the president signed into law p.l .

109-59 , the safe , accountable,flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) , whichreauthorized federal surface transportation programs .

aip: airport improvement program ( faa ) air21 ( sometimes fair21 ) : the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reformact for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the previous aviation authorizing legislation araa: the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-134 ) , theprevious amtrak authorizing legislation atsa: the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l .

107-71 ) , legislation whichcreated the transportation security administration within the dot brr: bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( fhwa ) bts: bureau of transportation statistics cmaq: congestion mitigation and air quality program ( fhwa ) dot: department of transportation eas: essential air service ( faa ) f&e: facilities and equipment program ( faa ) faa: federal aviation administration fahp: federal - aid highway program ( fhwa ) fhwa: federal highway administration fmcsa: federal motor carrier safety administration fra: federal railroad administration fta: federal transit administration hazmat: hazardous materials ( safety program in phmsa ) hpp: high priority projects ( fhwa ) htf: highway trust fund im: interstate maintenance program ( fhwa ) its: intelligent transportation systems ( fhwa ) mcsap: motor carrier safety assistance program ( fmcsa ) new starts: part of the fta's capital grants and loans program which funds newfixed - guideway systems or extensions to existing systems nhs: national highway system ; also a program within fhwa nhtsa: national highway traffic safety administration nmcsa: national motor carrier safety administration o&m: operations and maintenance program ( faa ) oig: office of the inspector general ost: office of the secretary of transportation phmsa: pipeline hazardous materials safety administration raba: revenue - aligned budget authority rita: research and innovative technology administration rd&t: research , development and technology program ( fhwa ) re&d: research , engineering and development program ( faa ) rspa: the former research and special projects administration safetea - lu: safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: alegacy for users ( p.l .

109-59 ) , the highway and transit authorizing legislationenacted in 2005 .

scasd: small community air service development program ( faa ) small starts: a component added to the transit capital investment grant program ( "new starts" ) in safetea - lu to support new transit infrastructure projectsseeking less than $75 million in federal funding .

stb: surface transportation board stp: surface transportation program ( fhwa ) tcsp: transportation and community and system preservation program ( fhwa ) tea - 21: transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) , the highwayand transit authorizing legislation enacted in 1998 tifia: transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( fhwa ) tsa: transportation security administration ( now in the department of homelandsecurity ) vision 100: century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) , the aviationreauthorization act enacted in 200 .

transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget .

itis also considered part of the discretionary budget .

funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources .

the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds .

the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds .

the transportation trust funds include the highway trust fund , whichcontains two accounts , the highway trust account and the mass transit account ; theairport and airway trust fund ; and the inland waterways trust fund .

all of theseaccounts derive their respective funding from specific excise and other taxes .

in fy2005 trust funds accounted for three - fourths of total federaltransportation spending .

together , highway and transit funding constitute the largestcomponent of dot appropriations .

most highway and transit programs are fundedwith contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund .

this is verysignificant from a budgeting standpoint .

contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate .

under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation ; although appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of theannual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with theopposite situation .

that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under theircontrol already exists , and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs alsois in place .

transportation budgeting uses a confusing lexicon ( for those unfamiliar withthe process ) of budget authority and contract authority - - the latter , a form ofbudget authority .

contract authority provides obligational authority for the fundingof trust fund - financed programs , such as the federal - aid highway program .

prior totea - 21 , changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component hadbeen achieved in the appropriations process by combining changes in budget / contractauthority and placing limitations on obligations .

the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds tocongressional budget agreements .

contract authority is tantamount to , but does not actually involve , enteringinto a contract to pay for a project at some future date .

under this arrangement,specified in title 23 u.s.c. , which tea - 21 amended , authorized funds areautomatically made available to the states at the beginning of each fiscal year andmay be obligated without appropriations legislation .

appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

tea - 21 greatly limitedthe role of the appropriations process in core highway and transit programs becausethe act enumerated the limitation on obligations level for the period fy1999 throughfy2003 in the statute ( 112 stat .

107 ) .

highway and transit grant programs work on a reimbursable basis : statespay for projects up front and federal payments are made to them only when work iscompleted and vouchers are presented , months or even years after the project hasbegun .

work in progress is represented in the trust fund as obligated funds andalthough they are considered "used" and remain as commitments against the trustfund balances , they are not subtracted from balances .

trust fund balances,therefore , appear high in part because funds sufficient to cover actual and expectedfuture commitments must remain available .

both the highway and transit accounts have substantial short - and long - termcommitments .

these include payments that will be made in the current fiscal yearas projects are completed and , to a much greater extent , outstanding obligations tobe made at some unspecified future date .

additionally , there are unobligatedamounts that are still dedicated to highway and transit projects , but have not beencommitted to specific projects .

two terms are associated with the distribution of contract authority funds tothe states and to particular programs .

the first of these , apportionments , refers tofunds distributed to the states for formula driven programs .

for example , all nationalhighway system ( nhs ) funds are apportioned to the states .

allocated funds , arefunds distributed on an administrative basis , typically to programs under directfederal control .

for example , federal lands highway program monies are allocated ; the allocation can be to another federal agency , to a state , to an indian tribe , or tosome other governmental entity .

these terms do not refer to the federal budgetprocess , but often provide a frame of reference for highway program recipients , whomay assume , albeit incorrectly , that a state apportionment is part of the federal budgetper se .

