u.s. security interests in south asia concentrate on weapons proliferation , strategies to reducetensions , antiterrorism , and regional stability .

this report emphasizes the role of missiles in southasian security because of their potential use as delivery vehicles for nuclear weapons .

as such , theproliferation of missiles in the region is considered to be a central variable in calculations gaugingregional stability .

during the 1990s , the u.s. security focus in south asia sought to minimize damage to the nonproliferation regime , prevent escalation of a nuclear arms and missile race , and promoteindo - pakistani bilateral dialogue , especially on the sovereignty dispute over kashmir .

in light ofthese goals , the clinton administration established five "benchmarks" for india and pakistan basedon the contents of un security council res .

1172 , which condemned the two countries' nuclear testsof may 1998 .

these were: signing and ratifying the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty ( ctbt ) ; ( 2 ) halting all further production of fissile material and participating in fissilematerial cutoff treaty ( fmct ) negotiations ; limiting development and deployment of wmd deliveryvehicles ; implementing strict export controls on wmd materials and technologies ; and establishing bilateral dialogue between new delhi and islamabad .

progress in each of these areas has been limited , and the bush administration makes no reference to the benchmark framework .

 ( 3 ) neitherindia nor pakistan has signed the ctbt , and bothappear to be continuing their production of weapons - grade fissile materials .

 ( 4 ) the status ofweaponization and deployment is unclear , though there are indications that this is occurring at aslow , but more or less steady pace .

 ( 5 ) earlier optimismin the area of export controls waned as fearshave gained credence that these countries , especially pakistan , might seek to export wmd materialsand / or technologies .

 ( 6 ) finally , while there has beenno repeat of the intense 1999 military clashesin kashmir - - and a ten - month - long military standoff in 2002 ended without large - scale fighting - - bilateral tensions remain significant , and no substantive dialogue between new delhi and islamabadis underway .

upon taking office , the bush administration set out substantively to build upon an initial improvement in u.s. relations with new delhi begun by president clinton , while also shifting u.s.nonproliferation policy from seeking to prevent south asian nuclearization to encouraging india andpakistan to be "more responsible nuclear powers. .

 ( 7 ) some analysts have argued that , by moving theu.s .

focus away from international nonproliferation treaties such as the ctbt and withdrawing fromthe anti - ballistic missile treaty , the bush administration's de - emphasis of "vertical proliferation" ( 8 ) issues has contributed to legitimizing south asia's strategic arsenals .

 ( 9 ) in the face of congressionalquestioning about seeming "contradictions" in u.s. policy , assistant secretary of state for southasia christina rocca stated in march 2003 that the united states is taking a "pragmatic approach"that seeks to have india and pakistan "exercise restraint" with regard to the proliferation of strategicarsenals .

 ( 10 ) the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states and ensuing u.s. - led antiterrorism efforts transformed u.s. relations with india and , especially pakistan , which again became a"front - line" ally and beneficiary of significant u.s. foreign assistance ( up from $3.5 million infy2001 to more than $1 billion in fy2002 ) .

india's swift offer of full support for u.s. antiterrorismefforts was widely viewed as reflective of much improved u.s. - india relations .

in 2003 , and forperhaps the first period in history , the united states simultaneously enjoys positive relations withboth countries .

 ( 11 ) this circumstance may meanthat the ability of the united states to influence southasian security dynamics is at an all - time high .

at the same time , differences with pakistan ( overissues of terrorism , proliferation , and democratization ) and with india ( over definitions of terrorism,u.s .

policy in the middle east , and human rights ) continue to cloud forecasts of future u.s.engagement with south asia's two largest and nuclear - armed countries .

the key issues for congress addressed here are whether missile proliferation in south asia enhances or detracts from regional stability and the role of u.s. policy in promoting such stability,as well as in tension reduction and nonproliferation .

levels of u.s. foreign assistance to india andpakistan , the establishment of aid restrictions , the transfer of conventional weapons platforms ( possibly including missile defense systems ) , the setting of export control parameters andnonproliferation goals , and the maintenance of policy and intelligence oversight of u.s. relationswith india and pakistan all have a vital congressional facet .

pending and future legislation couldinfluence levels of stability in south asia .

understanding present - day missile proliferation in south asia and relevant u.s. policy optionsis aided by a review of the historical setting .

three wars - - in1947-48 , 1965 , and 1971 - - and aconstant state of military preparedness on both sides of their shared border have marked thehalf - century of bitter rivalry between india and pakistan .

a bloody battle in the kashmiri mountainsnear kargil in 1999 cost thousands of lives and marked history's first significant direct clash betweenthe forces of two nuclear - armed countries .

most recently , a 10-month - long military standoff in 2002involving up to one million indian and pakistani soldiers was viewed as the closest the two countrieshad been to full - scale war since 1971 , and caused the u.s. government to become "deeply concerned... that a conventional war ... could escalate into a nuclear confrontation. .

 ( 12 ) a persistent and oftentimes perplexing aspect of u.s. engagement in the region has been the difficulty of maintaining a more - or - less balanced approach toward two antagonistic countries whilesimultaneously promoting perceived u.s. interests in south asia .

india has seven times thepopulation and four times the land area of pakistan .

in 2002 , the indian gdp was more than eighttimes that of pakistan , and the indian military enjoys a 2:1 or 3:1 advantage in numbers of soldiersand conventional arms .

 ( 13 ) yet , despite india'sclearly greater status in these concrete terms , theunited states has for the past half - century found itself much more closely engaged with pakistan,in particular during the 1950s , when pakistan was part of the u.s. - led alliance system to contain thesoviet union ; the 1980s , when pakistan was a front - line ally in u.s. - supported efforts to defeat thesoviet army in afghanistan ; and today , when pakistan is again a front - line ally , this time in u.s. - ledefforts to defeat islamic militancy .

india and pakistan have the ability to strike and destroy military and civilian targets outside oftheir respective countries by means of nuclear weapons , ballistic missiles , and aircraft .

these forces,associated readiness postures , command and control , and missile defense constitute a strategiccapability on a regional scale .

this section will discuss these capabilities and their impact onregional security .

detailed descriptions of the specific missiles in india's and pakistan's arsenals arepresented in the appendix .

regional missile defense has been viewed by some analysts as a potential catalyst to promotestability and by others as an inherently volatile proposition which could upset the region's strategicbalance .

in july 2002 , a deputy assistant secretary for defense presented dod's position onregional missile defense to the senate governmental affairs committee: "we believe that missiledefenses , generally speaking , are part of an inherently stabilizing concept .

the right to defendyourself against these missiles is something we feel is a matter to explore with the indians , with thepakistanis if they're interested. .

 ( 64 ) this pentagon position reportedly is not shared by the state department .

during the same senate governmental affairs committee hearing , state department officials expressed concern thatif india obtained the joint u.s. - israeli arrow ballistic missile interceptor , that it might heightentensions with pakistan .

 ( 65 ) .

some experts believe that india's ballistic missile program is motivated primarily by a desire for political and technological prestige , and to a lesser extent , strategic military considerationstowards pakistan and china .

 ( 94 ) india's programis considered to be one of the most ambitious missileprograms in the developing world , capable of producing missiles with ranges equal to thosedeployed by the original five nuclear powers ( united states , russia , china , england , and france ) .many analysts consider india's ballistic missile program a derivative of its space program which israted by some as one of the most advanced programs among emerging missile nations .

some expertsclaim that india's space launch vehicles constitute an intercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) capability but others argue that , although conversion of space launch vehicles into icbms ispossible , india does not have a security requirement that would necessitate such an undertaking .

india launched its first satellite in 1975 atop a soviet rocket and by 1980 was able to launch a small spacecraft into orbit using its own domestically - produced slv - 3 space launch vehicle .

 ( 95 ) theindian defense research and development organization ( drdo ) established the integrated guidedmissile development program in 1983 under the direction of abdul kalam to develop ballisticmissiles .

most likely in anticipation of the adoption of the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) by a number of key supplier countries , india went on what was described by some analystsas a "shopping spree" for gyroscopes , accelerometers , and motion simulators from suppliers in theunited states , germany , france , and sweden .

 ( 96 ) many analysts cite this foresight in obtaining highquality foreign missile components and subsequent reverse engineering by indian engineers as a keyfactor which has enabled india's missile program to become virtually self - sufficient .

thisself - sufficiency permits india to avoid international export control restrictions as well as inherent difficulties that could arise with extensive foreign involvement in its missile program .

india has developed two ballistic missiles , the short range prithvi and the medium range agni .

 ( 97 ) table 1 .

indian ballistic missiles source: information in this table is from jane's strategic weapons systems , issue 37 , july 2002 , pp.80-84 and "agni - india missile special weapons delivery systems," federation of americanscientists , june 19 , 2003 , available at http: / / www.fas.org / nuke / guide / india / missile / agni.htm .

prithvi i .

the prithvi i , like all prithvi variants , is a single - staged , liquid propellant , ( 100 ) singlewarhead short - range ballistic missile .

the prithvi i isused exclusively by the indian army and is reported to have high explosive ( he ) penetration,submunitions ( incendiary and anti - personnel / anti - armor ) , and fuel air explosive and possiblychemical warheads .

 ( 101 ) following indiannuclear tests in 1998 , some experts believe that indiadeveloped a number of small yield nuclear warheads for the prithvi i with 1 , 5 , 12 or 20 kt yieldswith the warhead weight estimated at about 250 kg .

first test fired in february 1988 , india hasconducted 16 known launch tests of the prithvi series as of march 2003 .

 ( 102 ) in service with the armysince 1994 , the prithvi i is believed capable of striking approximately a quarter of pakistan,including islamabad and other major cities .

 ( 103 ) prithvi ii .

prithvi ii missiles are reportedly used by the indian air force to attack enemy airfields and to support the indian army on the battlefield .

some experts believe that efforts are underway to adapt the full range of prithvi i warheads forprithvi ii use .

 ( 104 ) first test fired in january1996 , the prithvi ii is assessed to be capable of hittingalmost half of pakistan including almost all critical military targets and all major cities .

 ( 105 ) prithvi iii .

the prithvi iii is currently under development and is not yet believed to be operational .

it is believed to have a range of 350 km anda payload of 750 kg and may also have either a new liquid or solid propulsion system .

some reportssuggest that india may install a global positioning system ( gps ) guidance system that could reducethe missile's cep to 25 m. agni i .

the agni i is a two - staged , intermediate - range , single warhead ballistic missile .

the agni i is believed to have a minimumrange of 500 km and a maximum range of 2,500 km with a cep of 100 m. some analysts believethat india has developed a 45 kt nuclear warhead for the agni i and possibly a 200 kt warhead .

the agni i has a separating reentry vehicle ( rv ) that reportedly has an altitude control system andaerodynamic maneuver fins designed to make intercept from ballistic missile defenses more difficult .

the agni i , considered a technology demonstrator and not a developed weapons system by the indiangovernment , has undergone three test flights between 1994 and 2002 .

agni ii .

the agni ii has two solid propellant stages and some experts believe that it has a minimum range of 500 km and a maximum rangeof3,000 to 3,5000 km .

the agni ii is believed to have a 100 m cep and a separating 200 kt nuclearwarhead weighing approximately 500 kg .

the agni ii was first test launched in april 1999 .

someanalysts suggest that a small number of agni ii missiles ( fewer than five ) have been operationallyavailable since late 2000 and that the annual production rate since then has been from 15 to 20missiles .

the agni ii's range permits it to strike all of pakistan and deep into western portions ofchina .

 ( 106 ) agni iii .

the agni iii is believed to have a range of 5,000 km ( a range of approximately 4,000 km would be required for a missile to reach beijingfrom india ) and is presently assessed to be under development .

 ( 107 ) senior indian defense officialsreportedly claim that the agni iii is a "china - specific" missile and not intended for use againstpakistan .

 ( 108 ) the times of india claims that theagni iii will be both rail and road - mobile with a newinertial guidance system and will be able to "deliver a one - tonne warhead beyond the range ofcombat aircraft. .

the agni iii may have three stages and some analysts speculate that the first andsecond stages may be solid propellant stages and the third stage either liquid or solid propellant .

 ( 109 ) india has claimed that the agni iii would only be used to deliver conventional warheads but with areported cost of 4.5 to 8 million u.s. dollars per missile , some experts find it difficult to imaginethat the cost of such a missile could be justified unless it was used to deliver nuclear weapons .

 ( 110 ) submarine launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) .

according to some u.s. intelligence sources , india is developing a submarine launched ballisticmissile ( slbm ) known as the sagarika which could be operational sometime after 2010 .

 ( 111 ) indiareportedly is seeking a nuclear triad ( missiles , aircraft , and sea based ) to insure that at least some ofthe country's nuclear weapons survive a first strike attack .

 ( 112 ) it is unclear if the sagarika is intendedto be deployed on a modified russian kilo - class submarine or a russian akula - class submarine,which is believed capable of firing only cruise missiles , or india's advance technology vessel , anuclear submarine that has been under development with russian assistance since 1985 .

 ( 113 ) russian involvement in india's missile program .

reportedly , more than two thirds of india's military equipment is from russia or the former sovietunion and some analysts believe that india will purchase an additional 8 billion u.s. dollars worthof military items from russia in the decade to come .

 ( 114 ) while specifics are not readily available,some analyst suggest that it is a reasonable assumption - - although india's missile program isconsidered largely self - sufficient - - that india will continue to acquire some missile components andother missile - related technology from russia .

brahmos cruise missile .

india and russia reportedly are jointly developing the brahmos anti - ship cruise missile .

the brahmos , which is notpresently assessed to be nuclear - capable , has a reported range of 185 miles , a payload of 440 pounds,and a speed of more than 1,400 miles per hour .

 ( 115 ) the brahmos is significant in that it is consideredby many analysts to be a state - of - the - art missile which travels at supersonic speed ( it is about 3 timesfaster than the current u.s. tomahawk cruise missile ) and has been built with stealth technologywhich , according to some experts , could make it virtually impossible to intercept .

both countriesreportedly plan to deploy the brahmos with their armed forces as well as export the brahmos to thirdworld countries , possibly to offset u.s. military capabilities .

according to global security.org , thetwo - staged brahmos , which can be fired from air , land , and sea , could be modified to accommodatea small nuclear warhead , adding another operational capability to india's nuclear missile arsenal.while india and russia have publically stated their intentions to deploy the brahmos to theirrespective armed forces by the end of 2003 , some military officials believe that they are still severalyears away from deploying the missile .

 ( 116 ) .

many analysts consider pakistan's ballistic missile program to be a response to india's ballistic missiles , its sophisticated air defense system , and india's large and well - equipped armed forces .

 ( 117 ) some experts feel that relatively rapid advances in pakistan's missile program are a result ofcompetition between samar mubarak mund of the national development complex , responsible forsolid - fuel missiles and abdul qadeer khan of the khan research laboratories where liquid - fueledmissiles are produced .

despite these two competing organizations , pakistan relies heavily on northkorean , chinese , and , to a lesser degree , iranian assistance in its missile program .

 ( 118 ) prior to 1989 , pakistan's missile arsenal was comprised primarily of hatf i rockets ( 119 ) and hatfii missiles with ranges of 80 and 280 km , respectively .

india's 1989 launch of its agni i missile , inconjunction with the u.s. denial of delivery of f - 16 aircraft ( 120 ) to pakistan , is credited by manyexperts as central events that compelled islamabad to pursue ballistic missiles as pakistan's primarymeans to deliver nuclear weapons .

in 1992 , pakistan allegedly received m - 11 missiles from chinawhich are capable of carrying nuclear warheads to a range of approximately 300 km .

since thisacquisition in 1992 , much of pakistan's missile program has been devoted to the development of theshaheen and ghauri - series of ballistic missiles .

table 2 .

pakistani ballistic missiles source: information in this table is from jane's strategic weapons systems , issue 37 , july 2002 , pp.124 - 131 .

hatf i .

the hatf i is believed to be a single - stage , solid propellant rocket with a 60 to 80 km range carrying a 500 kg payload or a 350 km rangecarrying a 100 kg payload .

 ( 121 ) some analystsspeculate that the limited range and payload capacityof these rockets would preclude the use of a nuclear warhead and more likely payloads include highexplosives , submunitions , and possibly chemical weapons .

 ( 122 ) the hatf i's accuracy is unknown andpakistan may have as many of 80 of these rockets .

 ( 123 ) hatf ii .

the hatf ii is a two - stage , solid propellant missile of 280 km range with a 500 kg payload or a 450 km range with a 300 kgpayload .

 ( 124 ) the hatf iiprogram is believed to have been terminated due to technical problems butsome analysts speculate that in addition to high explosive and chemical payloads , that the hatf ii wasintended to carry a nuclear warhead .

 ( 125 ) m - 11 .

in 1992 , china reportedly delivered to pakistan between 30 and 84 unassembled m - 11 missiles with a 300 km range and a 500 kg payloadcapacity .

 ( 126 ) the m - 11's separating warheadis considered by many experts as a desirablecharacteristic for nuclear weapons delivery , but limited range precludes its use to strike new delhior large population centers lying beyond the indian desert .

 ( 127 ) the m - 11 is a road - mobile , solidpropellant missile with a 600 m cep that , in addition to high explosive , sub munition , and chemicalwarheads , can possibly deliver a variety of nuclear warheads with 2 , 10 , or 20 kt yields .

 ( 128 ) it ispossible that m - 11s may be fitted with gps technology to increase their accuracy .

shaheen i .

the shaheen i is a solid propellant , single warhead missile reportedly developed by dr. samar mubarak mund's national developmentcomplex .

many analysts consider the shaheen i a scaled - up version of the chinese m - 11 missile .

the shaheen i has a reported range of 600 km , an accuracy of 200 m , and can carry a 750 kg , 35 ktnuclear warhead or conventional or chemical munitions .

because launch preparations for thesolid - fueled , road - mobile shaheen i are relatively short , the missile reportedly can be launchedwithin 5 to 10 minutes of its arrival at a pre - surveyed launch site .

some analysts speculate thatpakistan may have had from 5 to 10 shaheen is available for testing and operational use by the endof 1999 and more may have been produced since then .

shaheen ii .

the shaheen ii is a road - mobile , two - stage , solid propellant ballistic missile also developed by pakistan's national developmentcomplex .

many analysts speculate that the shaheen ii is based on the chinese m - 18 missile .

 ( 129 ) theshaheen ii reportedly has a 2,500 km range , a 350 m cep , and can carry a 750 kg 15 to 35 ktnuclear warhead , as well as high explosives , submunitions , chemical , and fuel - air explosives .

 ( 130 ) theshaheen ii is also believed to have a separating reentry vehicle and its accuracy may be enhancedthrough the use of gps technology .

the shaheen ii was first publically displayed in march 2000and it is not believed to have been flight tested to date .

some experts speculate that pakistan mayhave produced from 5 to 10 shaheen iis .

ghauri i .

the ghauri - series of road - mobile , liquid propellant missiles are produced in pakistan's khan research laboratories .

 ( 131 ) many analystsbelieve that the ghauri i is based on north korea's no dong i and ii missile .

reports that iran'sshahab iii missile appears to be very similar in design to the ghauri i have led to widespreadspeculation by intelligence officials that pakistan , north korea , and iran have collaborated in thedevelopment of these missiles .

 ( 132 ) the ghaurii is believed to have a range of 1,500 km , and accuracyof 2,500 m , and could deliver a 760 kg 15 to 35 kt nuclear warhead which pakistan has alleged tohave tested in may 1998 .

the ghauri i is believed to have been operationally deployed in late 1998by pakistan's 47th artillery brigade with 5-10 missiles available for testing or operational use .

ghauri ii .

the ghauri ii is believed to be a lengthened and improved version of the ghauri i , possibly employing new propellants and a motorassembly .

the ghauri ii's accuracy is unknown but its range is believed to be between 1,800 to2,300 km and could also accommodate a 15 to 35 kt nuclear warhead as well as the full range ofwarheads available for the ghauri i .

a ghauri iii missile has been reported to be in developmentwith a possible 3,000 km range and motor tests for this missile were believed to have taken placein july and september 1999 .

foreign involvement in pakistan's missile program .

a february 2000 report from the central intelligence agency citedchinese and north korean assistance as "critical for islamabad's efforts to produce ballisticmissiles. .

 ( 133 ) some analysts suggest that chinamay have been heavily involved in the developmentof the shaheen i .

a 1999 u.s. intelligence report alleges that china transferred designs for a missilefactory to pakistan and this factory is currently being used to produce shaheen i missiles .

 ( 134 ) a july2000 report from the u.s. intelligence community stated that china had stepped up its shipments ofspecialty steels , guidance systems , and technical expertise to pakistan .

 ( 135 ) press reports , citing ajanuary 2003 central intelligence agency report to congress on weapons technology , claim thatchina also assisted pakistan in developing the shaheen ii and possibly nuclear weapons .

 ( 136 ) pakistan is believed to have started development of the ghauri i in 1993 with north korean assistance .

 ( 137 ) experts believe that the ghaurii is essentially a north korean no dong missile.india's interception in june , 1999 of a ship carrying a large amount of missile technology from northkorea to pakistan has raised the issue that north korean missile technology may be able to helppakistan achieve ranges out to 8,000 km .

 ( 138 ) there is also evidence that pakistan is reciprocating andassisting north korea in its missile program .

pakistan has been accused of providing north koreawith test data from ghauri test flights for its use in improving its no dong missiles despite northkorea's self - imposed 1999 moratorium on long range missile test flights .

 ( 139 ) some experts have alsosuggested that pakistan is providing valuable solid - fuel propulsion technology from itschinese - based shaheen missiles for north korea's use in the taepo dong missile program .

in 1993,pakistani and iranian specialists were alleged to have traveled to north korea to observe the launchof a no dong and three scud missiles .

 ( 140 ) some suggest that pakistani - iranian missile cooperationhas deteriorated .

amin tarzi , writing for the monterey institute of international studies incalifornia , claims that the relationship has lessened because of reported anti - shiite activities inpakistan and islamabad's policies towards afghanistan related to the u.s. war on terror in theregion .

 ( 141 ) .

