in 2000 , a series of media accounts reported that children were being trafficked and forciblyused in the west african cocoa sector .

shortly thereafter , the house passed h.amdt.142 to p.l.107-76 , fy2002 agriculture , rural development and food and drug administration ( fda ) appropriations , which would have provided $250,000 to the food and drug administration to beused to develop a label for chocolate products indicating that no child slave labor had been used inthe growing and harvesting of cocoa in a product so labeled .

a senate companion bill was neverintroduced , in part because after house passage of the bill , representatives of the cocoa industry , theinternational labor organization ( ilo ) , several private labor rights groups , and members ofcongress , negotiated "a comprehensive , six - point problem - solving" protocol aimed at ending the"use of abusive child labor in cocoa growing. .

 ( 1 ) the protocol , known colloquially as the as the harkin - engelprotocol ( discussed below ) after senator tom harkin and representative eliot engel , outlines sixsteps that the industry formally agreed to undertake in order to end abusive and forced child laboron cocoa farms by july 2005 .

 ( 2 ) to date , the first five steps of the protocol have been completed .

there are differences of opinion on whether the final step , the development of a certification system,has been completed .

 ( 3 ) itis possible that if senator harkin and representative engel , after consulting with the industrysignatories and witnesses to the protocol , find that the signatories have not met their commitmentsunder the protocol , they may initiate renewed legislative efforts to address the problem of child laborin cocoa production .

this report provides background on the production of cocoa and discusses the issue of childlabor in the industry , efforts by congress , including the harkin - engel protocol , and those of othergovernments , international organizations , and non - governmental groups to address the problem .

italso discusses potential policy options that might accomplish that end .

congress has consistently expressed interest in and supported efforts to abolish and counterchild labor , particularly the worst forms of child labor .

congress has funded programs to combatchild labor , expand the united states' role in the global fight against child labor , and include clausesthat require eliminating child labor in trade agreements .

in 1997 , congress prohibited theimportation of goods made with forced or indentured child labor .

 ( 18 ) later in 2000 , congressamended section 307 of the tariff act of 1930 - - which prohibited the importation of goods madewith forced or indentured labor - - to ensure that the statute applied to goods made with forced orindentured child labor .

 ( 19 ) congress also added child labor stipulations to foreign aidlegislation through the export - import bank re - authorization act of 1997 .

 ( 20 ) this law integrates childlabor into the list of criteria for denying credit by the export - import bank .

another law relating tochild labor abuses is the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 .

 ( 21 ) the law providespunishment for traffickers , as well as assistance and protection to trafficking victims , with a specialemphasis on women and children , both in the u.s. and abroad .

congress has used various international trade agreements to fight child labor .

thegeneralized system of preferences ( gsp ) is a program that extends duty - free entry to a wide rangeof products from more than 140 countries and territories .

the trade and development act of 2000expanded the gsp ineligibility criteria to include the worst forms of child labor .

 ( 22 ) the act prohibits anycountry from gsp consideration if "[s]uch country has not implemented its commitments toeliminate the worst forms of child labor. .

 ( 23 ) the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) is required to conduct a yearly review of countries receiving these benefits to determine , among otherthings , whether they are implementing their commitments under international labor organization ( ilo ) convention 182 to eliminate the worst forms of child labor .

the trade act of 2002 amendedthe andean trade preference act ( atpa ) to add child labor criteria .

 ( 24 ) the north americanagreement on labor cooperation ( naalc ) , the labor supplement to the north american free tradeagreement ( nafta ) , also has a child labor component .

the agreement seeks to promotefundamental labor standards , including those addressing child labor , compliance with labor laws,and the enforcement of those laws in each country .

the office of the u.s. trade representativestates that the naalc has enhanced transparency and public debate on labor law and enforcementissues .

 ( 25 ) in 1993 , congress directed the u.s. department of labor ( usdol ) international child laborprogram ( iclp ) to investigate and report on child labor around the world .

since then , congress hascontinued to fund the usdol - iclp research and reporting efforts .

it has expanded the iclp'smandate to include administering grants to organizations engaged in efforts to eliminate child laborand to improve access to quality basic education ; and raising public awareness and understandingof child labor issues .

congress appropriated $79 million in fy2005 to iclp for the elimination ofinternational child labor .

congress has also enhanced u.s. efforts to fight child labor by addingchild labor responsibilities to a host of u.s. agencies including , usaid , u.s. department of state,and u.s. customs service .

the first three programs described herein are complementary initiatives that work togetherto combat the use of child labor in cocoa production .

they are all implemented through the ilo withu.s .

and international support .

child labor , as derived from ilo convention 138 , is any economic activityperformed by a person under the age of 15 .

not all work is considered harmful to or exploitative ofchildren .

child labor is work that prevents children from attending and participating effectively inschool or is performed by children under hazardous conditions that place their healthy physical,intellectual , or moral development at risk .

the worst forms of child labor , as defined in ilo convention 182 , is the useof any individual under the age of 18 for the purposes of debt bondage , armed conflict , commercialsexual exploitation , drug trafficking , and other types of work identified as hazardous to children byratifying members .

working children are those who carried out at least one task / activity on thecocoa farm , i.e. , clearing ground ; weeding ; maintaining cocoa trees ; applying pesticides ; spreadingfertilizer ; harvesting ; piling / gathering up ; pod breaking ; fermenting ; transporting ; drying ; and otheractivities .

