public interest in approaches that might provide prescription drugs at lower cost , particularly for the elderly , has rekindled discussion over the role the federal government plays in facilitating the development and marketing of new pharmaceuticals .

in the current debate , some argue that the government's financial , research , and / or clinical support of health - related r&d entitles the public to commensurate considerations in the prices charged for any resulting drugs .

others view government intervention in price decisions based upon initial federal funding of basic research as contrary to a long - term trend of government promotion of innovation , technological advancement , and the commercialization of technology by the business community leading to new products and processes for the marketplace .

the federal involvement in r&d stems , in part , from the understanding that technological advancement is a key element in economic growth .

many of the innovations that stimulate technological progress are rooted in basic research .

however , because the returns to basic research accrue to society as a whole and often can not be captured by the firm performing the work , there tends to be underinvestment in these activities .

thus , the government typically funds fundamental research as a "public good. .

concurrently , the government has an interest in ensuring that the results of this enterprise are applied to generate new goods and services to meet the demands of citizens .

the benefits of research emerge when innovations are available in the marketplace .

in recognition of this , congress has passed legislation to facilitate the commercialization of new technology .

government policies implemented over the past 25 or more years include incentives to increase private sector investment in technology development through technology transfer , cooperative r&d , and intellectual property rights .

the intent is to encourage academia and industry to commit the necessary , and often substantial , resources required to take the results of federally supported r&d and generate products or processes to meet market demand .

utilizing patent ownership and facilitating collaborative government - university - industry efforts , the current legislative approach attempts to balance the public's need for new technologies and techniques with concerns over providing companies valuable benefits without adequate accountability or compensation .

the reservation of certain rights for the government that permit federal intervention in specific circumstances associated with health and safety concerns are intended to act as safeguards for the public .

some members of congress have questioned the adequacy of the current balance between public and private needs .

the particular nature of health - related research and development , and the substantial federal investment in this area ( over $30.8 billion was appropriated to nih for medical research in fy2012 ) , has led critics of the current system to argue that the necessity of incentives is mitigated by such factors as free access to the results of federally funded work ; by the monopoly power permitted by patent protection ; and by other regulatory and tax advantages such as those conveyed by the hatch - waxman act , the biologics price competition and innovation act , or the orphan drug act .

therefore , some commentators maintain , a more direct payback should be required including recoupment of public sector financial support or government involvement in price decisions .

other experts counter that these inducements have played an important role in making the u.s. pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries innovative , productive , and competitive .

they point out that while the government contributed to development of the internet , as well as to the telecommunications , semiconductor , and aviation industries , no one is advocating federal involvement in cost considerations in these areas as they are in the health field .

this paper explores the reasons behind government funding of research and development and subsequent efforts to facilitate private sector commercialization of the results of such work .

it does not address issues associated with drug costs or pricing .

instead , the report looks at the manner in which the national institutes of health ( nih ) supports research to encourage the development of new pharmaceuticals and therapeutics , particularly through cooperative activities among academia , industry , and government .

the goal is to offer insights concerning the discussion on whether or not use of the results of the federal r&d enterprise warrants government input into price decisions made by the private sector .

concerns surrounding innovation in health - related areas will be explored within the broader context of the government's role in facilitating technological progress .

the u.s. government is expected to spend an estimated $138.9 billion in fy2012 on research and development to meet the mission requirements of the federal departments and agencies .

traditionally , the government funds r&d to meet the mission requirements of the federal departments and agencies ( eg , defense , public health , environmental quality ) .

it also supports work in areas where there is an identified need for research , primarily basic research , not being performed in the private sector .

federal funding reflects a consensus that while basic research is the foundation for many innovations , the rate of return to society as a whole generated by investments in this activity is significantly larger than the benefits that can be captured by any one firm performing it .

"government support of basic scientific research represents an example of the government furnishing a good , scientific knowledge , that improves social well - being ... a good that cannot be sold because those who do not pay receive the benefits anyway. .

estimates of a social rate of return on r&d spending over twice that of the rate of return to the inventor of the product often lead to underinvestment by the business community .

in addition , incentives for private sector financial commitments are dampened by the fact that spending for r&d runs a high risk of failure .

the rewards of basic research tend to be long term , sometimes are not marketable , and are not always evident .

congressional initiatives have expanded the government's role in r&d to include the promotion of technological innovation to meet other national needs , particularly the economic growth that flows from the commercialization and use of new products and production processes by the private sector .

technological advancement is an important factor in the nation's economic growth .

experts widely accept that technical progress is responsible for up to one - half the growth of the u.s. economy and is one principal driving force for increases in our standard of living .

historically , industrial expansion was based on the use of technology to exploit natural resources .

today , such growth tends to be founded on scientific discoveries and engineering knowledge ( eg , biomedical applications , electronics ) and is even more dependent than before on the development and use of technology .

technology can help drive the economy because it contributes to the creation of new goods and services , new industries , new jobs , and new capital .

it can expand the range of services offered and extend the geographic distribution of those services .

the application of technologies also can contribute to the resolution of those national problems that are amenable to technological solutions .

technological progress is achieved through innovation , a process by which industry provides new and improved products , manufacturing processes , and services .

research and development are important to this technological advancement in many ways .

r&d contributes to economic growth by its impact on productivity .

for more than two decades various experts studying the effects of research and development have found that productivity growth in an industry or a firm is generally directly and significantly related to the amount spent previously on r&d in that industry or company .

analysts estimate that one - half of productivity increases ( output per person ) are the result of investments in research and development .

others argue that innovations arising from r&d are the most important ones .

profound changes in our society have been brought about by advances in research , resulting in new products and processes in the areas of medicine , semiconductors , computers , and materials , to name just a few .

to leverage the substantial federal investment in r&d , government policies and practices provide incentives for private sector utilization of the results of this endeavor to make products and processes for the marketplace .

legislative initiatives ( discussed below ) facilitate the commercialization of government - funded research and development through mechanisms that encourage government - industry - university collaboration .

joint federal efforts with the private sector offer a means to get government - generated research and technical know - how to the business community where it can be developed , commercialized , and made available for use to meet the needs of government agencies or to stimulate economic growth vital to the nation's welfare and security .

in addition , cooperative ventures among government institutions , companies , and academia allow for r&d to cross traditional boundaries of knowledge and experience .

ideas , expertise , and know - how are combined , facilitating a mix that may lead to more creativity and invention .

industry also has an interest in cooperative efforts with government and / or academia .

as new technologies are generated and their impact more widespread , industry has had to commit an increasing amount of resources to the performance of r&d .

concurrently , shortened product cycles have led to expanded demands for new technology and higher costs for technology development as reflected in the 43.5% increase in company support for such development work between 1998 and 2008 ( using constant 2000 dollars ) .

the rising expense of research and development has been juxtaposed with increasing international competition and shareholder demands for short - term returns .

thus , partnerships are a result of "today's complex technologies , intense competition , and information overload [that] have required new approaches" beyond the funding of scientists to pursue their own interests .

cooperative r&d permits work to be done which is too expensive for one company to fund or of marginal value for any given firm .

companies have developed alternative means of acquiring new technologies while controlling the requisite costs .

external alliances allow access to innovations without the expense and risks of generating them independently .

thus , collaboration permits firms to acquire the basic research they need from outside organizations .

experts argue that , for certain industries , the more extensive a firm's emphasis on external sources of technical knowledge , the greater its total factor productivity growth .

a survey undertaken by pricewaterhousecoopers found "businesses that outsource [their r&d] are growing faster , larger , and more profitable than those that do not. .

the perceived benefits to this approach are reflected in increasing company support for external r&d .

in 2007 , u.s. companies contracted out 7.8% of their r&d expenditures , up from the 4.5% contracted out in 1997 .

in the early 1980s , just after the passage of the bayh - dole act , less than 2% of industry funding was directed at extramural research .

it should be noted that joint ventures are not always successful due , in part , to failed concepts , cultural differences between companies or organizations , managerial and financial issues , or conflicting goals and objectives .

however , studies by pricewaterhousecoopers identify numerous benefits that have resulted from partnering including increased sales of existing products ; improved competitive position ; increased productivity ; development of more new products or business lines ; and better operations or technology .

of the fastest - growing u.s. firms , 56% had partnered in the prior three years "resulting in more innovative products , more profit opportunities — and significantly higher growth rates. .

an earlier survey undertaken by the company concluded that "collaborative growth firms are spending more on new product development while focusing more on bigger winners and on innovation ... [and] ... are not reluctant to go outside their organization to work with others in the development of their innovative new products. .

more recent work by battelle found that fully 81% of u.s. manufacturing survey respondents indicated their involvement in some type of collaborative r&d activity.... more than 60% viewed these technology collaborations as important to the growth of their organizations , with 39% planning to expand their collaborative efforts beyond existing levels .

this trend is reflected in the pharmaceutical industry .

there are an increasing number of alliances , particularly between large businesses and small biotech companies .

according to ernst & young , the number of strategic alliances in this sector more than doubled from 2005 to 2006 , while "2007 and 2008 were exceptionally strong years" for alliances .

later analysis from ernst & young found that in 2010 , u.s. strategic alliances between pharmaceutical firms and biotech companies increased for the "third consecutive year. .

data from the national science foundation indicate a 119.2% increase in r&d expenditures contracted out in the united states by the pharmaceutical and medicine industries between 2000 and 2005 .

research indicates the benefits to alliances and "positive effects on r&d performance. .

one study found that "nearly a third of new pharmaceutical products are now developed through alliances. .

another analysis indicated that "drugs developed in alliances are more likely to succeed in clinical trials. .

similarly , wheaton college professor kejun song argues that: concentrating talents through co - development alliances may be good news , as it would speed up commercialization of innovations in the drug industry .

finer specialization in r&d may improve the success rate in these highly risky endeavors as well .

thus , it appears that "merging technological knowledge and skills from different companies improves the innovation process. .

in addition to joint projects among companies , industry - university cooperation in r&d provides another important means to facilitate technological innovation .

traditionally , much of the basic research integral to certain technological advancement is funded by the government but performed in academia .

companies are increasingly looking toward this community to provide the underlying knowledge necessary for the development of commercial products without financing the large overhead costs associated with in - house research .

according to david blumenthal at the harvard school of medicine , by the mid to late 1990s , over 90% of life science companies in the united states had a cooperative relationship with universities .

later analysis found that in 2007 52.8% of academic life science faculty had a relationship with industry and "were more productive than faculty without such support on virtually every measure. .

a 2006 survey of medical schools and large independent teaching hospitals indicated that 67% of academic departments had established relationships with pharmaceutical companies .

the value of these interactions has been documented .

a study by the late professor edwin mansfield demonstrated that "over 10% of the new products and processes introduced in [the 8 industries explored] could not have been developed ( without substantial delay ) in the absence of recent academic research. .

more recent analysis reported that "during the past 40 years , 153 new fda - approved drugs , vaccines , or new indications for existing drugs were discovered through research carried out in psris [public - sector research institutions]. .

this same study indicated that between "9.3 and 21.2% of all drugs involved in new - drug applications approved during the period from 1990 through 2007," were the result of work performed by psris .

additional research based on the 252 new drugs approved by the fda between 1998 and 2007 established that 31% of the 118 drugs considered "scientifically novel" were the result of research originally performed in universities .

much of this cooperative work , whether government - industry , government - university , industry - university , or industry - industry , is facilitated by the patent system .

patents protect the inventor's investments in generating the knowledge that is the basis for innovation .

the u.s. constitution states that patents are intended to promote "the progress of science and the useful arts. .

as research and development become more expensive , ownership of title to inventions has been used by the federal government as a means to foster increased private sector activities to generate new and improved products and processes for the marketplace .

in an academic setting , the possession of title is expected to provide motivation for the university to license the technology to industry for further refinement and application in expectation of royalty payments .

the patent system is grounded in article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the constitution and is intended to stimulate new discoveries and their reduction to practice , commonly known as innovation .

the grant of a patent provides the inventor with a means to capture returns to his invention through exclusive rights on its practice for 20 years from date of filing .

this is designed to encourage those investments necessary to further develop an idea and generate a marketable technology .

at the same time , the process of obtaining a patent places the concept on which it is based in the public domain .

in return for a time limited monopoly right to specific applications of the knowledge generated , the inventor must publish the ideas covered in the patent .

proponents argue that , as a disclosure system , the patent can , and often does , stimulate other firms or individuals to invent "around" existing patents to provide for parallel technical developments or meet similar and expanded demands in the marketplace .

innovation produces new knowledge .

one characteristic of this knowledge is that it is a "public good," a good that is not consumed when it is used .

this "public good" concept underlies the u.s. patent system .

as professor john shoven points out , "the use of an idea or discovery by one person does not , in most cases , reduce the availability of that information to others. .

therefore the marginal social cost of the widespread application of that information is near zero because the stock of knowledge is not depleted .

this is why the federal government funds basic research .

"ordinarily , society maximizes its welfare through not charging for the use of a free good. .

however , innovation typically is costly and resource intensive .

patents permit novel concepts or discoveries to become "property" when reduced to practice and therefore allow for control over their use .

they "create incentives that maximize the difference between the value of the intellectual property that is created and used and the social cost of its creation. .

the patent process is designed to resolve the problem of appropriability .

if discoveries were universally available without a means for the inventor to realize a return on investments , most commentators are convinced that there would result a "much lower and indeed suboptimal level of innovation. .

although research is often important to innovation , it appears that , on average , it constitutes approximately 25% of the cost of commercializing a new technology or technique , thus requiring the expenditure of a substantial amount of additional resources to bring most products or processes to the marketplace .

the grant of a patent provides the inventor with a mechanism to capture the returns to his invention through exclusive rights on its practice for 20 years from date of filing .

that is intended to encourage those investments necessary to further develop an idea and generate a marketable technology .

the utility of patents to companies varies among industrial sectors .

patents are perceived as critical in the drug and chemical industries .

that may reflect the nature of r&d performed in these sectors , where the results often are relatively easy to reproduce .

others have pointed out that drug patents are more detailed in their claims and therefore easier to defend .

in contrast , studies have found that in many other industries the protection offered by patents is diminished by the ability to invent around the patent and limited by the disclosure of vital information in the patent itself .

in the aircraft and semiconductor industries patents have not been the most successful mechanism for capturing the benefits of investments .

instead , lead time and the strength of the learning curve were determined to be more important .

according to one study , in the semiconductor and related equipment industry , secrecy and lead time were deemed significantly more important than patents .

similar findings characterize the aerospace and machine tool industries , among others .

the degree to which industry perceives patents as effective has been characterized as "positively correlated with the increase in duplication costs and time associated with patents. .

the patent system has dual policy goals — providing incentives for inventors to invent and encouraging inventors to disclose technical information .

disclosure requirements are factors in achieving a balance between current and future innovation through the patent process , as are limitations on scope , novelty mandates , and nonobviousness considerations .

patents can give rise to an environment of competitiveness with multiple sources of innovation , which is viewed by some experts as the basis for technological progress .

this is important because , as professors robert merges and richard nelson found in their studies , in a situation where only "a few organizations controlled the development of a technology , technical advance appeared sluggish. .

the patent system has long been subject to criticism , however .

some observers have asserted that the patent system is unnecessary due to market forces that already suffice to create an optimal level of innovation .

the desire to obtain a lead time advantage over competitors , as well as the recognition that technologically backward firms lose out to their rivals , may well provide sufficient inducement to invent without the need for further incentives .

other commentators believe that the patent system encourages industry concentration and presents a barrier to entry in some markets .

still other observers believe that the patent system too frequently attracts speculators who prefer to acquire and enforce patents rather than engage in socially productive activity .

when analyzing the validity of these competing views , it is important to note the lack of rigorous analytical methods available for studying the effect of the patent law upon the u.s. economy as a whole .

the relationship between innovation and patent rights remains poorly understood .

as a result , current economic and policy tools do not allow us to calibrate the patent system precisely in order to produce an optimal level of investment in innovation .

thus , each of the arguments for and against the patent system remains open to challenge by those who are unpersuaded by their internal logic .

reflecting the importance of cooperative r&d to the government , a series of legislative provisions use intellectual property rights to foster collaboration between all the parties in the research and development enterprise leading to the generation of new and improved products and processes for the marketplace .

both p.l .

96-480 , the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act ( known as the "stevenson - wydler act" ) , as amended , and p.l .

96 - 517 , amendments to the patent and trademark act ( commonly referred to as the "bayh - dole act" after its two main sponsors , former senators birch bayh and robert dole ) , are the basis for efforts at using patents and licensing to facilitate cooperative r&d , technology transfer , and the commercialization of technology supported by the federal government .

these laws affect the way the national institutes of health , and other government agencies , interact with the academic community and industry in the r&d arena .

it is in this area where the sometimes competing goals of prescription drug cost containment and encouragement of technology - based innovations may conflict .

while the result of different legislative histories and concerns , the stevenson - wydler act and the bayh - dole act were passed to encourage the use of technologies funded by and / or developed by the federal government in pursuit of the departments' and agencies' mission requirements .

however , they address intellectual property issues that arise from different r&d relationships .

the stevenson - wydler act contains provisions concerning assignment of title to inventions arising from collaborative work between federal laboratories and outside cooperating parties where no direct federal funding is involved .

the bayh - dole act primarily addresses the distribution of patents resulting from federally funded research and development performed by outside organizations and prescribes the licensing of government - owned inventions .

the primary mission of the national institutes of health "is science in pursuit of fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the application of that knowledge to extend healthy life and reduce the burdens of illness and disability. .

to achieve this , nih funds over $30.9 billion of both in - house and extramural r&d ; less than 10% of this total is for work within nih laboratories and more than 80% goes to contractors , primarily universities and non - profit research institutions .

simultaneously , the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act and the bayh - dole act provide the agency with the "statutory mandate to ensure that new technologies developed in those laboratories are transferred to the private sector and commercialized in an expeditious and efficient manner. .

thus , nih is faced with two interrelated goals: "promoting the health of the american people and all mankind through research in the biosciences , and fostering a vigorous domestic biotechnology industry. .

while the legislation discussed in this paper provides a general framework within which to achieve some of these objectives , there are specific issues associated with health research that have generated concerns not raised in other industrial sectors .

given the particular interest in health - related r&d , the increased commercial potential , and cost considerations , questions are being raised within congress as to the adequacy of current arrangements .

most experts agree that closer cooperation can augment funding sources ( both in the public and private sectors ) , increase technology transfer , stimulate additional innovation , lead to new products and processes , and expand markets .

yet , others point out that collaboration may provide an increased opportunity for unfair advantages , excessive private sector profits at the expense of the public , conflicts of interest , redirection of research , and less openness in sharing of scientific discovery .

the actual and expected benefits flowing from the biomedical community go beyond economic consideration of the importance of technological progress to the nation .

the potential life saving quality of many of the products associated with this type of r&d provides an additional dimension .

in addition to the opportunities to generate profits on sales of products , provide jobs , and stimulate investments , advances in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals also can facilitate economic growth through improvements in productivity resulting from a healthier population .

professor frank lichtenberg suggests that the benefits of new drugs include "longer life , better quality of life , and reductions in total medical expenditure. .

to date , the u.s. system of research , development , and commercialization has had a clear impact on the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries .

policies concerning funding for research , intellectual property protection , and cooperative r&d have played an important part in the economic success of these sectors .

american pharmaceutical firms have "consistently maintained a competitive edge in international markets" and lead in new drug discoveries .

according to industry sources , u.s. investment in health - related r&d exceeds all other countries and has demonstrated a pattern of r&d investment that has increased at approximately twice the rate of r&d growth in europe .

incentives for innovation in the industrial community clearly have contributed to substantial research and development by the pharmaceutical and biotechnology sectors .

in 2010 , research and development spending by the biopharmaceutical industry in the united states totaled between $67.4 billion and $68.0 billion .

domestic r&d spending for members of the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) was an estimated $37.4 billion , with 20.3% of domestic sales reinvested in research and development .

the industry employs approximately 291,000 individuals in highly skilled jobs .

public u.s. biotechnology companies spent $17.6 billion on r&d , generated $52.6 billion in product sales , and produced $61.6 billion in revenue during 2010 .

an industry that did not exist 25 years ago , u.s. biotechnology has provided new products and processes for the international marketplace , including more than 200 biotech drugs and vaccines , with potential for many more advances .

some observers question whether or not there are unintended consequences to current policies and programs related to innovation that may need to be addressed .

as discussed in this paper , the current legislative approach promotes the private sector use of the results of federally funded research and development , particularly through incentives to cooperative activities among government , industry , and academia .

this approach attempts to balance the public's interest in new or improved products and processes for the marketplace with concerns over providing companies valuable benefits without adequate accountability or compensation .

in general , incentives for the commercialization of government - supported r&d have been created in response to the argument that the economic benefits to the nation's research investment occur when new goods and services are available to meet public demand , create new jobs , improve productivity , and increase our standard of living .

to date , these potential benefits have been considered more important than the initial cost to the government .

however , the particular nature of health - related r&d and the substantial federal investment in this area have caused uncertainty over whether or not the present balance is appropriate .

critics of the current approach argue that the need for technology development incentives in the pharmaceutical and / or biotechnology sectors is mitigated by industry access to government - supported r&d at no cost , monopoly power through patent protection , and other regulatory and tax advantages .

they maintain that the benefits to industry are such that the public has the right to expect a more direct financial return for the federal investment and , therefore , the government should be permitted to provide input into certain drug pricing decisions .

those who disagree point out that the collaborative public - private environment created by federal policies and practices has generated extraordinary innovation in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries .

these sectors have provided significant benefits to the health and well - being of the nation .

it remains to be seen if changes will be made and if the nature of government - industry - university cooperation will be altered .

