u.s. animal agriculture wants to improve its ability to trace the movement of livestock from their birthplace to slaughter .

some advocates also want such traceability to reach all the way to the final consumer .

is a national system needed ? .

should it be mandatory ? .

what would it cost , and who pays ? .

the livestock and meat industries have discussed these questions for some time , and an industry - government working group was developing a national animal identification ( id ) plan for livestock disease tracking purposes .

the group stated that the health of u.s. herds was "the most urgent issue" and "the most significant focus" of its proposed plan .

national interest intensified in the wake of such developments as the discovery in 2003 of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or "mad cow disease" ) in north america , and ongoing concerns about bioterrorism .

debate over a law requiring retail country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) for meats and other products also has fueled interest in increased animal id capabilities ( but was not a focus of the industry - government working group ) .

in 2007 , the need for , and design of , an animal id program will be a topic during debate on a new omnibus farm bill .

this report covers animal id and , to a lesser extent , meat traceability .

however , traceability , and the somewhat different but related concepts of "identity preservation" and "product segregation," also pertain to other agricultural products ( eg , grains ) and issues ( eg , genetically modified , or gm , crops ; the labeling of gm foods ; and the production and labeling of organic foods ) .

several sources cited below , including the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) economic research service ( ers ) and choices articles ( see footnote 1 ) and a 2002 sparks study ( see footnote 5 ) , cover traceability in more breadth .

animal id refers to the marking of individual farm animals , or a group or lot of animals , so that they can be tracked from place of birth to slaughter .

many producers already know , and keep records on , the identities of each animal .

in addition , many animals have been identified as part of official disease eradication or control programs .

however , no nationwide u.s. marking system , backed by universal numbering and a central data registry , is in place yet .

animal id is one component of meat traceability .

traceability is the more comprehensive concept of tracking the movement of identifiable products through the marketing chain .

an extensive form of meat traceability is the ability to follow products forward from their source animal ( i.e. , birth or ancestry ) , through growth and feeding , slaughter , processing , and distribution , to the point of sale or consumption ( or backward from the consumer to the source animal ) .

traceability can be used to convey information about a product , such as what it contains , how it was produced , and every place it has been .

animal id and meat traceability are not themselves food safety , animal disease prevention , quality assurance , or country - of - origin labeling programs .

however , they may be important components of such programs .

animal id dates back at least to the 1800s , when hot iron brands were used throughout the west to indicate ownership .

the methods of ( and reasons for ) identifying and tracking animals and their products have evolved since then and , as noted , are employed for both commercial and regulatory purposes .

together , the above activities might be viewed as a national id system , but there are significant gaps .

generally , as disease programs succeed , fewer animals receive tags .

the animal id working group reported that fewer than 4 million u.s. calves ( about 10% of the total ) were being vaccinated for brucellosis and tagged ( only female calves are vaccinated ) .

also , existing id programs may provide only limited information — for example , not all of an animal's movements between the farm and slaughterhouse may be documented .

none of the programs were set up to denote place of birth , analysts say .

although u.s. regulators and producers usually can locate where a product was processed or the movements of many farm animals , it can be tedious and time - consuming , taking weeks or months in some situations .

that's because the different animal id and traceability systems now in place have been implemented independently of each other , may be "paper trails" which take time to follow , have divergent and sometimes conflicting purposes , and collect disparate types of information , according to industry experts .

the limitations of existing animal id were tested after several u.s. cases of bse emerged .

the first case , in december 2003 , was a holstein dairy cow with a metal ear tag containing an identifying number .

that helped authorities to more quickly trace its likely movements and origin , to a herd in alberta , canada .

dairy farmers often have more extensive information about individual animals for milk production , breeding , feeding , and related purposes .

however , six weeks later , u.s. authorities announced that they had ended their bse field investigation after identifying only 28 of 80 cows that had entered the united states from canada with the bse cow .

an international expert panel , asked by usda asked to review its handling of this first u.s. bse case , warned that usda's failure to find every animal "is a problem faced by all countries which do not have an effective animal traceability system. .

it encouraged "the implementation of a national identification system that is appropriate to north american farming. .

announcing the end of an investigation into the second u.s. bse case ( in a texas - born cow that died in november 2004 ) , secretary johanns again lamented the lack of a national id system: the investigation "would have taken far less than two months" if a system were in place , a significant matter "because a number of trading partners have been reluctant to make decisions until the investigation is complete. .

investigators also were unable to trace back earlier locations and herdmates of a third bse case , an alabama beef cow found in february 2006 , at a time of delicate market - reopening discussions with both the japanese and koreans .

work toward a coordinated national animal id system began in earnest in the early 2000s with the formation of the national food animal identification task force , facilitated by the national institute for animal agriculture ( niaa ) .

this evolved into a larger , joint industry - government - professional effort whose principal goal was the ability to trace animals of interest within 48 hours of an animal disease problem .

usda eventually assumed the lead in planning the system , and has provided funding toward its establishment .

despite — some say because of — usda's direction , some livestock producers and their organizations complained that the department was beset by indecision , progressed much too slowly , and / or had sown considerable confusion about what type of program was evolving .

on the other hand , usda's actions may simply have been reflecting the continuing divergence of opinion within animal agriculture itself over the best policy approach .

a number of producers also were becoming more vocal about what they viewed as a threat to the privacy of their farm and financial records , particularly out of concern that participation in animal id could become mandatory .

usda has claimed broad authority , under the animal health protection act ( ahpa ; 7 u.s.c .

8301 et seq. ) .

to implement an animal id program , presumably making new legislation unnecessary .

some , however , believe that the ahpa might limit usda's options .

for example , does it empower the department to require producers to report data to a private entity ? .

several bills have been offered in recent years aimed at clarifying usda's authority and / or spelling out what type of program should be established .

congress also has played an important role by providing funding for animal id and placing conditions on use of that funding .

a number of policy options , possibly including legislative alternatives introduced in the past , are expected to be discussed in the 110 th congress .

a likely venue for these discussions is house and senate agriculture committee work in 2007 on a new omnibus farm bill .

the new chairman of the house agriculture committee , for example , has been the chief sponsor of legislation ( including h.r .

1254 in the 109 th congress ) to mandate a program .

in the 109 th congress , several animal id bills were offered .

h.r .

1254 would have amended the ahpa to require usda to establish a mandatory program for all farm - raised animals , and authorized federal appropriations to fund it .

another bill ( h.r .

1256 ) would have amended the ahpa to exempt certain information collected under an animal id program from foia disclosure .

meanwhile , h.r .

3170 would have established a privately governed livestock identification board to create and implement a mandatory system .

with regard to funding , both the senate - reported and house - passed versions of the usda appropriation for fy2007 ( h.r .

5384 ) would have funded the administration's budget request for another $33 million for animal id development .

however , the house version conditioned use of the money on the secretary first providing the house appropriations committee with a "complete and detailed plan" for the program , "including , but not limited to , proposed legislative changes , cost estimates , and means of program evaluation , and such plan is published as an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register for comment by interested parties. .

the accompanying house report ( h.rept .

109-463 ) expressed concern about the id program's progress and transparency .

the accompanying senate report ( s.rept .

109-266 ) asked the government accountability office to review usda's steps toward establishment of a program , and it also emphasized that the department should work with private industry on animal id .

the house and / or senate reports also directed that various amounts be allocated to a number of specified ongoing id pilot programs .

final action was uncertain as of mid - january 2007 ; usda and its programs were operating under a continuing resolution at that time .

during the full house's consideration of h.r .

5384 , a floor amendment by representative paul to prohibit all funding for the animal id program was defeated by a vote of 34 to 389 .

withdrawn , on a point of order , was a king amendment to create a mandatory but privately administered animal id system .

the amendment paralleled his bill ( h.r .

3170 ) to do the same .

in the 108 th congress , a number of proposals to establish animal id programs were introduced but not passed , including s. 1202 / h.r .

3546 , the meat and poultry products traceability and safety act of 2003 ; s. 2007 / h.r .

3714 [section 5 ( b ) ] , the ruminant identification program ; s. 2008 , the national farm animal identification and records act ; h.r .

3787 , also titled the national farm animal identification and records act ; h.r .

3822 , the national livestock identification act ; and s. 2070 / h.r .

3961 , the united states animal identification plan implementation act .

in the 107 th congress and the first session of the 108 th congress , much of the debate over the costs and benefits of expanded animal id and meat traceability occurred within the context of cool .

panels of both the house and senate agriculture committees held hearings on cool implementation .

in reviewing the cool issues , lawmakers learned more about how animal id systems could be used for other purposes , most notably to find and eradicate animal diseases like bse .

they also were exposed to more of the trade implications surrounding animal id in particular and meat traceability in general .

the agriculture committees also have held hearings on animal id specifically .

although most animal industry lobbyists generally appear to agree in concept on the need for a national plan , a consensus on its key elements is still evolving .

new developments regarding the bse situation , unforeseen outbreaks of some other potentially devastating animal disease , or some act of bioterrorism are examples of events that might propel further action .

