on january 12 , 2005 , the u.s. supreme court ruled that the sixth amendment right to a trial by jury requires that federal sentencing guidelines be advisory , rather than mandatory .

in doing so , the court struck down a provision in law that made the federal sentencing guidelines mandatory as well as a provision that permitted appellate review of departures from the guidelines .

in essence , the court's ruling gives federal judges discretion in sentencing offenders by not requiring them to adhere to the guidelines ; rather , the guidelines can be used by judges on an advisory basis .

as a result of the ruling , judges now have discretion in sentencing defendants unless the offense carries a mandatory sentence ( as specified in law ) .

while some may view the ruling as an opportunity for federal judges to take into consideration the circumstances unique to each individual offender , thus handing down a sentence that better fits the offender , others fear that federal sentencing will give way to unwarranted disparity and inconsistencies across jurisdictions .

the court has begun to clarify some of the lingering questions regarding the amount of weight to be given to the guidelines and what standards appellate courts should use in assessing the "reasonableness" of a particular sentence .

in light of these rulings , the issue for congress is whether to amend current law to require federal judges to follow guided sentences ( hence , codify specified sentencing ranges that are in the guidelines ) , or to continue the status quo and permit federal judges to use their discretion in sentencing , under certain circumstances .

the issue that brought the matter before the court was a judge's obligation to move from one guideline maximum to a higher one based on the judge's factual determination .

the court examined "[w]hether the sixth amendment is violated by the imposition of an enhanced sentence under the united states sentencing guidelines ( ussg ) based on the sentencing judge's determination of a fact ( other than a prior conviction ) that was not found by the jury or admitted by the defendant. .

this report provides background information on the federal sentencing guidelines .

in doing so , the report provides a summary of u.s. penal policy , paying particular attention to such policy at the federal level .

the report then discusses legislation enacted in 1984 that created the pre - booker federal sentencing structure .

a legal analysis of the court's sixth amendment jurisprudence leading up to the booker decision as well as subsequent , related court decisions follow .

next , the different types of sentencing guidelines , including the one that was approved by congress that was the basis for the recent u.s. supreme court decision , are discussed .

the report then provides an analysis of departures from the guidelines under the federal system .

the report concludes with an analysis of possible policy options congress may wish to consider if it chooses to address this issue .

historically , the way in which convicted offenders are sentenced in the united states falls under one of two penal policies — indeterminate and determinate sentences .

indeterminate sentencing practices were predominant for several decades , leading up to the major reform efforts undertaken by many states and the federal government in the mid - to late 1970s and early 1980s ( see discussion in the next section ) .

today , however , some states and the federal government have variations of determinate sentencing .

some states , however , continue to operate under indeterminate sentencing .

early penal policy in the united states served the goals of retribution and punishment .

beginning in 1870 , however , rehabilitation became the focus of criminal sentencing , which led to the adoption of an indeterminate sentencing system in the federal penal system .

at the time , indeterminate sentencing was seen as the preferred mechanism to rehabilitate offenders , which was the stated goal of punishment .

under the federal indeterminate sentencing scheme , congress established the penalty range within which the judge imposed a sentence .

typically , after one - third of the sentence was served , a parole board would determine if the offender had been rehabilitated and could be released from prison and placed on parole .

federal sentencing policy was reexamined by congress in the early 1970s , and in 1973 a proposal to revise the entire federal criminal code was introduced , which ultimately included a reform of the federal sentencing system .

it wasn't until 1984 , however , that congress passed a sentencing reform measure , which abolished indeterminate sentencing at the federal level and created a determinate sentencing structure through the federal sentencing guidelines ( see discussion below ) .

in 1984 , congress passed legislation that led to the creation of federal sentencing guidelines .

the sentencing reform act of 1984 ( chapter ii of the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 ; p.l .

98-473 ) , in essence , eliminated indeterminate sentencing at the federal level .

the act created the united states sentencing commission , an independent body within the judicial branch of the federal government and charged it with promulgating guidelines for federal sentencing .

the purpose of the commission was to examine unwarranted disparity in federal sentencing policy , among other things .

in establishing sentencing guidelines for federal judges , the commission took into consideration factors such as ( 1 ) the nature and degree of harm caused by the offense ; ( 2 ) the offender's prior record ; ( 3 ) public views of the gravity of the offense ; ( 4 ) the deterrent effect of a particular sentence ; and ( 5 ) aggravating or mitigating circumstances .

in addition to these factors , the commission also considered characteristics of the offender , such as age , education , vocational skills , and mental or emotional state , among other things .

prior to the booker decision ( discussed below ) , the guidelines were binding .

in summary , the sentencing reform act reformed the federal sentencing system in the following ways: it abandoned one of the traditional goals of punishment , rehabilitation , and asserted the following goals: retribution , education , deterrence and incapacitation .

it consolidated the power that had been exercised by judges and the u.s. parole board to decide the type of punishment and its length by abolishing paroles and creating the u.s .

sentencing commission and charging it with establishing sentencing guidelines .

it made all federal sentences determinate .

it authorized appellate review of sentences in which the judge departed from the guidelines and review of other sentences under certain circumstances .

in a series of cases , the u.s. supreme court has held that given the sixth amendment right to trial by jury , judges cannot impose sentences beyond the prescribed statutory maximum unless the facts supporting such an increase are found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt .

in apprendi v. new jersey ( apprendi ) , the court struck down new jersey's hate crime law , which allowed a judge to increase a sentence to double the statutory maximum if he or she found , by a preponderance of the evidence , that the defendant acted with a purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race .

in reversing the lower court's decision , the court declared that the jury trial and notification clauses of the sixth amendment and due process clauses of the fifth and fourteenth amendments embody a principle that insists that , except in the case of recidivists , a judge could not on his own findings sentence a criminal defendant to a term of imprisonment greater than the statutory maximum assigned for the crime for which he had been convicted by the jury .

in blakely v. washington ( blakely ) , the court held that washington state's sentencing guidelines violated the sixth amendment's guarantee of a trial by jury in criminal cases .

washington state guidelines allowed judges , rather than juries , to make certain findings of fact that increased an offender's sentence .

the court found that the "statutory maximum" for apprendi purposes is the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant .

in other words , the relevant statutory maximum is not the maximum sentence a judge may impose after finding additional facts , but the maximum he may impose without any additional facts .

after blakely , federal courts were immediately faced with arguments that the ussg also violated the sixth amendment .

the courts were divided sharply on this issue .

sentencing guidelines can be presumptive , statutory , advisory or voluntary .

the most notable of these are the presumptive sentencing guidelines , which had been in place at the federal level at the time of the supreme court's ruling in booker .

in light of the court's ruling in booker and its subsequent rulings in gall and kimrough , the issue for congress is whether to amend current law to require federal judges to follow guided sentences , or continue to permit federal judges to use their discretion in sentencing , under certain circumstances .

following is a discussion and analysis of several selected options congress could consider .

one option congress may wish to consider could be to maintain the sentencing guidelines by specifying mandatory minimum sentences and increasing the top of each guideline range to a statutory maximum for specified offenses ( hence , codify specified sentencing ranges that are in the guidelines ) .

in essence , this option would require any upward departures to coincide with the statutory maximum for the offense in question , in which case a statutory maximum would have to be specified .

this option was first presented to the u.s .

sentencing commission shortly after the u.s. supreme court decision in blakely by frank bowman , who concluded with respect to such an option: the practical effect of such an amendment would be to preserve current federal practice almost unchanged .

guidelines factors would not be elements .

they could still constitutionally be determined by post - conviction judicial findings of fact... .

the only theoretical difference would be that judges could sentence defendants above the top of the current guideline ranges without the formality of an upward departure... .

congress could consider a measure that has been implemented in kansas .

kansas had presumptive sentencing guidelines that were invalidated by the state's supreme court .

in response to the court ruling , the state's legislature chose to retain the sentencing structure by incorporating jury fact - finding as the basis for enhanced sentences .

under this scheme , for each enhancement that would increase the sentence beyond the guideline maximum for which the defendant did not waive his or her rights , the judge has the option of trying aggravating factors before the jury , either during the main trial or in a separate , bifurcated proceeding .

the jury would have to find that the enhanced factors exist beyond a reasonable doubt in order for the enhanced sentence to be applicable .

while this option may satisfy constitutional questions , it may prove to be an expensive and time - consuming .

congress may also allow federal judges to exercise their discretion in sentencing in cases where congress has not specified a mandatory term of sentence .

this option could possibly mirror the indeterminate sentencing scheme that was in place prior to the sentencing reform effort in 1984 .

while such an option would allow judges to individualize sentences to the extent that congress has not established a mandatory sentence for the offense , it could also result in a lack of uniformity due to judges applying different sentences across jurisdictions .

