after over a decade of intensive experience with multifaceted peacekeeping and peacebuildingoperations , ( 1 ) many analysts have concluded thatestablishing a secure and stable environment is oneessential element for achieving a sustainable peace .

as continued instability in iraq and afghanistanimpedes the restoration of normal lives for those countries' inhabitants , and as haiti exhibitsrenewed instability , some members of congress are examining with renewed interest available toolsto provide effective security .

while military forces are considered indispensable for establishinginitial security and often are also used to maintain law and order in peacekeeping and related"stability" or "stabilization" operations designed to normalize conditions in post - conflict and post - interventionenvironments , their use is often controversial .

 ( 2 ) overthe past decade , internationalcivilian police ( known as "civpol" ) have become increasingly recognized as generally more suitedthan military forces for most law and order tasks , and their use has increased dramatically .

thesenate foreign relations committee , in its march 2004 report 108-248 accompanying the fy2005foreign relations authorization bill ( s. 2144 ) , stated that it recognizes "the importanceof the united nations peacekeeping operations , including its capability to deploy civil police forces,in promoting stability in post - conflict situations. .

 ( 3 ) policymakers have recognized problems withtheir use and made efforts to deal with them .

among the current issues for congress are whether to provide for continued improvements to the existing system and whether to build new u.s. and international civpol capabilities .

civpoladvocates have advanced proposals to ( 1 ) facilitate the recruitment and rapid deployment of adequatenumbers of qualified police and related law enforcement personnel to complex post - conflictmissions , and ( 2 ) ensure that such missions include personnel with the appropriate training and skillsto handle a range of law enforcement situations .

these proposals encompass provisions that wouldstress continued implementation of u.s. and u.n. reform efforts , as well as provisions that wouldreform the existing system .

most important among the reform efforts were two key documents that recommended mechanisms to improve existing civpol systems and approaches for providing and using civpolforces .

one was the clinton administration's february 2000 presidential decision directive 71 ( pdd - 71 ) , which specifically dealt with the law enforcement aspects of peacekeeping operations .

 ( 4 ) while its provisions were left largely unimplemented by the clinton administration , ( 5 ) the directiveremains in effect under the bush administration , which has begun implementing some measures.the other was the united nations' august 2000 "brahimi panel" report , ( 6 ) which dealt with problemsof u.n. peacekeeping operations in general , but also contained four specific recommendations toaddress problems with the u.n. civilian police system , particularly in the areas of recruitment,training , and deployment of international civilian police personnel .

the united nations has begunimplementing some of the brahimi panel recommendations and other proposed reforms , while othersremain under discussion .

among the proposals recommended by advocates are: ( 1 ) the creation of a reserve civpol force , as could be contemplated under h.r .

1414 for the u.n. and as proposed for theunited states under h.r .

2616 ; ( 2 ) the diversification of international police forces ascurrently constituted , including the establishment of units of police with military skills ( i.e.,"constabulary forces" ) to handle hostile situations such as crowd control ( as is suggested for natounder h.r .

2616 ; and ( 3 ) the creation of more robust civilian response mechanisms , ascontemplated by s. 2127 and related proposals , including a proposal for a "stabilitypackage" of lawyers , judges , prosecutors , and penal experts , in addition to civpols , to create viablelaw enforcement systems .

an important consideration to many policymakers is whetherrecommendations for improving the civpol mechanisms could reduce reliance on u.s. militaryforces in post - conflict operations or shorten the length of their deployments to such operations .

this report will provide a brief synopsis of the evolution of the uses of international police in peacekeeping operations , with a description of the problems encountered .

 ( appendix a providesa synopsis , in chart form , of many of these operations .

appendix b discusses in more detail thegradual expansion of policing in u.n. and u.s. - led operations during the 1990s. ) .

this report willthen discuss the current u.n. , u.s. , and european mechanisms for providing civpols to internationaloperations , recommendations for improving those systems , and the status of their implementation .

it will then assess the various approaches that are recommended to resolve continuing problems andprovide options for the u.s. congress for continued improvements to the system .

this report maybe updated if warranted .

note : this is a list of acronyms used two or more times in the text .

acronyms used only once arenot included .

the international community has increasingly turned to civpols to perform a variety offunctions in international peace operations .

between 1994 and 2000 , the number of internationalcivilian police participating in u.n. operations ( uncivpols ) increased fourfold .

despite a dropfrom that peak , the number of currently deployed uncivpols is twice what it was nearly ten yearsago .

 ( 7 ) as of february 29 , 2004 , 4,655 internationalcivilian police , including 476 americans , wereassisting with law enforcement tasks in the eight u.n. peacekeeping missions with uncivpolcomponents .

in addition , several nations , including the united states , continue to provide bilateralassistance , especially training , to indigenous police forces in a variety of post - conflict situations .

some analysts urge the eventual deployment of sizable contingents of international civilian policeto afghanistan ( where the united states , germany , and the united kingdom are now working torecreate an indigenous police force ) to iraq ( where the united states and jordan are doing the same ) ,and to haiti .

as of february 29 , 2004 , five uncivpol were deployed to afghanistan .

all u.s. assistance for law enforcement entities abroad is carried out within the context ofsection 660 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa ) , adopted in 1975 .

except forspecific exempted cases , section 660 prohibits aid to train , advise , or provide financial support forpolice , prisons , or other law enforcement forces of any foreign government , or for programs ofinternal intelligence or surveillance on behalf of a foreign government .

among the exceptions tosection 660 is one that states that it does not apply to assistance in post - conflict situations .

 ( 8 ) suchassistance is provided , and the details regarding it are worked out , on a case - by - case basis , as thereis no specific statutory authority to regulate and fund such assistance .

 ( 9 ) .

since the end of the cold war , the international community has provided international policeassistance through multilateral and unilateral mechanisms .

the united nations has been theprincipal actor in international police operations , but the european countries and regionalorganizations and the united states have also played important roles .

the united nations international civilian police system is currently the mechanism through which much international civilian police assistance is provided in multilateral operations .

as offebruary 29 , 2004 , some 4,655 uncivpol officers from 65 nations were serving in eight u.n.missions .

 ( 16 ) about a fifth of those countries ( 13 ) provide about two - thirds of those officers .

thelargest contributor is jordan ( 553 ) and the second largest is the united states ( 476 ) .

other countriescontributing over 100 officers are: india ( 347 ) , germany ( 259 ) , turkey ( 194 ) , the ukraine ( 192 ) ,nepal ( 182 ) , malaysia ( 178 ) , romania ( 176 ) , pakistan ( 172 ) , argentina ( 146 ) , poland ( 127 ) , and theunited kingdom ( 126 ) .

over 75% of those uncivpol ( 3,508 ) were serving in kosovo , the largestuncivpol mission by far , as of february 29 , 2004 .

other missions are in liberia ( 518 ) , easttimor ( 303 ) , sierra leone ( 142 ) , the democratic republic of the congo ( 115 ) , cyprus ( 47 ) , georgia ( 10 ) , and afghanistan ( 5 ) .

many nations have also provided training and reform assistance on an individual basis , oftenwithin the context of multilateral efforts .

during the early to mid - 1990s , the united states providedpolice assistance in two u.s. peacekeeping operations in somalia and haiti , carried out under u.n.authority .

the united states also took the lead in developing police training programs in somaliathrough the justice department's international criminal investigative training assistance program ( icitap ) , which continues to provide direct training and reform assistance .

 ( for more information,see appendix b. ) .

many european union ( eu ) member states have contributed police assistance onan individual basis , including the united kingdom , germany , sweden , belgium , netherlands,france , spain , and italy .

increasingly over the past decade , the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , and more recently the european union ( eu ) have taken the lead in specific missions , oftenas an adjunct or follow - up to u.n. missions .

for instance , while the united nations has hadresponsibility for the overall police mission in kosovo , the osce has provided civpols to establishthe new police academy and train the members of the new police force there .

the osce also hasmissions which provide training assistance and support for building local police capacity in sevenother countries .

in january 2003 , the eu assumed responsibility from the united nations for thepolice mission in bosnia .

on december 15 , 2003 , the eu launched its second police mission , the200-strong proxima mission in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia .

in the 108th congress , members introduced three bills with the intent of strengthening u.s. andinternational capabilities to conduct civpol missions and other rule of law missions .

h.r .

1414 is intended to improve uncivpol capabilities .

h.r .

2616 addresses perceived problems with u.s. civpol capabilities and would create capabilities withinnato to handle international post - conflict stabilization and reconstruction efforts .

s. 2127 seeks to improve the united states' ability to provide civilian capabilities to respond to crisesabroad .

these proposals build upon prior u.n. and u.s. efforts to improve international capabilities .

in addition to these proposals , analysts advance three related options to address perceiveddeficiencies in training , in capabilities for performing constabulary functions , and in creating viablelaw enforcement and rule of law institutions .

sources: peacekeeping fact sheets accessible through the u.n. department of peacekeeping operations website http: / / www.un.org / depts / dpko / dpko / home.shtml ; fact sheet on the eu police accessible at http: / / ue.eu.int / eupm ; omik information accessible throughthe organization for security and co - operation in europe ( osce ) website http: / / www.osce.org ; united nations .

the blue helmets , 3rd edition , newyork , 1996 ; erwin a. schimidl , police in peace operations , informationen zur sicherheitspolitik , ( landesverteidigungsakademie / militã¤rwissenschaftliches bã¼ro of austria ) no .

10 , september 1998 ; robert b. oakley , michael j. dziedzic , and eliotgoldberg , eds .

policing the new world disorder: peace operations and public security .

washington,d.c .

: national defense university press , 1998,and robert m. perito , the american experience with police in peace operations , clementsport,canada: the canadian peacekeeping press , 2002 .

note: this chart excludes a number of u.n. civilian police missions whose numbers were under 100 authorized or deployed .

the dispatch of groups of bilateral and multilateral international policemen to advise and train local police forces predated the first world war .

european nationssent police units in the late 1800s to provinces of the disintegrating ottoman empire and to albania in 1913-1914 to create a new police force .

early police monitors weredeployed to guard the suez canal in 1882 , and under the league of nations to thesaarland in 1935 .

 ( 91 ) the first use of u.n. civilian police in a peacekeeping operation took place in 1960 with the u.n. operation in the congo , when first a ghanaian contingent wasdeployed for a few months , and next a nigerian contingent which remained for abouta year after the u.n. operation ended in 1964 .

they were tasked with assisting thecongolese police in maintaining order .

subsequently , in 1962-63 , the unitednations provided a u.n .

temporary executive authority ( untea ) to administerwest new guinea during the transition from dutch to indonesian rule and recruitedphilippine police officers to assist the local force .

the u.n. peacekeeping force incyprus ( unficyp ) , beginning in 1964 and continuing to the present day , was thefirst operation where the term uncivpol was used , and the first multilateral u.n.police force .

unficyp civpols assisted cypriot police in maintaining order andproviding security in sensitive areas in hopes of diffusing tensions .

predominance of monitoring mandates , cambodia , et al .

: 1989-early 1992 and recognition of deployment and institutiongaps .

the earliest post - cold war operations with mandates limitedto or focused primarily on monitoring the performance of local police officerscommenced in 1989 through 1992 .

two of the earliest post - cold war operations , innamibia ( 1989-1990 ) , and the western sahara , ( starting in 1991 and continuingintermittently , with the latest uncivpol presence there recorded in november2003 ) took place in areas where there were well - trained police forces , as did the u.n.operations of the cold war period .

 ( 92 ) the unitednations transition assistancegroup ( untag ) in namibia was established to monitor the electoral process leadingup to south west africa's independence .

unarmed civpol monitors were to assistwith this mission .

in the field , the uncivpol mission increased to patrollingseparate from the local police and investigating complaints about them .

 ( 93 ) accordingto one analyst , untag became a model for future missions in the early 1990s,setting the three main tasks for the early monitoring missions: "accompanying localpolice in performing their duties ; receiving and investigating public complaints aboutthe police ; and supervising investigations conducted by local police. .

 ( 94 ) untag was followed in 1991 by the u.n. mission for the referendum in southwest sahara ( minurso ) where the united nations established a temporary administration tocarry out a referendum to decide on the future status of the former spanish colony - - a referendum that is yet to be held because of continued opposition by morocco .

two other operations with strictly monitoring mandates - - angola ( unavem ii and iii , 1991-1995 ) and cambodia ( 1992-1994 ) - - occurred in more difficultsituations with less established institutions and in the wake of tenuous peace accords .

despite the limited mandates , actors in the field occasionally decided additionalfunctions were necessary .

police monitors were also deployed in another tenuoussituation through the u.n. protection force peacekeeping operation ( 1992-1995 ) tothe new states created by the break - up of yugoslavia , with civpols deployed in 1992,first to croatia , then to bosnia - hercegovia , and last to macedonia for a variety ofmonitoring functions .

their missions were largely overwhelmed by the escalationof armed conflict which many analysts attribute to an inadequate mandate andinsufficient number of unprofor military forces .

the u.n .

transition administration in cambodia ( untac ) was one of the last and certainly the largest and most ambitious u.n. peacekeeping operation in whichpolice served a strictly monitoring mandate .

a broad operation in other respects,untac did little to increase the scope of police operations and powers in themandate .

as a result , the untac police mission underwent a significant shift ofresponsibilities in the field .

as rethought , the focus of the untac police unit wasto investigate complaints of violations of political liberties and human rights .

when cambodian police failed to apprehend those cited as suspects of such violations byuncivpols , the u.n. secretary - general's representative began in january 1993bestowing arrest powers on civpols , by directive and for the first time in a u.n.operation , and mandating the establishment of an untac jail .

both actions,however , came too late to make the operation effective according to some analysts .

 ( 95 ) cambodia was one of the first places where the slowness of deployment , which took some 10 months to get to the field in full strength due to problems of raising alarge force , was noted as a hindrance to the effective performance of the entireoperation .

 ( 96 ) it was also quickly recognized thatalthough untac had been assignedthe task of ensuring law and order , the numbers of authorized police were inadequatefor such a task .

as a result of this deployment gap , the untac police missioninitially underwent another adjustment , cutting the scope of its efforts from ensuringlaw and order to monitoring elections .

while not an explicit part of the untac mandate , the operation contemplated a limited amount of training for cambodian police , and untac police quicklyrecognized the need for training not only the police , but also the judiciary .

accordingto one analyst , "once in the field , they could clearly see the value of [such]training...." as few resources were available , according to the same source , "somecivil police undertook makeshift training using their own training manuals..." ( 97 ) analyses of the untac operation , among others , led to the concept of thedevelopment of an "institution gap" as untac police were perceived as unable topromote justice due to the lack of an adequate and independent judicial system,which had been "systematically removed by the [previous] pol pot regime," to punishthose that untac police apprehended .

 ( 98 ) as aresult , analysts developed the ideaof deploying integrated "justice packages" of justice and penal officials , as well aspolice officers .

police reform and training components added: 1992-1994 , and recognition of enforcement gap .

reform ofpolice forces became a "pivotal" element for the first time in the u.n. observermission in el salvador ( onusal ) .

according to one analyst , onusal "constitutedthe most radical attempt to date to put internal security forces under civilian control"with the international community supplying "unprecedented levels of technicalassistance , training , on - the - job supervision , and material assistance to the new policeforce. .

 ( 99 ) the reform role for international policeforces was established throughjanuary 1992 peace accords , negotiated with the mediation of the united nationsfrom april 1990 , which put an end to el salvador's decade long civil war .

theaccords were detailed on security affairs , calling for the dismantling of the military - controlled security forces andthe creation of a new national civilian police force ( policã­a nacional civil , or pnc ) , and had a general reference to the reform of thejudicial system .

 ( 100 ) onusal , which had started operations in july 1991 with the dispatch of human rights monitors even before a cease - fire was declared , provided uncivpolsbeginning in march 1992 .

their mandate included the broad and vague direction to cooperate "in ensuring a smooth transition and assisting police authorities," and alsothe function of "accompanying officers and members of the [existing] nationalpolice in the performance of their duties. .

 ( 101 ) these functions occurred during a two - year transition period while a new police academy was created and the recruits forthe cnp force were trained .

although the emphasis of the onusal policeoperation was on verification and field work , ( 102 ) onusal also was responsible foroverseeing the formation of the new police academy and police force .

the u.n.development program ( undp ) took over the management role , soliciting andcoordinating international contributions from spain , norway , and sweden , with theunited states and chile providing assistance under bilateral agreements .

 ( 103 ) the establishment of the new police force , which was seen as a crucial element in the country's reconciliation and democratization processes , was considered asuccess by many analysts , even though the overall police operation encounteredsignificant problems .

one analyst pointed to the success as "sufficient to convincecontributing governments that civilian police deployment in a peacekeepingoperation had come to stay," despite her judgment that the success was"overshadowed by high crime rates and the continued meddling of the el salvadorian[sic] military. .

 ( 104 ) while the salvadoran experience may have been the first charged with creating a new police force , subsequent missions in the next few years had at least an implicit,if not an explicit , training and / or reform mandates .

the first of these was themozambique civilian police operation authorized in february 1994 ( although theu.n .

operation in mozambique , onumoz actually began in december 1992 ) .

onumoz's civilian police mission was heavily monitoring , but a small trainingassistance component came under the mandate's provision to provide technicalsupport to the mozambican police .

according to one analyst , onumoz was "aprecursor to later training and police reform missions , in that civpol were to'monitor and verify the process of reorganization and retraining of the quickreaction police. .

it is important to note , however , that onumoz was not itselfconducting the training. .

 ( 105 ) an important partof international mozambique policesupport came towards the end of and after the formal un operations , with follow - uppolice reform programs conducted for several years , primarily through bilateraltraining , particularly by the spanish guardia civil .

 ( 106 ) training was an explicit partof the mandate of the u.n. assistance mission in rwanda ( unamir , 1993-1996 ) .

in two other countries - - somalia and haiti - - international forces made concerted training and reform efforts .

both of these efforts were initiated as u.s.operations .

the u.s. - led united task force ( unitaf , december 1992-march1993 ) , multilateral coalition began efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and tohelp restore order in somalia , where competing factions had fought to assert powerafter the collapse of the lengthy dictatorship of siad barre .

in the context of a largemilitary operation , unitaf began the task of establishing an interim auxiliarysecurity force ( asf ) , despite the lack of a specific mandate under the authorizingsecurity council resolution ( un scr 794 ) , although it had originally intended toleave the reorganization of somali police forces to the u.n. force which was tofollow .

 ( 107 ) the asf was intended to "enforcelocally agreed upon laws and becontrolled by the community: in essence , [to be] a community police force," ( 108 ) andeventually was present in 17 cities and towns .

 ( 109 ) as perceived by one of itsorganizers , the asf "would eliminate the need for unitaf troops to serve as police,not only freeing them for other duties but avoiding confusion about their role andreducing friction with the local population , thus minimizing casualties on both sides .

a police force would also enable somalis to deal with ordinary criminal activity ( asdistinct from organized looting and robbery ) and give them some responsibility fortheir own affairs .

finally , it would create jobs and provide income to severalthousand otherwise unemployed somalis. .

 ( 110 ) unitaf encouraged the somalipolice who , according to at least one analyst , were respected by the somalipopulation "to act on their own while the allied military forces were available asback - up near the police stations. .

 ( 111 ) substantial assistance was provided for the asfby unitaf , the united nations , and individual nations through bilateral assistance.according to one analyst: the u.n. development program ( undp ) paid salaries and operating expenses , provided equipment and officefurnishings , and refurbished police stations .

italian , dutch and german policeexperts arrived under undp auspices to work with the new force... .

the italiansprovided uniforms , nightsticks and whistles .

unitaf provided surplus vehicles andradios brought from saudi arabia after operation desert storm .

unitaf militaryforces , particularly contingents from morocco , botswana and the united arabemirates , provided training , weapons , and conducted joint patrols in their sectors .

the world food program provided food rations for asf members and theirfamilies .

 ( 112 ) a smaller u.n. military force , the u.n. operation in somalia ii ( unosom ii ) , took over from unitaf in may 1993 , ( 113 ) bywhich time the 5,000 asf memberswere operating in the capital of mogadishu and 17 other cities and towns ( 114 ) and theasf was considered a credible and popular police force .

in december 1993 , theu.n .

announced that unosom ii would re - establish a 10,000 member somalipolice force by the end of 1994 , ( 115 ) even as themilitant somali faction led by generalmohamed farah aidid increasingly challenged u.n. forces .

despite ambitious plansfor reconstructing not only the somali police , but also the courts and prisons , theu.n .

efforts foundered due to inadequate staffing and funding .

it took nearly a fullyear after unitaf departed for the first of the 54 members of the uncivpol toarrive and another two months for the unit to reach full strength .

even after theyarrived , there were enough training and cultural differences among them to impedethe development and delivery of a coherent program .

 ( 116 ) in the interim , unosomii military forces worked with the u.s. justice department's international criminalinvestigative training assistance program ( icitap ) to develop basic police coursesand , in march 1994 , iciptap sent its own trainers to conduct courses for somalipolice officers .

the programs collapsed , however , amid the escalating violence and insecurity , which was largely attributed to an insufficient u.n. military presence .

icitapwithdrew in june 1994 , and the uncivpols left in march 1995 with the forcedu.n .

withdrawal .

while the unitaf asf is judged as achieving some success inproviding police forces that offered protection to citizens and enjoyed a legitimacythat it conferred by extension upon unitaf , its success was attributed by someanalysts to the commitment of unitaf to back it up when it faced a level ofviolence that it could not control .

nevertheless , by the end of the 1990s , the need for the development and reform of existing police institutions was widely recognized .

the august 2000 brahimipanel report recommended a "doctrinal shift" in the use of civilian personnel inpeace operations .

 ( 117 ) according to the panel,the primary role and function of civpolpersonnel should be to build local police services capacity .

enforcement and institutional gaps in somalia and haiti .

unosom ii's lack of a commitment to back upuncivpols , like that which the unitaf had made to the asf , contributed to thedevelopment of the concept of a law "enforcement gap. .

analysts perceived insomalia , as previously in cambodia and as in several future operations , that thepresence of an adequate police force to maintain law and order in normalcircumstances may not be sufficient to control the sporadic outbreaks of violence ormore organized violent challenges in post - conflict situations , often due to the lackof a widely - accepted peace accord .

as a result , the use of military force may beneeded to maintain law and order , often in a primary role when violence is high,other times as a supplement to police forces when the level is lower .

the somalia operation also demonstrated several other problems , in the judgment of many analysts .

these were that ( 1 ) an international civilian police forcecannot function where there is no effective cease - fire , ( 2 ) uncivpol missions,because of the sheer diversity of their experiences , are not , as currently constituted,particularly well - suited for training local police , and ( 3 ) an "institutional" gap ( i.e.,the lack of adequate courts and prison system ) and lack of a political settlement willundermine even successful police reform efforts in the long run .

 ( 118 ) similar gaps were highlighted in haiti , where six years of intensive u.s. and u.n. police reform efforts demonstrated dramatically , in the opinion of someanalysts , the problems created by the institutional gap .

reform efforts in haiti beganunder the u.s. - led multilateral force ( mfn , sept 1994- march1995 ) .

the mfn'spolice component , the international police monitoring force ( ipm ) , with about 820monitors from 20 countries , was formed to create , develop , and train a new haitiannational police force ( hnp ) .

 ( as a complementary step , the ipm vetted formermembers of haiti's armed forces in order to select those fit to serve on an interimpublic security force which the ipm also supervised. ) .

ipm members were allowedto carry arms , to use force when necessary , and to make arrests , as were members ofthe uncivpol which followed .

 ( 119 ) theuncivpol under the subsequent u.n.mission in haiti ( unmih , which actually deployed in force from march 1995through june 1996 ) took over the monitoring and training functions .

threesubsequent u.n. follow - on missions were sent to haiti over the next five years ( through march 2000 ) to continue work professionalizing the haitian police .

analysts note careful coordination between the military and the mnf and unmih civilian police to establish and maintain public security while the hnp wastrained and deployed .

 ( 120 ) for instance , whenthe ipms were slow to deploy insufficient strength and with a sufficient degree of organization to deter violence , theunited states adjusted mfn rules of engagement to permit the military forces todetain and , as necessary , shoot those committing serious crimes and commencedaggressive patrolling .

the interim public security force was rapidly forced to furtherfill the deployment gap before the planned deployment of the hnp between june1995 and february 1996 .

mnf military police conducted separate patrols and jointpatrols with the ipms and the ipsf .

the mnf military police also provided trainingwith the ipms at haitian police stations on basic matters such as patrolling,performing desk operations , and the appropriate use of force .

unlike somalia , in haiti there was a smooth transition between the u.s. - led mnf and the succeeding u.n. operation , and the military forces of unmih alsoserved to bridge the law enforcement gap .

 ( 121 ) unmih , like the mnf , provided rapidback - up to the uncivpol , as well as mps to police stations for liaison andtechnical assistance .

unmih also contributed to the restoration of stability bycontinuing military patrols to deter crime and political violence .

as the hnpdeployed , the uncivpols moved from a law enforcement role to a mentoring,monitoring , and on - the - job training role .

unmih military forces also monitoredhnp performance .

despite the ability of planners in the haitian operations tocompensate for the deployment and enforcement gaps , the institutional gap - - theovercrowded prisons and the inept if not corrupt judicial system - - proved a severeimpediment to the establishment of public security .

 ( 122 ) covering the "enforcement gap" in bosnia: the creation of special constabulary units in bosnia , 1995-1999 .

bymandate , the united nations had full responsibility for international policeassistance in bosnia from 1995-2002 .

under its mandate , that assistance was largelylimited to monitoring , which was emphasized in the first year of the operation , andtraining , which later took on greater importance .

the united nations was assignedthis role by the december 1995 dayton accords , under which the three competingpopulations in bosnia agreed to a joint government overseen by a complexinternational mechanism , in order to put an end to their conflict .

it carried out the rolethrough the international police task force ( iptf ) , a component of the u.n. missionto bosnia and hercegovina ( unmibh ) .

the u.n. responsibility encompassed sevendistinct functions: ( 1 ) to monitor , observe and inspect law enforcement ( le ) activities and facilities , "including associated judicial organizations , structures andproceedings ; " ( 2 ) to advise le personnel and forces ; ( 3 ) to train le personnel ; ( 4 ) to facilitate the parties' le activities within the purview of the iptf mission ; ( 5 ) toassess threats to public order and to offer advice concerning le agencies' abilitiesto deal with those threats ; ( 6 ) to advise the bosnian government authorities on howto organize effective civilian le agencies ; and ( 7 ) to accompany bosnian lepersonnel in the performance of their duties as the iptf deemed appropriate .

 ( 123 ) in january 2003 , the european union took responsibility for monitoring and trainingpolice in bosnia , as well as contributing to the development of police institutionalstructure , through the eu police mission ( i.e. , the eupm ) .

in practice , the 1,721 authorized unarmed iptf civpols , who lacked any enforcement powers , quickly proved inadequate to the task of ensuring public orderamong the three still openly hostile groups .

 ( iptf began deploying in january 1996and reached full strength some eight months later , in august .

 ( 124 ) ) this deficiency hadbeen feared during the dayton negotiations by those , including principal u.s.negotiator richard holbrooke , who had argued not only for a stronger mandate forthe international civpol , but also for a policing function for the nato peacekeepingimplementation force ( ifor ) .

 ( 125 ) several analysts point to the early 1996 transfer of control of certain areas of sarajevo , with the relocation of many residents in early 1996 when only a fewhundred iptf personnel had been deployed , as an early test for both the iptf andifor .

ifor provided much needed assistance to the still - organizing iptf , with civilaffairs police specialists helping to plan the operation ( as well as providing otherassistance in organizing the force ) , ( 126 ) and thus,to compensate in part for the slowdeployment of iptf personnel .

in some analysts' judgment , the death of only oneperson during the weeks of relocation was a "remarkable accomplishment," ( 127 ) butthe gutting , burning , and booby - trapping of many dwellings in the process pointedto an "enforcement gap" given that iptf had "neither the authority nor the resourcesto act" and ifor refused to act in a law enforcement capacity in the absence of animminent threat to life .

in the opinion of one analyst , the result , a flight of bosnianserbs from sarajevo suburbs , led to the perception of yet another u.n. failure inbosnia , and a loss of credibility for understaffed and under - resourced iptf , whichlacked law enforcement powers .

"arguably," she writes , "it took the iptf almosta year to recover from its inability to live up to exaggerated expectations and madeit more difficult to gain popular confidence. .

 ( 128 ) in late 1996 , the smaller natostabilization force ( sfor ) replaced ifor ; operating under the same provisions ofthe dayton peace accord as ifor , it provided backup when the iptf did not possessadequate force to maintain public order .

the "enforcement gap" in bosnia was also covered in another way: the development of "specialized units" within the iptf , a term that meant paramilitaryforces ( i.e. , police forces specially trained in certain military skills necessary tohandle exceptional law enforcement situations , especially hostile groups ) .paramilitary and paramilitary - like police units from foreign nation , principally the gendarmarie from france , the carabinieri from italy , and the guardia civil fromspain , had taken part in other policing operations .

in the early 1990s , they wereintegrated into international civpols and not assigned special functions .

by the late1990s , however , the utility of such police to fill "a perceived gap between militarycapabilities and the abilities of unarmed police monitors" was recognized .

the firstplace that the gap was filled with such a unit was in bosnia in 1998 , when themultinational specialized unit ( msu ) was formed .

the msu was assigned the tasksof protecting elected officials and those who returned to their former homes in hostileareas , and could be called upon to back up the iptf in preserving public order .

 ( 129 ) the bosnia experience was successful enough to warrant the formation of such unitsin kosovo and east timor .

 ( 130 ) mandates granting executive authority: kosovo and east timor , 1999 .

the final expansion of the mandates andpowers of international civilian police occurred in two peacekeeping operations thatbegan in 1999: the u.n. mission in kosovo ( unmik ) and the u.n. transitionaladministration in east timor ( untaet ) .

in both operations , the uncivpols weregiven mandates that included "executive authority" powers ( i.e. , the authority to carryarms and make arrests ) .

in both cases , the decision to provide international policeforces with executive authority reflected the absence of any legitimate , effective localauthority .

after the end of the coalition air war against serbia , nato and the united nations took responsibility for stabilizing kosovo and providing continuing securitythere .

beginning in june 1999 , and continuing to the present day , nato hasprovided a military presence through the kosovo force ( kfor ) and the unitednations has taken responsibility for all civil administration functions , includingpolicing , through unmik .

in addition , the osce was given responsibility , underthe unmik structure , for overseeing and training the kosovo police service ( kps ) ,comprised of a growing number of local police officers .

in east timor , the u.n .

transitional administration ( untaet ) provided a complete civil administration from october 1999 through may 2002 for east timoras it made a transition from its former status as a province of indonesia to self - government as an independentstate .

 ( 131 ) with indonesia's decision to leave theprovince after protracted civil conflict , and its withdrawal of all indonesian securityforces , a complete security vacuum would have existed without a mandate for u.n.forces , in conjunction with the australian - led military peacekeeping force ( theinternational force in east timor or interfet ) , to exercise executive authority .

despite these cases , a mandate for the exercise of executive authority is judged by many analysts as highly problematic and unlikely to be a wise choice in manyother future situations .

although some analysts and practitioners argue that"executive authority is inevitable when there is no local police force to monitor ortrain," ( 132 ) the number of available internationalcivilian police personnel capable ofresponsibly and effectively exercising such authority is limited , and forces of suchpolice will be even more difficult to recruit and deploy in a timely manner than forceswith more limited mandates .

in cases where local police forces exist , but may beconsidered as unsuited to perform their duties without considerable , and time - consuming vetting , practitioners andpolicymakers will make case by case decisionsregarding the desirability of executive policing .

for many , sovereigntyconsiderations will be an additional important factor to weigh .

