the child and family services review ( cfsr ) is the central and most comprehensive component of federal efforts to determine state compliance with federal child welfare policies and , equally , to help ensure that positive outcomes are achieved for the children and families served by state child welfare programs .

the review intends to gauge state efforts and ability to achieve the primary goals of safety and permanence for children , along with well - being for children and their families .

the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) began the first onsite reviews in march 2001 and , as of march 2004 , had completed the initial round of the cfsr in all states , the district of columbia and puerto rico .

in this report , both the district of columbia and puerto rico will be referred to as "states. .

many states were found to have substantially achieved the goal of safety , permanence , or well - being for a majority of the cases reviewed and to have in place systems adequate to achieve positive outcomes for children .

at the same time , the initial round of cfsrs found that no state's child welfare programs met the criteria that hhs established as demonstrating "substantial conformity" with all of federal child welfare policy requirements .

as a result , all states have or are implementing program improvement plans ( pips ) .

to avoid financial penalties associated with noncompliance , states must meet the improvement goals established in their pip .

although the final cfsr regulation states that a subsequent full cfsr is to occur in each state two years after the approval of a state pip , in practice this has been judged impossible ( eg , such a time frame would mean that a state's second - round cfsr performance would be based on the same data that are used to assess the success of the initial pip ) .

the second round of cfsrs is now being planned with 15 states ( de , nc , vt , in , nm , ga , ks , dc , tx , ma , az , al , ok , or , and mn ) slated for an onsite review from march through september 2007 .

this report begins with a short history of the legislation and other factors that led to the creation of the current cfsr and then briefly describes how a cfsr is conducted and what "substantial conformity" with federal child welfare policy means in the context of this review .

much has been made of the fact that no state was found to be in substantial conformity with all aspects of federal policy reviewed during the initial ( fy2001-fy2004 ) round of the cfsrs .

this report seeks to better understand that fact by looking closely at state performance on each of the performance indicators that determined compliance .

taking apart this general "not in substantial conformity" finding permits a more complex understanding of state performance , and the report uses this analysis to identify and discuss those areas in which states showed the greatest inability to achieve compliance with federal policy .

 ( readers should note that in addition to the text describing state performance , tables included in appendices b and c of the report provide detailed ratings information for each state and appendix d presents information on the case characteristics ( eg , age or race / ethnicity of child in case being reviewed vis - à - vis outcome achievement ) ) .

finally , the report concludes with a brief discussion of 1 ) how penalties for non - compliance are assessed ; 2 ) the requirement that states not in compliance with federal policy develop program improvement plans ( pips ) ( appendix a shows the status of pip implementation ) ; 3 ) some of the criticisms of how the initial cfsr assessed state performance ( especially with regard to the national standards ) ; and 4 ) planning for the second round of cfsrs .

the cfsr begins with a state's own assessment of its child welfare programs .

this self - assessment is followed by an onsite review conducted by a team of federal and state investigators .

the final determination of substantial conformity with specific outcomes and systems is made following the onsite review and is based on information gathered during the onsite review as well as the analysis of statewide data for the period for which the state is under review .

in general both the onsite case review and the analysis of statewide data showed that states performed best with regard to safety outcomes , had greatest difficulty with most of the permanency outcomes and showed more mixed results in relation to the well - being outcomes .

reviewers also rated state performance based on the state's policy and practice with regard to seven federally required "systems. .

this part of the cfsr is intended to measure a state's capacity to achieve positive outcomes related to safety , permanency and well - being for the children and families its serves .

ratings for this part of the review are largely based on interviews with state and local stakeholders in the child welfare system .

overall states were more likely to be assessed as having the capacity to produce positive outcomes for children than they were to have been rated as achieving these outcomes .

at the same time , because these systems are intended to work together , a poor rating on any one of the systems may affect a state's ability to achieve one or all of the outcomes assessed .

further , state capacity was judged weakest with regard to case review system and service array and these systems are arguably keystones of a successful child welfare program .

of the 52 states , 49 were found to have child welfare agencies that were "responsive to the community," 45 were judged in substantial compliance with federal requirements for a statewide information system , and 43 were found to have adequate recruitment , retention , and licensing programs for foster and adoptive parents .

a less substantial majority of states were found to have a functioning quality assurance system in place ( 35 ) and to adequately meet the federal staff training requirements ( 34 ) .

states had more difficulty meeting the system requirements related to service array and case review .

less than half of states ( 23 ) were judged to have a service array system in compliance with federal policy and just 13 states were found in compliance with the case review system requirements .

compliance with the system requirements of federal child welfare policy was determined based on stakeholder interviews and the number of "strength" or "area needing improvement ratings" given to each of the items associated with the implementation and proper functioning of a system .

figure 2 shows a composite ( national ) rating for each system — with 100% representing a strength rating for each of the items associated with an outcome for all states .

the figure illustrates again that service array and case review system were determined to be the most significant areas of weaknesses in state efforts to achieve positive outcomes for children .

the findings also suggests that performance in each of these areas may be more nearly equal than would appear simply by looking at the number of states in compliance with each system .

compliance with a particular system is directly determined by the number of associated indicators that are given a strength rating .

table 6 ranks each of the indicators associated with this compliance determination , from those least likely to receive a strength rating to those most likely to receive this rating .

as might be expected , it shows that items associated with the service array and case review system are more likely to be rated as areas needing improvement than are most of those items associated with agency responsiveness to the community and foster and adoptive parent recruitment , retention and licensing .

however , a few items run counter to this trend .

for instance , despite being an indicator related to the case review system , the large majority of states ( 42 states – 81% ) received a strength rating for the case review item that sought to assess how good a state was at conducting a periodic review of the status of each child in foster care .

by contrast just 21 states ( 40% ) received a strength rating for their efforts to ensure the diligent recruitment of potential foster and adoptive families that reflect the ethnic and racial diversity of children needing those homes , although the vast majority of states were found in substantial conformity with the overall system related to licensing , recruitment and retention of foster care and adoptive parents .

the following discussion looks more closely at each of the indicators explicitly associated with the two outcomes for which no state was found to be in substantial conformity ; it also examines indicators associated with systems that might be expected to affect state performance on those two outcomes .

many of those indicators are related to the case review and service array systems on which states were the least likely to have been found in substantial conformity .

in mandating the creation of the new review system , congress required hhs to specify in regulations how financial penalties would be determined for states found to be out of conformity with federal child welfare policy and to make those penalties commensurate with the degree of nonconformity .

at the same time , it required hhs to allow states found out of conformity with federal policy to develop and implement a corrective action plan and to rescind any penalties if that plan was successfully implemented .

financial penalties for non - conformity with federal child welfare policy are to be withheld from a specific pool of child welfare funds that , as defined in the regulation , includes all title iv - b funds to the state ( funding for both child welfare services and promoting safe and stable families ) and 10% of the foster care administrative costs claimed by the state under title iv - e for the specified penalty period .

for the state's initial review , penalties may range from 1% of the specified penalty pool ( for failure to achieve a specified level of conformity with one of the outcomes or one of the systems studied ) up to 14% ( for failure to achieve a specified level of conformity with each of the 14 outcomes or systems studied ) .

the regulations also specify that if a state reaches the end of its required program improvement plan ( pip ) and fails to have successfully completed the plan , hhs must withhold funds from a state ( based on the number of outcomes and systems that were found not in substantial conformity during the cfsr and for which the state did not successfully complete the level of improvement outlined in its pip ) .

this withholding is to begin with the last specified completion date in the pip and continue until the state successfully achieves the relevant pip goal or is found in substantial conformity by a subsequent full review .

hhs has at times stressed that the cfsr process is about program improvement — not recoupment of federal funds .

through may 2005 it had completed evaluation of pip implementation by eight states and determined that each of them had met their pip goals and that therefore no penalties would be assessed .

evaluation of additional states ( 10 through may 2005 ) that had completed their pips continues .

 ( for state - by - state information on pip implementation and status see appendix a . ) .

state officials , advocates and researchers have raised a number of concerns about how "substantial conformity" was measured in the initial cfsr .

several of the measurement concerns are related to the national standards and might call into question the accuracy of the overall assessment that no state was found in substantial conformity with federal child welfare policy .

for instance , some researchers and state officials argue that in certain cases what is actually measured does not accurately reflect what hhs intended to measure .

they further argue that accurate measures are necessary not only to ensure correct penalty assessment but , as important , to ensure that the required program improvement plans ( pips ) are properly focused .

other concerns raised about the cfsr raise questions about what is not measured and ensuring that accountability for outcomes is properly assigned .

the national standards are an early effort to establish a quantitative benchmark by which to judge state child welfare performance .

state conformity with the national standards directly effects a state's performance rating on just two of the seven outcomes ; none of the seven systems that are assessed in the cfsr are directly affected by a state's rating on the national standards .

thus the ability to meet or not meet the national standards might be understood as a relatively small factor in achieving cfsr compliance .

at the same time , no state can be found in complete substantial conformity with federal policy until it meets each of the six national standards .

further , if the national standards are not designed in a way that truly measures state performance for a given issue , they might lead hhs to incorrectly require program improvements ( or not require improvements ) of states who risk financial harm if they do not comply .

a number of critiques of these standards have been offered .

hhs , which provided in the final regulations that it could "add , amend , and suspend any such statewide data indicator ( s ) " has announced revised national standards for the second round of the cfsr and these seek to respond to at least some of the criticisms discussed here .

child welfare systems are administered differently by each state , and , sometimes , by each county within a state , and this can be a problem if each state is judged by a single federal standard .

for instance , the federal government largely defers to the states with regard to a definition of child abuse and neglect and state definitions of what constitutes child abuse and neglect ; thus , how reports of child abuse and neglect are classified varies significantly .

this is a concern for some , who argue that requiring all states to meet the same national standard for preventing recurrence of maltreatment in foster care might unduly punish states that have enacted broader definitions of child maltreatment and / or that have a well - developed system of reporting and investigation while allowing states with more narrow definitions or less efficient reporting and investigating systems to more easily achieve federal compliance .

during the course of the initial review and analysis hhs uncovered a separate example of how varied state policy might affect a state's ability to meet the national standards established with regard to recurrence of maltreatment .

close to half of the states reviewed in fy2002-fy2004 ( 35 states ) indicated that child abuse and neglect allegations for families with open child welfare cases ( eg , in - home cases ) are not reported as new allegations of abuse or neglect and therefore there is no formal assessment of the validity of the allegation .

instead state policy or practice usually provides that the caseworker assigned to the family would informally assess the information and act to protect the children if necessary .

in short , if child maltreatment is identified , this information — while it is likely acted on — would not be reported to the state's national child abuse and neglect database and thus would not be a part of the statewide data used to determine whether or not a state meets the standard on recurrence of maltreatment .

the composition of a state's caseload may also vary for reasons that are not in control of the child welfare agency or , again , because of state policy decisions .

some researchers have called for "risk - adjusted" standards , although they acknowledge that not enough is known about , for instance demographic characteristics and achievement of certain outcomes to allow for such adjustments .

in reviewing findings from the initial cfsr , the report general findings from the federal child and family services review , analyzed certain characteristics of the case review sample and the degree of success achieved on certain outcomes .

for the most part this analysis found that a state's overall performance on the cfsr outcomes — when compared to all other states — was largely unaffected by the significant state variation in the case sample demographics ( including age , race / ethnicity , primary reason for case opening , and geographic location ) .

the single exception to this overall finding was in regard to the age of children in a state's case review sample , and state performance on the safety outcome: children are safely maintained in their own homes whenever appropriate and possible .

states with a higher percentage of children in their case review sample that were younger than age six at the time of their entry into foster care had a lower percentage of cases rated as substantially achieving that outcome .

at the same time , many more significant relationships were established when the lens of the analysis was shifted from a comparison between states' performance to the relationship between the particular characteristics of a child in a given case and the performance ratings for cases with children of similar or different characteristics .

 ( for more information on these specific findings see appendix d . ) .

closely related to the issue of state variation are certain concerns about data used to determine compliance with the national standards .

the most basic concerns the accuracy and comparability of the data .

the majority of the data used to set the national standards as well as to assess state performance on those standards are collected via the adoption and foster care analysis and reporting system ( afcars ) .

an analysis by the hhs office of the inspector general found that the federal "guidance on reporting afcars data supports states beliefs that the lack of clear definitions leads to inconsistent reporting .

states believed afcars data elements were not clearly and consistently defined and expressed concerns about foster care placement definitions , which potentially affect child welfare performance measures .

in addition , differences in states' methods of reporting dates of discharge and juvenile justice populations may further inhibit uniform performance measures. .

the march 2003 inspector general report recommended that hhs provide more precise definitions for data elements , increase accessibility of technical assistance on data collection , and other provisions .

an april 2004 report from the u.s. general accounting office ( gao ) reported some of the same concerns about data inaccuracies and also made similar recommendations .

hhs has and continues to work on providing more guidance , assessing what states are doing and improving state data collection systems .

the agency has also solicited comments on revisions to the afcars data collection system .

nonetheless , the national standards used for the initial cfsr were derived from data collected via afcars in the early years of the system's operation in most states .

although the department worked closely with each state to ensure that the data used to measure the state against the standards were the best possible data available , some find this troubling .

supporters of the policy to use statewide data measured against a national standard , however , argue that no data system is perfect , that improved data collection is a by - product of using the data ( or , in essence that you have to start somewhere , sometime ) , and that the cfsr assessed state performance in multiple ways ( using both qualitative and quantitative data ) so that no state could be judged on all of the measures purely by quantitative data .

researchers have taken particular issue with three of the data indicators that are used in the national standards .

these indicators seek to ensure that states 1 ) are reuniting children with their families in a timely manner or , 2 ) are finding timely adoptive placements for children who cannot be reunited with their parents ; and 3 ) do not allow children to exit foster care to placements that are not permanent and simply result in the return of these children to foster care .

while researchers generally applaud the intent of these measures — that is the effort to use quantitative data to determine how quickly and effectively states re - establish a permanent home for children who come into care — they argue that some of the measures used in the initial round of reviews might penalize a state even if its performance was improving .

the national standards for both of these measures look at only children who exit foster care in a given year .

they determine of those who were reunited with their parents , what share were reunited within 12 months of entering care and , of those who were adopted , what share were adopted within 24 months of entering care .

some researchers have argued that the focus exclusively on children who exit foster care means that the overall likelihood of a child being adopted or reunited is not being measured — i.e .

the measure does not look at all children who have been in care during the year but only those who exit that care .

further , in the case of adoption , they note that if a state did the hard work of moving many of its longer - staying and likely more difficult to place children into adoptive homes , even if it held steady or improved the rate at which newer entrants moved to adoption , it might perform badly on the official measure .

that is the longer staying children moved to adoption — and who presumably were a legacy of older agency practice — would necessarily reduce the share of children adopted within two years .

rather than looking at children who exit foster care , one alternative measure of time to reunification or adoption might follow the group of children ( or "cohort" in researcher lingo ) who entered foster care in a given year to determine how many were adopted within two years or reunited within one year .

this kind of measure however would require the administrative data to follow a single child's records across more than one fiscal year ( i.e. , it requires longitudinal data ) and afcars is currently not set up to enable this kind of analysis .

another alternative might group certain measures together .

for instance , with regard to timely adoption , in addition to recording the share of children who exited foster care to adoption within 24 months of entering care , the measure would also look at overall likelihood of adoptions ( eg , total children served in given fiscal year divided by number of adoptions in that year ) .

criticism of the national standard that looks at the foster care re - entry rate focuses on the fact that changes in a state's caseload size in the given fiscal year affect state performance in this area — even though those caseload changes may be unrelated to how well a state did at achieving permanency for children in the previous year .

this is because the current measure looks at all the children who enter foster care in the given year and asks what percentage of them are re - entering care within 12 months of their prior entry to foster care .

this means that a state that experiences a decline in new entries to care may have fewer — or at least no greater number of children re - entering than in previous years but its performance might nonetheless be rated as worse than the previous year .

by contrast a state with an increasing number of entries to foster care might increase the number of re - entries but show no decline in its performance .

one alternative measure might compare the number of children who re - entered care in a given year as a share of the number of children who left foster care ( via reunification , adoption , or guardianship ) in the previous year .

some critics of the cfsr also believe it does not go far enough in its effort to measure outcomes versus processes .

in particular they cite the measurement of child and family well - being outcomes as weak .

the pew commission on children in foster care recommended that congress require the national academy of sciences to study and make recommendations for appropriate measures and outcomes — especially those related to child well - being and further , that hhs convene an ongoing advisory panel of experts to periodically review the measures to ensure that they remain timely and appropriate .

such a panel would however have to reconcile its ultimate recommendations with the federal policies currently in law .

the criteria used to judge state performance is based on the federal statute , including its interpretation in regulation .

current law includes relatively limited child welfare provisions specifically related to , for instance , health treatment or education services .

it requires that a child's updated health and education record be accessible to foster parents .

while a logical interpretation of these requirements might be that these records are supposed to be current and accessible so that children can receive the education services and health services needed , this requires an interpretation .

and an easier case might be made for measuring states compliance based on process .

 ( for example: are the records up - to - date and available , as opposed to did the availability of the records lead to adequate health and education services for the child. ) .

this same concern might also be viewed as a question of accountability .

a child welfare system must be able to count on other agencies and , especially the courts , if it is to successfully achieve positive outcomes for children .

is the state's failure to achieve "substantial conformity" with the performance measure related to the system "service array" and the well - being outcome related to providing adequate mental health services a true problem of the child welfare agency not making the appropriate services available and accessible ? .

or is it simply a lack of widely available child mental health services in the state ? .

if a state is not in compliance with the statute's termination of parental rights ( tpr ) provisions , is this because the courts in the state have a tremendous backlog and cannot hear the cases on a timely basis or is it because the child welfare agency is not making an effort to begin these proceedings in a timely manner ? .

the regulation provides that for states not found in substantial conformity , a second full cfsr is to begin two years after the date hhs approves the state's pip .

however , hhs has since determined that state performance may not be reasonably re - reviewed until at least one year following the completion of its pip .

this time is necessary to ensure data used to measure state performance are based on a period after the state has completed its improvement plan .

the second round of cfsrs is now scheduled t o begin in 2007 when 15 states ( de , nc , vt , in , nm , ga , ks , dc , tx , ma , az , al , ok , or , and mn ) will undergo an onsite review .

in this second round of reviews , the regulations provide that the onsite case review must find that the desired outcome was substantially achieved in 95% of the cases reviewed ( as opposed to 90% in the initial round ) .

as mentioned above , hhs has revised the national standards that will be used for this round of the cfsr and may also revise its procedures manual and survey instruments for this round of reviews .

appendix a .

initial cfsr review and pip implementation schedule states generally have 90 days after the final report date to submit a program improvement plan ( pip ) .

there is no time frame for approval of the plan by hhs , and the department may require changes before granting approval .

the approval date is also the formal implementation date for the plan .

states generally have two years in which to implement their pip .

in rare instances , the regulations provide that a state may receive approval from hhs for an additional year to complete their pip .

florida , louisiana and mississippi were each granted an additional year to complete their pips .

as of the end of september 2006 , 42 states had reached the end of the pip implementation period and for at least 20 of those states hhs had evaluated their success in meeting the agreed - upon level of improvements in those plans .

in 19 of the states , the department determined the goals of the pip had been met and therefore all penalties that would have resulted from the state's initial cfsr were rescinded .

in one jurisdiction ( district of columbia ) , hhs determined that not all of the agreed - upon improvements had been achieved and a fine of $135,285 has been assessed .

appendix b. overview of state performance on outcomes , systems , and national standards this appendix includes three tables that summarize state performance in the initial round of child and family services reviews .

tables included are — table b - 1 .

state performance on outcomes in the initial child and family services review table b - 2 .

state performance on the national standards in the initial child and family services review table b - 3 .

state performance on systems in the initial child and family services review appendix c. state performance on outcomes assessed in the initial child and family services review this appendix contains a summary table showing aggregate state performance on the case reviews along with detailed tables showing , for each state and each outcome , how many cases were found to have substantially achieved , partially achieved and not addressed or achieved a given outcome .

individual state performance on the national standards is also shown for the two outcomes where these standards were a part of determining the state's overall compliance .

tables included are — table c - 1 .

performance ratings for applicable cases reviewed in the initial child and family services review table c - 2 .

safety outcome 1: children are first and foremost protected from abuse and neglect table c - 3 .

safety outcome 2: children are safely maintained in their own homes whenever possible and appropriate table c - 4 .

permanency outcome 1: children have permanence and stability in their living situation table c - 5 .

permanence outcome 2: the continuity of family relationships and connections is preserved for children table c - 6 .

well - being outcome 1: families have enhanced capacity to meet their needs of their children table c - 7 .

well - being outcome 2: children receive appropriate services to meet their education needs table c - 8 .

well - being outcome 3: children receive adequate services to meet their physical and mental health needs appendix d. analysis of case characteristics and ratings of outcome achievement as part of rating each case , reviewers collected certain data about the characteristics of the child whose case was under review ( e.g .

age , race / ethnicity ) .

these case specific data are not available in the final reports but have been studied by hhs ( via a contract with james bell associates ) for statistically significant relationships between outcomes achieved and the characteristics of the case .

the full report discussing these findings is available on the children's bureau web site .

a synthesis of some of the key findings is provided below .

age of child cases involving children under the age of 6 at the start of the cfsr review period were more likely to be rated as having substantially achieved permanency and stability in their living situations than cases involving children of all other ages .

age was independently established as significantly related to two of the performance indicators — placement stability and establishment of permanency goal — used to determine whether permanency and stability have been achieved for a child .

these analyses generally supported the anecdotal information that placement stability is harder to achieve for adolescents and that establishing appropriate permanency goals for children in a timely manner is easier for younger children than for adolescents .

the percentage of cases receiving a strength rating for placement stability decreased with increasing age until age of 16 ; for youth age 16-18 a strength rating for placement stability was as likely as it was for children younger than 9 at the start of the cfsr review period .

the percentage of strength ratings related to establishment of the permanency goal was highest for children under the age of 6 at the start of the cfsr review period and lowest for children who were 10-12 years of age at that time .

race / ethnicity of child cases involving white ( non - hispanic ) children were more likely to be rated as having substantially achieved permanency and stability in their living situations than were cases involving children who are alaska native / native american , asian / pacific islander , or black ( non - hispanic ) .

separate analysis shows that cases involving children who are white ( non - hispanic ) were significantly more likely than cases involving children of any other race / ethnicity to have been rated as substantially achieving the well - being outcome: children receive adequate services to meet their physical and mental health needs .

finally , cases involving children who were white  ( non - hispanic ) , black ( non - hispanic ) , or of "two or more races" were significantly more likely to have substantially achieved the well - being outcome families have enhanced capacity to meet children's need than were cases involving children who are alaska native / indian or asian / pacific islander .

primary reason for case opening cases opened primarily for issues related to a child's behavior ( e.g .

child's substance abuse or juvenile delinquency ) were more likely to be rated as having substantially achieved permanency and stability than were cases opened for any other reason .

cases opened primarily for all other reasons ( e.g .

parent's substance abuse , abuse or neglect of the child , mental / physical health of family ) were more likely to be rated as not having substantially achieved permanency and stability in living situation than to have been rated as substantially achieving this outcome .

location of case review as noted earlier , the onsite cfsr takes place at three locations in a state , including the most populous city or county .

other locations in each state varied from very rural to metropolitan / suburban .

no significant relationship between case ratings for most outcomes and review location ( largest population compared to smaller population sites ) was found .

however , for two of the well - being outcomes , families have enhanced capacity to meet the needs of their children , and children receive appropriate services for their physical and mental health needs , cases reviewed in smaller population sites were significantly more likely to have been found to have achieved these outcomes .

