the geographic and societal diffusion of the illicit production of methamphetamine ( meth ) has spread hazardous manufacturing wastes , and related concerns , into communities nationwide .

the need to reduce the potential safety , health , and environmental hazards of these wastes , bycleaning and remediating the sites of illicit production , consequently also has spread nationwide .

"clean - up" is the term often used to describe removing gross , or large - scale , contaminants , such asequipment and large quantities of chemicals ; clean - up is usually done for the purpose of securingevidence for criminal investigations , and for reducing imminent hazards such as explosions or fires .

"remediation" is often used to describe removing residual , or small - scale , contaminants such aschemical residues in carpeting or walls , usually for the purpose of rehabilitating a facility forreoccupancy or reuse .

while there are many ways to make meth , the most common way begins withover - the - counter medications containing pseudoephedrine or ephedrine , ( 1 ) and often involves cookingwith acetone , hydrochloric acid , sodium hydroxide , ether , and anhydrous ammonia to seriallyconcentrate and purify the meth .

cooking meth , which can result in eye and respiratory irritations,chemical burns , explosions and fires , toxic waste products , and contaminated surroundings , can bedangerous to the meth "cook," to the people and community around the lab , and to those persons whofirst come upon the lab , such as fire fighters , law enforcement officials , emergency medicaltechnicians , or social welfare workers .

there are reports of emergency medical technicians andpolice officers suffering burns , eye and respiratory irritations , nausea , and other injuries not just atmeth labs , but even from treating persons removed from the labs .

 ( 2 ) depending on the process used and the skill of the cook , each pound of meth produces aboutsix pounds of hazardous waste .

illicit meth "cooks" usually dump this waste into sewers , streams,rivers , or the ground near the lab ( which may be farmland , or land over groundwater supplies ) , alonghighways , in parks and forests , or on hiking trails .

water used to extinguish lab fires also carriestoxic chemicals into the environment .

cooking meth can also infuse carpeting , walls , furniture,water supplies , and the ground with toxic chemicals .

 ( 3 ) residues of meth have been measured as high as 16,000micrograms per 100 square centimeters of surface , with levels as high as 300 micrograms per 100square centimeters as long as six months after the last cook , sometimes far from the actual cookingarea .

 ( 4 ) while health effects on a user from direct use of meth have been well - studied , long - termhealth - effects research on exposures to substances associated with illicit meth production has justrecently begun .

such health - effects research considers impacts on children , as well as on adults , whomight be in the vicinity of a meth - making site .

there are no uniform federal guidelines or standards governing the clean - up or remediationof former meth sites , either for meth residues themselves , or for chemicals related to illicit methproduction , partly because there is a lack of health - effects research upon which to base suchguidelines or standards .

"guidelines," as used in this report , are discretionary recommendations,often using the word "should. .

"standards" are mandatory , nondiscretionary regulations which mustbe followed , often denoted by words like "shall" or "prohibited. .

guidelines may be developed byregulators into more stringent standards .

there generally have been four main approaches to cleaning meth sites .

the united statesenvironmental protection agency ( epa ) can respond directly when a pollutant or contaminant atan stl site presents an imminent or substantial danger to public health or welfare , but most stlsdo not rise to this level .

 ( 5 ) for most stls , state and local governments can pay to clean a meth site , then apply to epa forreimbursement which is capped at $25,000 per incident .

alternatively , rather than pay directly forclean - up and later apply for reimbursement from epa , state and local governments instead can notifythe united states drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , in the united states department ofjustice , and dea will take responsibility and arrange for clean - up .

in addition , there have beenfunds available from the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) to redevelop ofa former meth site .

the approaches to remediate meth sites are more variable , involving private , local , and statedecisions .

remediation is an additional cost , after clean - up .

neither epa nor dea funds areavailable for remediation .

owners of contaminated private property , eg , an apartment building ora motel , need to decide whether remediation is sensible ; remediation cost estimates may exceed thevalue of the property .

local or state governments need to decide whether to remediate or restrictaccess to a contaminated public area , eg , a hiking trail or parking lot in a forest .

remediation isdiscussed further in the section below on "clean - up and remediation procedures. .

remediation costs vary , depending on the severity of contamination with meth and / ormeth - related compounds .

the average cost to clean a meth lab is estimated to range from $1,500to $3,000 , with some clean - ups exceeding $200,000 .

 ( 6 ) the cost of remediating an average - size site has been estimatedat $50,000 , according to the u.s. department of justice .

 ( 7 ) several factors contribute to the geographic and societal diffusion of illicit meth productionand use .

methamphetamine ( meth ) is a schedule ii narcotic under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , title ii of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 .

csaregulates the manufacture and distribution of drugs , and places all drugs into one of five schedules .

a drug in schedule ii , like meth , has current accepted medical use and has high potential forabuse .

 ( 8 ) meth has limitedmedical uses for the treatment of narcolepsy , attention deficit disorders , and obesity .

 ( 9 ) this report focuses on illicituse and production of meth , and subsequent clean - up and remediation issues .

there have been four main ways to clean and redevelop a former meth lab site: two involveepa , one involves dea , and the last involves hud .

the task of remediating former meth labs is complicated by the lack of uniform standards,for the reasons discussed above: there are currently no uniform federal guidelines for the remediation of formermeth labs .

research on health effects associated with clandestine labs only recently began,so there is currently only limited health - effects information to guide policychoices .

feasibility - based standards , which consider costs , for remediating clan labsexist , but differ among states and localities .

existing feasibility - based standards differ in stringency of clean - up level , needfor certification of clean - up workers , and requirements for reporting and recording the history of afacility's association with meth .

 ( 35 ) the national alliance for model state drug laws ( namsdl ) is working toward a modelact or model guidelines for the clean - up and remediation of meth lab sites .

 ( 36 ) members of the alliancehave noted the need for federally funded short - and long - term health - effects studies , health - basedcleanup standards , and scientifically validated field test - kits , as well as methods forsample - collection and remediation .

having reviewed existing state and local laws , policies,guidelines , and ordinances pertaining to meth lab remediation , namsdl released its preliminaryoutline of key components that the alliance may include in a draft model act or model guidelines: state agency authority: oversight of clean - up program ( probably withdesignated responsibilities to local health departments in regulation ) ; set requirement for owner toclean property ; promulgate related regulation ; keep database of properties deemed to becontaminated ; keep list of certified contractors and approved laboratories .

notification responsibilities: making uniform requirements regarding whomust be notified , when , how , and for how long , about the existence and status of a meth lab ( likelyparties include first responders , law enforcement , local health officers and departments , buildingcode and local or other property records officials ; owners ; and the public via signage on the propertyitself ) .

contractor / industrial hygienists: certification ; training ; site safetyresponsibilities ; monitoring of contractors' work .

preliminary assessment and work plan .

decontamination procedures: for walls , furniture , ventilation systems , varietyof surfaces ; waste characterization and disposal .

confirmation of decontamination: decontamination standards ; samplingmethods ; laboratory analytical testing .

 ( 37 ) after various reviews and approval by namsdl's board of directors , the model would bedistributed to alliance contacts in the states , including governors and attorneys general .

the modelalso would be posted on namsdl's website ( http: / / www.natlalliance.org ) .

 ( 38 ) .

in the 109th congress , 11 bills authorize funds to help local and state governments pay forcleaning former meth production sites .

one bill provides for research and development ofremediation standards and other related activities .

h.r .

4763 , the methamphetamine eradication act , authorizes funds for thecops program , the byrne formula grant program , dea , epa local governments reimbursementprogram , and department of transportation , for remediation actions , equipment , and training .

h.r .

3324 and s. 430 , the arrest methamphetamine act of2005 , authorizes funds for the cops program and provides authority to the attorney general,through the bureau of justice assistance , to make grants to states to undertake meth clandestine labenvironmental clean - ups .

h.r .

3889 , the metheamphetamine epidemic elimination act , authorizesfunds to reimburse dea for remediation activities .

h.r .

3199 , the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of2005 , became p.l .

109-177 on march 9 , 2006 .

authorized to be appropriated each fiscal year 2006through 2010 are $99 million to reimburse dea for remediation work and to support state and localenvironmental meth - related activities , among other things .

h.r .

1446 , the methamphetamine abuse prevention act of 2005 , expandsauthority to include the hiring of personnel and the purchasing of equipment for cleaning stls .

h.r .

314 and s. 103 , the combat meth act of 2005 , wouldamend the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 to authorize the use of grant fundsto hire personnel and purchase equipment to assist in cleaning methamphetamine - affected areas .

h.r .

13 , the clean , learn , educate , abolish , neutralize , and undermineproduction ( clean - up ) of methamphetamines act , authorizes funds for grants , through thesecretary of labor and occupational safety and health administration , to state and local lawenforcement for training and equipment acquisition for cleaning former meth lab sites ; funds for theunited states department of agriculture to clean former stls ; and funds , through dea , for meth - related training activities .

s. 2118 , to amend the usa patriot act , extends certain provisions of theact to march 31 , 2006 , and authorizes funds to reimburse dea for clean - up expenses .

s. 259 , the federal emergency meth lab cleanup funding act of 2005 ,would make funding available from the department of the treasury forfeiture fund for payment todesignated state , local , or tribal law enforcement , environmental , or health entities for experts andconsultants needed to clean areas formerly used as meth labs .

it would also provide that if a methlaboratory is located on private property not more than 90% of the costs may be paid only if theproperty owner ( 1 ) did not have knowledge of the existence or operation of such laboratory beforethe law enforcement action to close it or ( 2 ) notifies law enforcement not later than 24 hours afterdiscovering the existence of such laboratory .

h.r .

798 , the methamphetamine remediation research act of 2005 ,passed by the house on december 13 , 2005 , would require the assistant administrator for researchand development of epa to establish ( 1 ) voluntary guidelines , based on the best currently availablescientific knowledge , for the remediation of former meth laboratories , including guidelines regardingpreliminary site assessment and the remediation of residual contaminants , and ( 2 ) a program ofresearch to support the development and revision of such guidelines .

it also would direct theassistant administrator to ( 1 ) periodically convene a conference of appropriate state agencies , aswell as individuals or organizations involved in research and other activities directly related to theenvironmental or biological impacts of former meth laboratories , and ( 2 ) enter into an arrangementwith the national academy of sciences for a study of the status and quality of research on theresidual effects of meth laboratories .

h.r .

798 also would require the director of thenational institute of standards and technology to support a research program to develop ( 1 ) newmeth detection technologies , with an emphasis on field test kits and site detection , and ( 2 ) appropriate standard reference materials and validation procedures for meth detection testing .

