shortly after september 11 , 2001 , usda created a homeland security staff in the office of the secretary to develop a department - wide plan to coordinate agroterrorism preparedness plans among all usda agencies and offices .

efforts have been focused on three areas: food supply and agricultural production , usda facilities , and usda staff and emergency preparedness .

the homeland security staff also has become the department's liaison with congress , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and other governmental agencies on terrorism issues .

the white house's national security council weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) preparedness group , formed by presidential decision directive 62 ( pdd - 62 ) in 1998 , included agriculture , especially in terms of combating terrorism .

many observers note that , as a latecomer to the national security table , usda has been invariably overshadowed by other agencies .

in addition to the following presidential directives and actions , many departments and agencies in the executive branch have undertaken efforts to improve preparedness for agroterrorism .

many of these actions are discussed later in this report under "countering the threat. .

this report treats federal funding for agroterrorism preparedness broadly , including appropriations and user fees , both within usda and dhs .

however some general activities that support agroterrorism preparedness , such as certain intelligence and warning functions performed by the fbi and cia , often cannot be identified exclusively as agriculture spending , and thus cannot be included in this report .

however , items that can be identified specifically to agroterrorism preparedness within the budgets of usda and dhs are included .

the president's annual budget request to congress includes a government - wide cross - cutting budget analysis of homeland security issues , as mandated by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 , section 889 ) .

the budget request includes details on the most recently passed appropriations law and the previous fiscal year .

comprehensive details on agroterrorism funding are difficult , if not impossible , to compute while appropriations bills are being debated in the house and senate .

legislative language rarely mentions specific amounts for agroterrorism , and report language usually mentions only a few agroterrorism related items that the appropriations committees wish to highlight .

for a comprehensive accounting , analysts must wait until the president's budget is released .

in usda , five agencies and three offices receive homeland security funding: agricultural research service ( ars ) animal and plant health inspection ( aphis ) cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) economic research service ( ers ) departmental administration and executive operations ( including office of the secretary , homeland security staff ( hss ) , and office of chief information officer ( ocio ) ) .

in the dhs , two directorates receive funding related to agroterrorism: customs and border protection science and technology classifying spending on agroterrorism and homeland security requires judgments about which programs are relevant , especially when some have dual purposes .

this subjectivity introduces discrepancies when agencies refine criteria or definitions , or change the way activities are characterized in their homeland security mission .

in such cases , the most recently available data are used to update prior year data .

examples of dual - use programs for agricultural homeland security are animal and plant health programs .

these programs , such as border inspection and disease surveillance existed before september 11 , 2001 , and would be needed at some level due to natural and accidental disease outbreaks .

however , the scale and scope of these programs have been expanded primarily due to agroterrorism .

for budget and accounting purposes , all or part of dual - use activities may be counted as homeland security spending , depending on each agency's criteria .

for example , gao reports that the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) attributes 100% of an activity's budget authority to homeland security if any of the following questions apply: is this a new activity or program focus as a result of 9 / 11 ? .

has the bulk of the program activity changed as a result of 9 / 11 ? .

does the activity address international pest or disease outbreaks or other acts of agro - bioterrorism ? .

was the activity initiated with homeland security supplemental funds ? .

did aphis receive enhanced homeland security funds for the activity ? .

is the activity needed in order to comply with one or more homeland security presidential directives or the bioterrorism act of 2002 ? .

of the hundreds of animal and plant pathogens and pests available to an agroterrorist , perhaps fewer than a couple of dozen represent significant economic threats .

determinants of this level of threat are the agent's contagiousness and potential for rapid spread , and its international status as a "reportable" pest or disease ( i.e. , subject to international quarantine ) under rules of the world organization for animal health ( also commonly known as the oie , the office international des epizooties ) .

a widely accepted view among scientists is that livestock are more susceptible to agroterrorism than cultivated plants .

much of this has to do with the success of efforts to systematically eliminate animals diseases from u.s. herds , which leaves current herds either unvaccinated or relatively unmonitored for such diseases by farmers and some local veterinarians .

once infected , livestock can often act as the vector for continuing to transmit the disease , facilitating an outbreak's spread , especially when live animals are transported .

certain animal diseases may be more attractive to terrorists because they can be zoonotic , or transmissible to humans .

in contrast , a number of plant pathogens continue to exist in small areas of the u.s. and continue to infect limited areas of plants each year , making outbreaks and control efforts more routine .

moreover , plant pathogens generally are more difficult to manipulate from a technical perspective .

some plant pathogens require particular environmental conditions of humidity , temperature , or wind to take hold or spread .

other plant diseases may take a longer time than an animal disease to become established or achieve a level of destruction that a terrorist may desire .

the goal of the u.s. animal and plant health safeguarding system is to prevent the introduction and establishment of exotic pests and diseases , to mitigate their effects when present , and to eradicate them when feasible .

in the past , introductions of pests and pathogens were presumed to be unintentional and occurred through natural migration across borders or accidental movement by international commerce ( passengers , conveyance , or cargo ) .

however , a system designed for accidental or natural outbreaks is not sufficient for defending against intentional attack .

consequently , the u.s. system is being upgraded to address the reality of agroterrorism .

different analysts and agencies have various ways to outline a response for agroterrorism .

the national research council outlines a three - pronged strategy for countering the threat of agroterrorism: deterrence and prevention detection and response recovery and management even though no foreign terrorist attacks on crops or livestock have occurred in the united states, government agencies and private businesses have not taken the threat lightly .

biosecurity is an increasingly prominent among food manufacturers , merchandisers , retailers , and commercial farmers .

many agribusinesses have prepared response plans or added security measures to protect their product and brand names , ranging from input sources to processing and retail distribution networks .

the annual appropriations process provides an opportunity for legislators to influence homeland security activities separate from writing authorizing legislation or conducting oversight hearings .

in addition to the primary purpose of appropriations laws — providing or limiting funding — appropriators may also use committee report language to request reports from federal agencies or make statements and stipulations about future counterterrorism activities .

usda's budget request for fy2008 calls for significantly increased spending on several agroterrorism preparedness programs .

the food and agriculture defense initiative requests an fy2008 appropriation of $340 million , nearly double the $177 estimated for items in the initiative for fy2007 ( table 4 ) .

using omb's more comprehensive analysis of homeland security funding for agriculture cited on previous pages , the requested fy2008 increase in homeland security funding for agriculture is 54% , up from $340 million estimated for fy2007 to $524 million requested for fy2008 ( table 2 ) .

the fy2008 dhs budget request does not include any individual line items for agriculture .

ongoing border inspection and science and technology activities are mentioned , but no specific allocations or requests are mentioned .

these budget issues and past appropriations for agroterrorism are discussed earlier in this report under the heading " federal funding to respond to agroterrorism . .

increasing the level of terrorism preparedness remains a concern , not only for agroterrorism , but also for other forms of terrorism .

several bills were introduced in the 109 th congress to authorize funding or otherwise improve the level of preparedness or coordination of response to an agroterrorist attack .

these bill are listed in table 7 and discussed in the context of several issues below .

the 110 th congress may consider similar bills regarding coordination and response activities .

two complementary bills addressing agroterrorism preparedness were introduced by senator akaka: s. 572 ( the homeland security food and agriculture act , 109 th congress ) and s. 573 ( the agricultural security assistance act , 109 th congress ) .

versions of both bills were introduced in the 108 th congress .

both bills addressed different aspects of agroterrorism preparedness and coordination .

s. 572 would have amended the homeland security act of 2002 by giving additional responsibilities to the department of homeland security for agroterrorism preparedness .

s. 573 ( which subsequently was incorporated into project bioshield ii , s. 975 , 109 th congress ) would have tasked the secretary of agriculture with various studies and programs , and authorized funding for state and local preparedness , public awareness programs , and biosecurity grants for farmers .

s. 573 / s. 975 also would have established agriculture liaison position in the department of homeland security and department of health and human services .

another agroterrorism preparedness bill , s. 1532 ( the agroterrorism prevention act , 109 th congress ) was introduced by senator specter .

it would have authorized funding for public awareness , on - farm biosecurity guidelines , and state and local preparedness assistance , and bolstered laboratory and other response capacity .

s. 1532 also would have addressed criminal penalties for agroterrorism , and coordination for agricultural issues in the intelligence community .

s. 3898 / h.r .

6086 ( national reportable conditions act , 109 th congress ) would have directed dhs , in coordination with usda and several other agencies , to develop a list of diseases , conditions , and events that represent a threat to humans , animals , food production , and the water supply .

a commission of public health professionals , veterinarians , animal and food specialists , and environmental , and utility , and laboratory workers would have advised the secretary .

the bill would have created a coordinated notification system to a single government agency .

p.l .

109-374 ( the animal enterprise terrorism act ) was enacted in 2006 to enhance criminal penalties for terrorism against animal enterprises , not only for agroterrorism as discussed in this report , but also for what is sometimes called "eco - terrorism" against animal research facilities or types of livestock production .

the law prescribes penalties and restitution in title 18 of the u.s. code for varying levels of economic damage and personal injury involving threats , acts of vandalism , property damage , criminal trespass , harassment , or intimidation .

in terms of preparedness and coordination , the bills from the 109 th congress sought to provide more concrete congressional instructions and budget authorizations for agroterrorism preparedness .

however , similar results could occur if the presidential directive hspd - 9 is implemented successfully .

the presidential directives facilitating agroterrorism preparedness , and subsequent administrative actions , did not exist when senator akaka's bills were introduced in the 108 th congress .

while congress certainly has oversight authority of federal agencies and may ask questions about implementation of hspd - 9 , a public law outlining and directing the implementation of an agroterrorism preparedness plan would establish the statutory parameters for such a plan , and , as a practical matter , might result in enhanced oversight by specifically identifying executive branch entities responsible for carrying out particular components of such a plan .

in the 109 th congress , s. 573 was referred to the agriculture committee , but the most of the text was incorporated subsequently into title 27 of s. 975 ( project bioshield ii , 109 th congress ) which is referred to the health , education , labor , and pensions committee .

the bills would have authorized such sums as necessary , subject to annual appropriations , for state and local vulnerability assessments , emergency response plans , geographic information systems , and grants to state and local agriculture health officials .

the bills also would have created awareness programs and grants for farm - level producers to improve biosecurity measures .

these farm - level activities would have included development and dissemination of on - farm biosecurity guidelines , and on - farm biosecurity improvement grants ( up to $10,000 per farm ) .

s. 1532 ( the agroterrorism prevention act , 109 th congress ) would have authorized funding for usda and dhs - fema to assist states in developing response plans .

it also would have authorized funding for public awareness , the dissemination of farm - level biosecurity guidelines , and mandated further development of a national veterinary stockpile and a national plant disease recovery system , largely as mentioned in hspd - 9 .

the homeland security food and agriculture act ( s. 572 , s.rept .

109-209 , 109 th congress ) would have amended the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) by giving additional biosecurity responsibilities to the department of homeland security .

the bill was reported favorably by the homeland security and governmental affairs committee in september 2005 .

it would have given a leadership role to dhs for agriculture security preparedness and disaster response .

s. 572 ( 109 th congress ) would have authorized an agriculture security program in dhs that would advise and consult with federal , state , local , and other agriculture officials regarding agroterrorism preparedness .

it would have given the secretary of dhs authority to execute responsibilities mentioned in hspd - 7 and hspd - 9 , and tasked dhs with coordinating much of an agroterrorism response by communicating , equipping , and otherwise facilitating emergency response providers .

dhs also would have become the lead responder by coordinating with the department of transportation , the environmental protection agency , department of agriculture , and department of state .

dhs would have coordinated task forces to identify and recommend best practices for state response plans .

the bill also would have created a grant program to help state and local agricultural specialists prepare for agroterrorism by funding conferences and agroterrorism response exercises .

the congressional budget office estimated that implementing s. 572 would cost $8 million in 2006 and $53 million over a five - year period .

of this total , $48 million would fund additional staff and expenses in the current dhs directorate for preparedness , and $5 million would be for grants to state and local agriculture officials .

shortly following enactment of the homeland security act and the 2003 transfer from usda to dhs of agricultural border inspections and the plum island agricultural research facility , concerns over dhs dedication to these agricultural functions began rising .

moreover , concern over coordination between established agencies and dhs is not unique to agriculture .

nonetheless , the issue of improved coordination between federal agencies with various jurisdictions , which agency has primary responsibility , and encouraging agencies to seeking adequate consultation from other stakeholders has been raised in many venues and proposed legislation .

for example , the agricultural security assistance act ( s. 573 , 109 th congress ) would have established agriculture liaison position in the department of homeland security ( specifically with the federal emergency management agency , fema ) , and in the department of health and human services .

the bill , among other things , would have given leadership roles for preparedness and response , particularly with first responders , to dhs .

s. 1532 ( the agroterrorism prevention act , 109 th congress ) would have instructed dhs , hhs , usda , intelligence agencies , interior , epa , and other agencies to coordinate response plans , conduct vulnerability assessments , and expand monitoring and surveillance for agroterrorism .

the bill also mentioned enhanced intelligence systems and cooperation , tracking systems for agricultural products , laboratory networks , and border inspection training .

the bill would have directed dhs , in coordination with other agencies , to assess the need for modernizing or replacing bl - 3 and bl - 4 laboratories with agricultural capacity .

project bioshield ii ( s. 975 , 109 th congress ) would have established a working group spanning usda , dhs , hhs , and fda to identify and recommend specific actions , capacities , and limitations regarding agroterrorism preparedness .

section 2708 of s. 975 ( 109 th congress ) would have compelled dhs to cooperate with usda and other intelligence agencies to improve the targeting of agricultural border inspections .

while the agencies are working together already toward this goal , such legislation would further compel the coordination of the departments .

s. 3898 / h.r .

6086 ( national reportable conditions act , 109 th congress ) would have created a coordinated notification system to a single government agency for a specific list of diseases , conditions , and events deemed to be a threat to human or animal health , or the safety of the food and water supply .

once agricultural border inspectors were transferred from usda to dhs , some members and industry groups expressed concerns that dhs would concentrate on more immediate or catastrophic homeland security issues such as immigration or radiological threats , and neglect agricultural functions .

some were also concerned that personnel and resources formerly devoted to agriculture would be shifted to other dhs areas ( for more background , see the earlier section on the homeland security act ) .

coordination over agricultural border inspections was raised in the conference report for the fy2007 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

109-295 ) .

appropriators directed dhs to report on activities to target agricultural inspections , adjust to new agricultural threats , improve training , generally coordinate with usda and state governments regarding agricultural inspections .

the conferees are concerned with the steps the department is taking to improve the targeting of agricultural inspections and direct the secretary to submit a report consistent with section 541 of the senate bill .

 ( h.rept .

109-699 ) sec .

541 .

the secretary of homeland security shall submit a report to the committees on appropriations of the senate and the house of representatives , not later than february 8 , 2007 , that — ( 1 ) identifies activities being carried out by the department of homeland security to improve — ( a ) the targeting of agricultural inspections ; ( b ) the ability of united states customs and border protection to adjust to new agricultural threats ; and ( c ) the in - service training for interception of prohibited plant and animal products and agricultural pests under the agriculture quarantine inspection monitoring program of the animal and plant health inspection service ; and ( 2 ) describes the manner in which the secretary of homeland security will coordinate with the secretary of agriculture and state and local governments in carrying out the activities described in paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( h.r .

5441 , 109 th congress ) the coordination issue was previously raised fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 , h.rept .

108-792 ) .

conferees expressed their concern over two agricultural functions transferred to dhs , and requested a gao study of coordination between dhs and usda .

the conferees are aware of ongoing concerns within the agriculture sector that the transfer of these responsibilities [border inspection and research] may shift the focus away from agriculture to other priority areas of dhs .

in order to ensure that the interests of u.s. agriculture are protected and that the intent of the homeland security act of 2002 is being fully met , including the proper allocation of aqi [agricultural quarantine inspection] and other funds , the conferees request the government accountability office to provide a report, no later than march 1 , 2005 , on the coordination between usda and dhs in protecting the u.s. agriculture sector , including a description of the long - term objectives of joint activities at plum island and the effectiveness of aqi and other inspection activities ( h.rept .

108-792 ) .

this was the impetus for the 2006 gao study , management and coordination problems increase the vulnerability of u.s. agriculture to foreign pests and disease ( gao - 06-644 ) , discussed earlier in this report , which identified several problems concerning inter - agency coordination and inspection performance .

both s. 573 ( 109 th congress ) and s. 975 ( 109 th congress ) would have instructed the attorney general to review state and local laws relating to agroterrorism to determine whether any such laws would facilitate ( or impede ) the implementation of agroterrorism response plans and whether a state court could delay the implementation of such federal response plans .

s. 1532 ( 109 th congress ) would have criminalized acts of agroterrorism by amending title 18 of the u.s. code to define agroterrorist acts and prescribing penalties of fines , imprisonment , or death .

the animal enterprise terrorism act ( p.l .

109-374 ) enhanced the authority of the department of justice to prosecute and convict individuals committing terrorism against animal enterprises .

the act defines such acts and prescribes penalties .

it applies not only to international actors committing agroterrorism in the united states , but also to acts commonly considered "eco - terrorism" that are conducted by parties within the united states against locations such as animal research facilities or confinement livestock operations .

