distributional effects are often central policy issues in debates over tax legislation .

although economic analysis can be used to estimate the distribution of the tax system , or a tax change ( a positive or descriptive analysis ) , it cannot be used to provide a normative or prescriptive analysis .

descriptive analyses indicate the expected effects of policies , but normative analyses indicate the optimal policy .

most normative analysis in economics is focused on efficiency .

even in the case of distribution issues , however , economic analysis can be used to facilitate the understanding of desirable distributions , measure them correctly , and determine the implications of different assumptions about social welfare for the optimal distribution of the tax burden .

the first section of this report , which is normative in nature , therefore discusses different philosophies about how the tax burden should be distributed , and what those philosophies imply for the shape of the tax system .

in particular , it addresses the question of the justifications for a progressive tax system ( one where the share of income collected as a tax rises as income rises ) .

this section is presented for the interested reader , but is not a necessary preliminary to examining the analysis in the second section , which presents estimates of the distribution of the federal and total u.s. tax burden .

the third section of the report discusses the measures that can be used to characterize the distributional effects of tax changes .

there are two separate , albeit related , questions about tax burden distribution .

one of them is how to pay for the goods that the government provides ( such as national defense , or highways ) .

the second issue is whether the tax system should be used for direct income redistribution ; in that case the optimal tax burden depends on the degree to which redistribution is deemed desirable .

several public and private organizations have produced distributional tables .

the governmental entities include the treasury department , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and joint committee on taxation ( jct ) .

some of the private researchers involved in this work include the urban institute and brookings institution tax policy center ( tpc ) and the institute on taxation and economic policy ( itep ) of citizens for tax justice ( ctj ) .

their analyses vary in several ways , including how they define income , the definition and ordering of tax units , and the taxes included .

the following several sections discuss the rationale behind certain methodological choices and report the results of distributional analyses for different organizations , for different time periods , and for different kinds of taxes .

these measures are presented as effective tax rates , which makes comparison meaningful despite the methodological differences .

the effective rates are simply the ratio of taxes paid to the income measure .

they are different from the statutory marginal rates that apply to an extra dollar of taxable income only .

when effective tax rates rise with income a tax system is progressive , it is proportional when effective tax rates are relatively constant , or regressive , if effective tax rates fall as income increases .

although it is straightforward to describe what makes a tax system regressive , proportional , or progressive , it is more difficult to characterize changes to an existing tax system .

indeed , it is difficult even to determine the degree of progressivity or regressivity of a system so that the old and new tax systems can be compared based on their degree of progressivity .

although a variety of progressivity indices and measures have been proposed , none has been entirely satisfactory and they can lead to different conclusions about relative progressivity .

this report will instead examine the measures that are often used to characterize tax changes .

reports of the distributional effects of tax cuts sometimes appear to depict the same tax change very differently .

this difference in how the cut is perceived for distributional purposes arises from the choice of distributional measure .

some of the measures that have been presented include ( 1 ) the share of taxpayers benefitted that fall below an income level ; ( 2 ) the percentage reduction in taxes paid ; ( 3 ) the tax cut as a percentage of income ( both pre - tax and disposable ) ; ( 4 ) the distribution of the tax cut by income class ; and ( 5 ) the average tax cut .

the first of these measures is most likely to tend to depict a tax change as favoring lower - income individuals relative to higher - income ones ; the second measure is next most likely , and so forth .

to illustrate this point , consider a 10% across - the - board income tax cut ( all positive net tax liabilities reduced by 10% ) .

assuming that the bottom quintile of the distribution does not have tax liability , this tax cut could be described as one in which three quarters of the beneficiaries have cash income below $80,000 , which might make the cut appear not to be particularly targeted to high - income individuals .

almost any tax cut that is a general one will benefit , in numbers , those outside the high - income taxpayers , because high - income taxpayers are , by definition , not very numerous .

but this description of the tax cut does not reveal anything about how much of a tax cut different groups receive .

table 13 illustrates how such quantitative measures of the types described above would look assuming everyone in each quintile and group has the same average income ( an assumption that allows the calculation of measures in the lower brackets where some individuals have negative tax liability because of the earned income tax credit ) .

based on percentage changes reported in the second column , the tax cut as a percentage of income tax liabilities , the tax cut may appear to be fairly equal across income classes ( except for the lowest group ) .

but that measure does not reveal very much about distribution , because people in the lower - income categories may have extremely small tax liabilities and a tiny change in tax could result in a very big percentage change .

expanding the measure to a percentage reduction in all taxes shows that a proportional cut in income taxes reduces total taxes proportionally more for high - income individuals .

even in this case , however , measuring the percentage reduction in tax liability has not demonstrated anything about the effect on income equality ; it merely reveals that individual income taxes are more progressive than total taxes .

in discussing these measures that do relate to effects on income inequality , it is important to distinguish between absolute measures and relative measures .

for example , average tax reductions per unit provide information on the absolute size of a tax benefit across the income classes , which is a straightforward measure , and is shown in the last column of table 13 .

in this example , the second quintile has a tax cut of $21 per person and the highest quintile a cut of $2,841 .

another way of examining this same effect is to compare the distribution of the tax benefit with the distribution of the population in the first column of table 13 .

if each taxpayer class is getting 20% ( one - fifth ) of the benefit , then the benefits are evenly distributed .

but the 10% tax cut distributes benefits disproportionally to higher - income individuals , indicating that incomes are becoming more unequal on an absolute basis .

both of these measures can inform us about how a tax cut is changing income without being misleading , although it is important to remember that existing income and tax payments are more concentrated among high - income individuals .

thus , there is a tendency for absolute measures to show most across - the - board tax cuts as favoring higher - income individuals — because these individuals have a larger proportion of the income and pay an even larger fraction of the income tax .

moreover , unless a tax provision is refundable , it will have little benefit for the bottom fifth of the population .

a different type of measure is a relative one that tries to examine how the tax benefit is changing the overall relative distribution of income in the country — that is , is it making income shares more equal or less equal ? .

in this case , a tax change that does not alter distribution provides tax benefits to different income classes in proportion to some measure of income .

 ( higher - income individuals would still receive high absolute tax cuts , but not higher tax cuts as a percentage of income. ) .

in general , the best method for measuring this type of effect on inequality is to examine the percentage change in disposable ( after - tax ) income .

if the percentage change is equal , then the tax change is not making incomes shares more equal or less equal .

if the percentages are higher among higher - income individuals the change is making income shares less equal .

clearly , the across - the - board proportional tax cut is increasing inequality measured by the relative concept: incomes in the lower brackets are increased by considerably less than 1% , whereas incomes in the higher brackets are increased by 2% or more .

these different measures have been used to report different tax cuts , sometimes with very different depictions , which are illustrated from distributional data provided for two recent individual tax cuts: the 2001 tax cut ( originally h.r .

1836 ) and the 2003 tax cut ( originally h.r .

2 ) .

the 2001 tax cut was a multi - year phased in tax cut , which sunsets after 2010 .

table 14 , table 15 , and table 16 provide data from the three sources we are aware of that provided distributional data for the 2001 tax cut .

the first table presents data from the joint tax committee for the latest year provided , 2006 , when most provisions would be fully phased in .

the percentage change in federal tax liability was reported directly .

the percentage change in after - tax , or disposable , income , the measure suggested above as conceptually the best measure of changes in distribution , was derived from data in the jct table .

as suggested in the previous section , the percentage change in federal tax liability shows the largest percentage changes at the lower income and the smaller ones at higher levels , except for the very top level .

these numbers give the appearance of a tax cut favoring lower - income individuals .

the numbers showing the percentage change in after - tax income suggest , however , that the largest benefit was in the highest income class .

both patterns show that benefits fell , and then rose at very high - income levels , but the percentage change in tax liability suggests the biggest benefits for the lower - income class , while the percentage change in after - tax income measure shows the biggest benefits for the top measure .

table 15 shows the percentage increase in after - tax income , based on data from cbo .

cbo provided effective tax rates and distributional shares , but did not present any direct comparisons of the effects of tax changes ; our distributional measures could be derived from their data , however .

the effect of the 2001 tax cut is approximated by comparing 2010 and 2011 , because the provisions of the 2002 and 2003 tax cuts that add to the 2001 cuts would be phased out before 2010 .

the analysis indicates that the largest percentage changes in after - tax income were received by the highest income classes .

table 16 shows a distribution of the tax cut measure provided directly and a percentage of income that was derived from the citizens for tax justice ( ctj ) data .

the ctj measures are a percentage of pre - tax income rather than disposable income , which tends to make all percentages slightly smaller .

in contrast with the jct table , the ctj data show fully phased - in taxes .

unlike both the jct and the cbo data , it also included the effect of the cut in estate taxes , which was a significant part of the 2001 tax cut .

the distribution of the tax cut shows , as expected , a very large share of the cut going to high - income individuals — almost 40% went to the top 1% of individuals .

the tax cut as a percentage of income , a measure similar to the last column of table 14 , shows the lowest decile with the smallest amount , the broad middle receiving slightly less than average , and higher benefits in the top decline , particularly the top 1% — clearly showing a cut skewed to the rich .

the larger effect for the top 1% as compared with table 15 probably reflects the estate tax .

for the 2003 tax cut , the jct did not produce a distributional table , but the treasury department did .

cbo's effective tax rate tables cannot be used because they mix phase - ins from 2001 in the data .

for the treasury data , the only measure of distributional change presented ( and no other could be derived from their data ) was the percentage change in individual income taxes .

like the jct , they present a percentage change in taxes , but unlike the jct the change is confined to income taxes .

note that , unlike the analysis presented in their 1999 study , the income measure is cash income , rather than economic income .

the treasury analysis , shown in table 17 , confronted a problem that illustrates the difficulty of reporting distributional effects through percentage change when the base can approach zero or become negative , as in the case with percentage change in income tax liability .

the lower part of the income distribution actually had negative taxes , when refundable items such as the child credit and earned income credit were taken into account .

therefore , what treasury actually reports for that class is a percentage increase in negative taxes ; technically speaking ( as a mathematical issue ) the percentage increase should have been positive change , because negative taxes became larger .

there is really no way to compare this number with the other changes ; moreover , the class of under $30,000 probably accounts for almost half ( about 40% ) of the population .

so it is difficult to know what to make of this analysis .

for the remaining classes , however , the measure appears to favor the lower - income individuals .

a very different picture is presented with the distributional effect measured as a change in after tax income based on analysis by the brookings - urban tax policy center ( tpc ) , using the measure they favor , percentage change in after tax income .

table 18 and table 19 present this data for income classes and population shares .

at that point , the tpc was using adjusted gross income as their income measure , although they later developed expanded income measures .

among a variety of statistics released by the urban - brookings tax policy center , one statistic presented is the average tax change among income quintiles .

their discussion cautions the reader in using this measure ( as would the authors of this report ) , but it is included here for comparison purposes and to lend some concreteness to understanding the problem with percentage change in tax liability .

as table 20 demonstrates , the average tax change in the lowest quintile , a group accounting for about half of the under $30,000 cash income group in the treasury table , is only a dollar .

clearly , this group gained essentially nothing from the tax change .

the entire under $30,000 group probably gained an average of about $20 — again , a very negligible amount .

thus , while the treasury table seems to suggest that this group benefitted more than average ( "15%" as compared with an overall benefit of 11% ) , many people would not characterize the relative benefits in this way .

the percentage change in after tax income , by contrast , suggests that these lower - income groups gained very little .

it is particularly in these lower - income classes where average tax liabilities are small or negative , that percentage changes in tax liability can be highly misleading .

