terrorist attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon on september 11 , 2001 , resulted in significant endeavors to combat terrorism and ensure homeland security .

among other efforts , the u.s. government and private firms are seeking high technology solutions to detect and prevent such attacks , as well as to respond to any future attacks that do occur .

biometrics , digital surveillance and vaccines are among the anti - terrorism technologies subject to current research .

the intellectual property laws have a role to play in the research and development of anti - terrorism technologies .

the patent system has long been viewed as a promoter of technological development , including inventions that may aid homeland security efforts .

on the other hand , some commentators have expressed concern that the existence of intellectual property rights may impede homeland security needs .

one possibility is that an individual or firm might own a patent that covers an anti - terrorism technology .

in such circumstances , the exclusive patent right may be perceived as conflicting with the rapid and widespread deployment of that technology for purposes of homeland security .

intellectual property rights might also increase the market price of the patented technology and limit the ability of others to further develop it .

if the patent is owned by a foreign individual or enterprise , then additional security complications may potentially arise .

u.s. government demand for the antibiotic cipro in late 2001 provides a past example of this potential conflict .

in october 2001 , an unknown person or persons sent a refined form of the bacteria bacillus anthracis , commonly known as anthrax , through the u.s. mail to members of congress and members of the media .

the u.s. government responded by administering treatment of a pharmaceutical compound known as "ciprofloxacin hydrochloride" to affected individuals .

ciprofloxacin is sold under the trademark cipro by the german firm bayer ag .

although widely prescribed for several medical indications , cipro was at that time the only antibiotic approved by the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) for inhalation anthrax .

as the incident proceeded , attention focused on the availability of large quantities of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride for public use .

some observers noted that bayer owned the pertinent u.s. patents on ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and therefore possessed the ability to exclude other pharmaceutical companies from selling generic versions of the drug in the united states .

additional commentators encouraged the u.s. government to purchase ciprofloxacin hydrochloride from generic manufacturers , who had been producing and selling the drug in foreign countries where bayer did not possess patent rights .

these commentators observed that generic versions of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride were available for much lower prices than bayer was charging in the united states .

others went even further , calling for the u.s. government to "override" bayer's patent and purchase ciprofloxacin hydrochloride from other suppliers .

subsequent events ultimately diffused public concern over the availability of cipro .

bayer agreed to reduce the prices it charged the u.s. government and to increase production .

also , the fda quickly approved alternative antibiotics for the treatment of certain strains of anthrax , including the one used in the attacks .

nonetheless , this scenario remains a possibility for other technologies that bear upon homeland security .

perhaps not fully appreciated during the cipro incident was the fact that existing laws provide mechanisms for addressing potential conflicts between intellectual property rights and homeland security needs .

these mechanisms include a government taking of the intellectual property , subject to reasonable compensation owed to the patent owner , as well as government purchase of patents .

legislation introduced in the 107 th congress would have called for the award of a compulsory patent license in the event of a public health emergency .

other current or proposed legislation also relates to the intersection between intellectual property and homeland security , including the invention secrecy act and a proposed patent extension for firms that develop anti - terrorism technologies .

this report addresses each of these issues in turn .

the term "intellectual property" identifies a number of legal instruments , including copyrights , patents and trade secrets , that provide innovators with proprietary interests in their intangible creations .

copyright provides authors with exclusive rights in their writings , visual works and other works of authorship ; patents relate to products , processes and other useful inventions ; while trade secret law concerns secret information that is of commercial value .

discussion concerning the intersection of homeland security issues and the intellectual property law has principally concerned patents .

as a result , this report will focus upon the patent law , although its broader discussion of the relationship between homeland security and intellectual property is applicable to trade secrets , copyrights and other similar proprietary interests .

episodes such as the cipro incident have raised the possibility that intellectual property rights may clash with homeland security needs .

if a firm owns a patent that covers an anti - terrorism technology , the exclusive patent right may be perceived as impeding the rapid and widespread deployment of that technology for purposes of homeland security .

current laws provide several possibilities for addressing this conflict , however .

one option is a u.s. government taking of the intellectual property , subject to reasonable compensation owed to the patent owner .

another is that the federal government purchase any applicable patents from their owners .

legislative proposals submitted before congress have suggested additional mechanisms for resolving issues at the interface between homeland security and intellectual property .

alongside the various laws pertaining to u.s. government use of subject matter protected by an intellectual property right , other legislation relates to the issues at the intersection of homeland security and intellectual property .

this report next considers the more significant of these statutes .

intellectual property is an important consideration for the federal government as it shapes homeland security policy .

policy makers should be aware that there is a long history of using patents in order to encourage innovation , accompanied by legislative safeguards that protect government interests .

in particular , existing law allows intellectual property owners to obtain compensation should the government use privately owned intellectual property to protect public health and safety without prior authorization .

this and other laws attempt to achieve the goals of the prompt , widespread use of critical anti - terrorism technologies , along with the continued encouragement of firms to use their research and development capabilities to help the government fight terrorism in the future .

