the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) , which began operations in 1969 as the u.n. fund for population activities , is the world's largest source of population and reproductive health programs and the principal unit within the united nations for global population issues .

in 2009 , the organization provided services in 155 developing and transition countries , with funds totaling $783.1 million , drawn exclusively from voluntary contributions made by governments and some foundations .

in the past three decades , there has been continuing and contentious debate within the united states , and especially among members of congress , as to whether the united states should financially contribute to unfpa .

the debate has centered on the extent to which , if any , unfpa aids china's coercive family planning programs and policies .

in 15 of the past 25 years , the united states has been one of the leading contributors to unfpa .

for the other years , the united states withheld funding to the organization through the so - called "kemp - kasten" amendment that has been included in foreign operations appropriations since fy1985 .

kemp - kasten states that u.s. funds will not be made available to any organization or program which , as determined by the president , supports or participates in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization .

u.s. contributions to unfpa will likely be considered during the second session of the 111 th congress as part of the debate on the annual state - foreign operations appropriations bill and other related legislation .

from fy2002 through fy2008 , the george w. bush administration found unfpa ineligible for u.s. funding under kemp - kasten and transferred proposed annual contributions to other foreign aid activities .

in march 2009 , president barack obama announced that the united states would resume u.s. contributions to unfpa , specifying that $50 million would be made available to the organization as directed in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

in fy2010 , the united states provided $55 million to unfpa as required by division f of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

for fy2011 , the president requested that the united states contribute $50 million to the organization .

this report provides an overview of the u.n. population fund , its current mission and operations , and recent funding trends .

it further discusses the role of the united states in supporting unfpa programs , the varying interpretations by several administrations of legislative authorities pertaining to unfpa's eligibility for u.s. resources , and congressional debates over how much and under what conditions the united states should voluntarily contribute to unfpa .

finally , it reviews the findings of several private and u.s. government investigations of china's family planning programs and the role unfpa plays in their implementation .

the united nations , since its earliest days , has maintained an interest in population issues .

in 1947 , the united nations established a population commission that collected and analyzed global population data and supported member government efforts to examine information about national populations .

following several years of u.n. debate over the rapid rise of the world's population , the general assembly approved a resolution in 1966 calling on the united nations and other international organizations to extend technical assistance on population matters .

in 1967 , the u.n. secretary - general created a trust fund for population activities , which in 1969 was renamed the u.n. fund for population activities ( unfpa ) .

initially , unfpa was administered by the united nations development program ( undp ) , the organization's primary international development organ .

within a few years , at the direction of the general assembly , unfpa had expanded its operations beyond statistical collection and analysis to the provision of maternal and child health / family planning , communication and education , and population policy assistance .

by 1972 , unfpa was operating in 78 countries with a budget of over $30 million .

with such rapid growth in the fund's scope and programs , unfpa became a separate entity under the direct authority of the general assembly , with the same status as undp and the u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) .

in these initial years , the united states provided the majority of unfpa funding through voluntary contributions .

in 1968 and 1969 , when seven governments extended financial support , the $4 million transfer by the united states represented nearly 80% of total contributions .

by 1972 , the number of donors had grown to 52 , but the united states remained by far the largest source of funds , with 46% of the total .

over the next decade , the u.s. share declined to about 25% as other nations increased their contributions .

the united states was an important actor in the launch of unfpa in 1969 .

during the mid - to - late 1960s , congress began to express heightened concern over the impact of rapid population growth on development prospects in poor countries , noting that the world's population was growing by about 2% annually compared with only a 1% growth in food production .

in 1967 , for the first time , congress amended the foreign assistance act of 1961 to specifically authorize and earmark funds for population assistance programs , urging the united states especially to channel family planning resources through the united nations and other international organizations .

some members believed that such earmarks were necessary because the state department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) had not been giving the issue adequate attention .

these initial u.s. contributions , however , were conditioned on the requirement that other donors match the american payment in an equal amount .

this incentive helped unfpa exceed its 1970 projected resource goal when 22 other countries contributed a combined $7.7 million .

in 1971 , with the same matching requirement tied to the u.s. pledge of $15 million , unfpa received donations of $14.5 million from 45 nations .

as shown in table 3 , u.s. contributions continued to climb throughout the 1970s and early 1980s .

at the same time , however , the number and size of transfers from other donors rose faster , so that the share of unfpa resources from the united states declined from 50% to around 27% .

in fy2009 , the u.s. contribution to unfpa peaked at $50 million .

for fy2010 , unfpa is expected to receive $55 million from the united states , the largest u.s. contribution to date .

the highest unfpa contribution earmarked by congress prior to fy2009 — $46 million — was enacted in the fy1985 foreign aid appropriation , p.l .

98-461 .

however , only a portion of these funds — $36 million — was transferred to the organization as u.s. policy and its support for unfpa shifted .

one issue that has been debated among many members of congress and past and current administrations involves whether , and to what extent , unfpa programs in china violate the kemp - kasten amendment .

as previously mentioned , initial unfpa programs in china concentrated on bolstering china's capacity for data collection and analysis , and maternal and child health / family planning activities .

following the cairo population conference in 1994 and the conclusion of unfpa's third chinese program , unfpa and beijing officials began to discuss significant changes for a fourth agreement that would more closely follow the principles set out in cairo .

the subsequent unfpa program , launched in 1998 , concentrated efforts in 32 counties where birth targets and quotas had been eliminated by the chinese government .

the fourth program shifted from a more administrative family planning approach — focusing on population control and imposed contraceptive methods and orders — to an "integrated , client - oriented reproductive health approach in the project counties" that included education and counseling regarding informed choice of contraceptive methods and reproductive health rights .

according to unfpa , service delivery points were upgraded to offer integrated reproductive health services in both the chinese state family planning commission and the ministry of health .

unfpa said that there had been a "downward trend" in the abortion ratio in these counties , and that the organization had played a "catalytic role in introducing a comprehensive , voluntary reproductive health approach," that included rigorous monitoring of the projects .

the fifth program , covering the period 2003-2005 , expanded many of the earlier initiatives .

in june 2005 , unfpa approved a sixth program for china that began in 2006 and spans five years .

the $27 million program is to build on the policy changes made in 1998 and includes two components .

the reproductive health element seeks to increase the utilization of high - quality , client - centered , gender - sensitive reproductive health and family planning services , and to reduce the vulnerability and risk behavior associated with hiv / aids among migrants , young people , and other vulnerable groups .

the population and development component centers on strengthening the government's capacity for addressing population - related policies , especially those regarding gender , migration , and aging issues , and enhancing the government's ability to collect and apply surveillance data , particularly data related to hiv / aids .

critics of the administration policy , including some members of congress , have expressed concern over what they perceive to be a shift in the interpretation of kemp - kasten restrictions related to unfpa and other international organizations .

they point to a usaid notification to the global health council that the agency would not provide funding for the council's 31 st annual meeting in june 2004 because unfpa would be a participant .

some believe that this represented a state department warning to unicef , the world health organization , and other organizations that continued involvement in joint programs with unfpa might jeopardize their funding support from the united states .

in 2003 , the state department decided that it would fund a $1 million hiv / aids program supporting african and asian refugees only if the implementing ngo group — reproductive health for refugees consortium — did not include marie stopes international among its members .

marie stopes international is a british - based reproductive health organization that is also a major implementing partner of unfpa in china .

the state department , while not making a legal determination under the kemp - kasten amendment , felt that an action not to fund marie stopes international would be the "approach most consistent with u.s .

policy. .

on august 11 , 2003 , however , the consortium declined to accept the $1 million grant due to the exclusion of marie stopes international .

