hope vi is a public housing reform program .

through hope vi , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) provides funds to rehabilitate or demolish public housing and replace it with housing that serves both the poor as well as the middle class .

in order to understand hope vi and its issues , it is important to first understand a brief history of the larger public housing program .

hope vi began as a demonstration program , created in reaction to the findings of the national commission on severely distressed public housing .

the commission's national action plan was presented in august 1992 ; in october 1992 the final version of the fy1993 hud appropriations bill ( p.l .

102-389 ) passed congress , including $300 million for an urban revitalization demonstration program .

under the demonstration , the secretary of hud was to choose 15 cities , based on need , to receive up to $50 million each to revitalize distressed public housing .

each city was required to spend 80% of its funds toward the capital costs of major reconstruction , rehabilitation and other physical improvements , the capital costs of replacement units and / or section 8 certificates , management improvements for the reconstructed project , and for planning and technical assistance purposes .

the remaining 20% was to be used for community and supportive services .

phas were required to match 15% of all funds provided .

from 1993 until 1998 , the urban revitalization demonstration , now commonly referred to as hope vi , continued to receive funding through annual appropriations bills ; however , the program remained unauthorized .

the law governing the program was contained within annual appropriations bills and the requirements for eligibility and funding changed from year to year .

hud administered the law not through regulation , but in the directions it issued along with each annual notice of funding availability ( nofa ) , to which communities would apply for hope vi funding .

changes to the program , in addition to those mandated by annual appropriations laws , were included in these nofas .

the fy1999 hud appropriations bill ( p.l .

105-276 ) included a major public housing reform initiative , the quality housing and work opportunity reconciliation act ( qhwra ) , that authorized the hope vi program .

qhwra codified four purposes for the program: improving the living environment for public housing residents of severely distressed public housing projects through the demolition , rehabilitation , reconfiguration , or replacement of obsolete public housing projects ( or portions thereof ) ; revitalizing sites ( including remaining public housing dwelling units ) on which such public housing projects are located and contributing to the improvement of the surrounding neighborhood ; providing housing that will avoid or decrease the concentration of very low - income families ; and building sustainable communities .

in the law , severely distressed public housing was defined as public housing that requires major redesign , reconstruction or redevelopment , or partial or total demolition ; is a significant contributing factor to the physical decline of and disinvestment by public and private entities in the surrounding neighborhood ; is occupied predominantly by families that are very low - income families with children , unemployed , and dependent on various forms of public assistance ; or has high rates of vandalism and criminal activity ( including drug - related criminal activity ) in comparison to other housing in the area ; cannot be revitalized through assistance under other programs because of cost constraints and inadequacy of available amounts ; and is lacking in sufficient appropriate transportation , supportive services , economic opportunity , schools , civic and religious institutions , and public services , resulting in severe social distress in the project .

qhwra authorized funding for hope vi through the end of fy2002 and included a sunset clause which stated that no assistance could be provided to the program after september 30 , 2002 .

the fy2003 hud appropriations bill ( p.l .

108-7 ) extended authorization for the hope vi program through the end of fy2004 and p.l .

108-186 reauthorized the program , with some changes , through fy2006 .

each year since , congress has extended the program's authorization in the annual appropriations acts .

the program lacks formal regulation ; guidance is set out for each cohort of grantees in the annual notice of funding availability to which they apply for funds .

the purpose of the hope vi program is to revitalize severely distressed public housing developments and transform them into safe , liveable environments .

as described by hud , this includes changing the physical characteristics of public housing from high - rise tenements to attractive , marketable units that blend in with the surrounding neighborhoods ; lessening concentrations of poverty by reducing density and promoting mixed - income communities ; encouraging partnerships with other agencies and local governments for support and resources ; achieving high - quality management in public housing and enforcing strict eviction rules ; and helping residents to attain self - sufficiency by providing services and educational opportunities , and by encouraging economic development in the area surrounding public housing .

hud seeks to meet the goals of the hope vi program by providing grants to phas for revitalization , or if this is not economically feasible , for demolition of distressed public housing .

the majority of funds are awarded through revitalization grants ; funds have also been awarded through demolition grants ( until fy2004 ) and planning grants ( until fy1995 ) .

a 2003 hope vi reauthorization law ( p.l .

108-186 ) created a fourth type of hope vi grant , designed to promote "main street" revitalization in small communities , which is unrelated to public housing .

hope vi has been credited with a number of successes .

in terms of addressing severely distressed public housing , the program has largely met its original goal: to eliminate the worst severely distressed public housing .

grantees have been provided sufficient funding to demolish over 100,000 units of public housing .

the homes that are built in place of the demolished units are typically lower - density , safer , and more attractive .

the new designs also generally connect the public housing developments with their surrounding communities , both functionally and aesthetically .

despite the hope vi program's successes , there are several issues in the program that have led some to call for reforms to the program .

they include the slow expenditure of hope vi funds , the impact of hope vi on the original public housing residents , the cost - effectiveness of the program , and the loss of assisted housing stock .

the bush administration requested no new funding for the hope vi program in each of his fy2004-fy2008 budget requests to congress .

citing the slow expenditure of funds , concerns about cost - effectiveness , and that the program had effectively reached its goal of demolishing 100,000 units of distressed public housing , the former administration stated it was time to rethink whether hope vi is still necessary or effective .

the bush administration argued that even without new funding , the program would not end any time soon because so many projects are still in the pipeline , but that by not funding the program , hud would have time to throughly evaluate the program and consider alternatives .

each year , congress rejected the bush administration's request to eliminate funding for the program , but it contined funding at a level significantly less than the amout provided prior to fy2004 .

 ( see table 1 for historical appropriations levels. ) .

president obama's first budget in fy2010 requested no new funding for hope vi , and instead , requested $250 million for a new choice neighborhoods initiative ( discussed later in this report ) .

the final fy2010 funding law , p.l .

111-117 , included $200 million for hope vi , but of that amount , $65 million was set aside to fund a demonstration of the choice neighborhoods initiative .

president obama's fy2011 budgets again requested funding for choice neighborhoods , but not for hope vi .

congress responded by providing $100 million ( p.l .

112-10 ) , of which $65 million was set aside for choice neighborhoods .

in fy2012 , for the first time since the program's inception , congress provided no new funding for hope vi ( p.l .

112-55 ) , as requested by the president in his fy2012 budget .

instead , congress provided $120 million for choice neighborhoods .

the hope vi program was originally authorized through the end of fy2002 .

the 108 th congress initially extended the program through the end of fy2004 ( p.l .

108-7 ) but later extended the hope vi program through the end of fy2006 , as a part of a larger bill designed to make changes to a number of housing programs , including hope vi .

the american dream downpayment act ( p.l .

108-186 ) amended the program to change the selection criteria , broaden the definition of severe distress , require gao to conduct a study , and add a new category of grant ( main street revitalization grants ) .

several bills to reauthorize the hope vi program were introduced in the 109 th congress , although none were enacted .

several reauthorization bills were also considered in the 110 th , and one version ( h.r .

3524 ) passed the house .

no reauthorization legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress .

the program's authorization has been maintained through extensions included in the annual appropriations bills .

it is unclear if reauthorization legislation will be considered in the 112 th congress .

the choice neighborhoods initiative ( cni ) was originally proposed by the obama administration as a replacement for the hope vi program .

the initiative is designed to "transform neighborhoods of poverty into viable mixed income neighborhoods with access to economic opportunity by revitalizing severely distressed public housing and assisted housing and investing and leveraging investment in well - functioning services , effective schools and education programs , public assets , public transportation and improved access to jobs. .

as described by the administration , cni is similar to hope vi in that it is a competitive grant program aimed at improving distressed communities .

however , it is broader in scope than hope vi in that it targets distressed neighborhoods with hud - assisted housing , not just distressed public housing communities .

key differences between choice neighborhoods and hope vi , as outlined by the administration , include the following: eligible choice neighborhood grantees may include local governments , nonprofit entities , and for - profit entities partnered with local governments , in addition to phas .

phas are the only eligible grantees in the hope vi program .

while choice neighborhood grant funding is to be primarily focused on the transformation of distressed housing , the funding could also be used , on a limited basis , for improvements to the surrounding community .

hope vi funding can only be used for public housing demolition and development and related supportive services ( including relocation ) .

choice neighborhood grants are targeted to distressed neighborhoods with assisted housing and severely distressed public housing developments .

hope vi grants are limited to severely distressed public housing developments .

while the choice neighborhoods initiative has received some support for its concept of broadening the focus beyond public housing , it has also been met with concerns .

those concerns include whether the program will have the same displacement and loss of affordable housing stock effects as hope vi , and whether in a limited funding environment cni , with its broader pool of eligible applicants , will lead to more entities competing for a limited pot of funds , resulting in less funding available for public housing .

legislation to authorize the choice neighborhoods initiative was approved by the house financial services committee in the 111 th congress but was not enacted before the end of the 111 th congress ( h.r .

5814 ) .

choice neighborhoods authorizing legislation has been introduced in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

762 and s. 624 ) , but no further action has been taken .

while the program is not formally authorized , a choice neighborhoods demonstration was funded in fy2010 and fy2011 at $65 million and in fy2012 at $120 million .

the first round of choice neighborhoods implementation grants was announced in august 2011 .

five grants worth a total of $122 million were awarded to grantees in boston , ma ; chicago , il ; new orleans , la ; san francisco , ca ; and seattle , wa .

