the history of the present - day department of veterans affairs ( va ) can be traced back to july 21 , 1930 , when president hoover issued executive order 5398 , creating an independent federal agency known as the veterans administration by consolidating many separate veterans' programs .

on october 25 , 1988 , president reagan signed legislation ( p.l .

100-527 ) creating a new federal cabinet - level department of veterans affairs to replace the veterans administration , effective march 15 , 1989 .

va carries out its veterans' programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for veterans' health care programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for compensation , pension , vocational rehabilitation , education assistance , home loan guaranty and insurance among other things .

the national cemetery administration's ( nca ) responsibilities include maintaining 120 national cemeteries in 39 states and puerto rico .

the board of veterans appeals renders final decisions on appeals on veteran benefits claims .

this report provides an overview of major issues facing veterans' health care during the 109 th congress .

the report's primary focus is on veterans and not military retirees .

while any person who has served in the armed forces of the united states is regarded as a veteran , a military retiree is someone who has completed a full active duty military career ( almost always at least 20 years of service ) , or who is disabled in the line of military duty and meets certain length of service and extent of disability criteria , and who is eligible for retired pay and a broad range of nonmonetary benefits from the department of defense ( dod ) after retirement .

a veteran is someone who has served in the armed forces ( in most , but not all , cases for a few years in early adulthood ) , but may not have either sufficient service or disability to be entitled to post - service retired pay and nonmonetary benefits from dod .

generally , all military retirees are veterans , but all veterans are not military retirees .

currently , va health care services are generally available to all honorably discharged veterans of the u.s. armed forces who are enrolled in va's health care system .

in general , veterans have to enroll in the va's health care system to receive care from va .

typically veterans are enrolled in priority enrollment groups based on service - connectedness and income ( described later in this report ) .

persons enlisting in one of the armed forces after september 7 , 1980 , and officers commissioned after october 16 , 1981 must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for benefits .

veterans discharged at any time because of service - connected disabilities are not held to this requirement .

also eligible on a more limited basis are members of the armed forces reserve components called to active duty and who serve the length of time for which they were activated , and national guard personnel who are called to active duty by a federal declaration and serve the full period for which they were called .

these servicemembers can receive care from va for an initial two - year period for conditions presumably related to military service and for proven service - connected conditions thereafter .

to provide some context on veterans' health care issues , the first part of this report provides a brief history of the veterans health administration ( vha ) and an overview of the evolution of eligibility for va health care .

the second part of the report discusses major issues facing veterans' health care and provides a summary of major legislation enacted into law and bills that have been passed by either the house or senate .

this section provides a brief summary of veterans health care legislation that became public law in either the first or second session of this congress .

this summary does not include appropriation measures for veterans health care programs .

this section provides a brief summary of health care - related legislation passed by the house during the first and second session of the 109 th congress that has not yet received senate action .

this summary does not include appropriations measures for veterans' health care programs .

this section provides a brief summary of health care related legislation passed by the senate during the first and second session of this congress but were not enacted into law .

this summary does not include appropriation measures for veterans health care programs .

this bill was introduced on april 6 , 2005 , and was reported by the senate veterans affairs committee without an amendment on september 15 , 2005 ( s.rept .

109-180 ) .

the senate passed the measure on december 22 ( legislative day of december 21 ) , 2005 .

s. 716 is awaiting house action .

the legislative impact of these provisions is described below .

this provision would authorize 50 additional veterans of oif and oef to perform outreach efforts for vet centers .

under the senate - passed bill , these veteran - employees may be assigned to any vet center deemed appropriate by the secretary of veterans affairs .

furthermore , under this provision outreach coordinators would not be subject to va's stipulation that these positions be limited to only three years of hiring authority .

it should be noted here that shortly after the introduction of s. 716 , va announced that it has hired 50 additional outreach workers for vet centers .

however , the senate veterans affairs committee believed that as the number of returning oif and oef veterans continues to grow , the number of outreach workers needed must be increased to provide services to veterans .

this provision would provide express authority to vet centers to provide bereavement counseling to all immediate family members .

the provision would also ensure the furnishing of bereavement counseling services to parents by defining them as members of the immediate family when a servicemember dies in active duty .

in august of 2003 , the secretary of veterans affairs enabled vet centers to provide bereavement counseling services to immediate family members of servicemembers who died while on active duty , as well as federally activated reserve and national guard personnel on active duty .

however , the committee believed that the current law is unclear on whether or not a bereaved parent can receive such services .

therefore , this provision would give va the authority to provide bereavement counseling to all immediate family members , including parents .

this provision would authorize $180 million for va in fy2006 for the purpose of increased funding for vet centers .

this bill was introduced on june 9 , 2005 .

on september 15 , 2005 , the senate veterans affairs committee reported the measure , as amended , to incorporate provisions derived from the veterans mental health care capacity enhancement act of 2005 ( s. 1177 ) ; sheltering all veterans everywhere act of 2005 ( s. 1180 ) ; an act to require the secretary of veterans affairs to publish a strategic plan for long - term care ( s. 1189 ) ; blinded veterans continuum of care act of 2005 ( s. 1190 ) ; as well as an amendment offered by committee ranking member daniel k. akaka and an amendment from committee ranking member daniel k. akaka , as amended by committee chairman larry e. craig ( s.rept .

109-139 ) .

the senate passed the measure on december 22 ( legislative day of december 21 ) , 2005 .

s. 1182 is awaiting house action .

given below is a brief summary of major provisions of this bill .

under current law , va is only authorized to provide medical care and treatment to veterans .

therefore , va provides maternity , prenatal , and postnatal care for female veterans .

however , va is not authorized to provide , or pay for , any care for the newborn child of a female veteran .

this provision would authorize va to provide up to 14 days of care for newborn children of female veterans who are receiving maternity care furnished by va .

under current law , va provides , or pays for , care for certain children of vietnam veterans .

in general , the payment provided by va is considered payment in full for all services provided to the patient .

however , in some circumstances a care provider may seek reimbursement for certain services not otherwise covered by va. s. 1182 would designate va as the primary payer for care or services furnished to certain children of vietnam veterans , and permit a provider who furnishes care to children to seek payment for the difference between the amount billed and the amount paid by the va from a third - party payer if the beneficiary has health insurance that would otherwise be responsible for the payment .

furthermore , this bill would prohibit the health care provider from imposing any additional charges on the beneficiary who received the care , or on the beneficiary's family , for any service that va has paid for .

this would add the professions of "marriage and family therapist" and "licensed mental health counselor" to the list of clinical care providers va is authorized to hire .

under current law , va is not permitted to employ any professional not mentioned in statute .

this provision would allow va to compare its performance with the experience of those conducting a similar business in the private sector .

under current law , va is prohibited from using any appropriated funds to carry out studies comparing the costs of services provided by vha with the same services provided under contract through a private - sector company .

this provision would require va to enhance and improve mental health services for veterans .

specifically , it would require va to 1 ) expand the number of clinical treatment teams dedicated to the treatment of ptsd ; 2 ) expand treatment and diagnosis services for substance abuse ; 3 ) expand telehealth initiatives dedicated to mental health care in communities located great distances from current va facilities ; 4 ) improve programs that provide education in mental health treatment to primary care clinicians ; and 5 ) expand the number of community based outpatient clinics ( cboc ) capable of providing treatment for mental illness .

furthermore , this provision would authorize $95 million in fy2006 and fy2007 to carry out these activities .

it establishes a joint va — dod workgroup that will consist of seven experts in the fields of mental health and readjustment counseling from va and dod .

the workgroup is tasked with looking at ways to combat stigmas associated with mental health , to better educate families of servicemembers on how to deal with such issues , and is required to report its findings to congress .

this provision would permit dod to share certain medical records of servicemembers with va , and ensure that dod would not violate the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) of 1996 ( p.l .

104-191 ) by providing such information .

as stated in s.rept .

109-177 , due to requirements under hipaa , va must wait until the veteran actually enrolls for care at a va facility before requesting that dod send the veteran's medical records from active duty service .

this delay hinders the seamless transition from active duty to veterans status .

this provision would require va to expand the total number of personnel employed by the department as part of the readjustment counseling service's global war on terrorism ( gwot ) outreach program .

it also requires va to ensure that all appropriate health , education , and benefits information is available to returning members of the national guard .

this provision would require va to expand the number of vet centers capable of providing health services and counseling through telehealth linkages .

according to s.rept .

109-177 , the committee believes that it will allow va to reach more veterans in rural areas and provide more services in a setting closer to veterans' homes .

this provision would require va to submit a report to the senate and house committees on veterans' affairs describing the mental health data maintained by va .

the report must include a comprehensive list of the sources of all such data , including the geographic locations of va facilities maintaining such data ; an assessment of the limitations or advantages of maintaining the current data configurations and locations ; and any recommendations for improving the collection , use , and location of mental health data maintained by va .

this provision would require va to publish a strategic plan for long - term care .

the plan must include policies and strategies for the delivery of care in many different settings such as domiciliaries , residential treatment facilities , and nursing homes .

it must also include policies to maximize the use of state veterans nursing homes , locate domiciliary units as close to patient populations as feasible , and identify freestanding nursing homes as an acceptable model for care .

the plan must also include data on the care of catastrophically disabled veterans , and the geographic distribution of catastrophically disabled veterans .

furthermore , the plan must address the full spectrum of noninstitutional long - term care options , including respite care , home - based primary care , geriatric evaluation , adult day health care , skilled home health care , and community residential care .

the strategic plan must provide an analysis on cost and quality among all the different levels of care , detailed information about geographic distribution of services and gaps in care , and specific plans for working with medicare , medicaid , and private insurance companies to expand care .

this provision directs va to employ 35 new blind rehabilitation outpatient specialists at va facilities over the next three years .

this provision would authorize va to treat any veteran from one of the affected states in the gulf coast in any va facility , regardless of whether the veteran is enrolled in the va health care system or eligible to enroll .

this authority also waives any applicable copayments or fees .

this authority would expire on january 31 , 2006 .

under current law , va is authorized to pay for emergency care services provided to veterans in non - va facilities if the veteran seeking the services is an enrolled patient and has seen a va health care provider in the past two years .

however , a veteran who obtains emergency care in a non - va facility for a nonservice - connected condition is not eligible for va reimbursement for the related expenses if the veteran has any insurance or other coverage for the cost of the care , in whole or in part .

this provision would amend the current law and authorize va to reimburse veterans who receive emergency treatment from a non - va medical facility for costs that the veteran remains personally liable for if the veteran is enrolled in va's health care system , received medical care from va during the 24-month period preceding emergency treatment , has health insurance that partially reimburses the cost of emergency treatment , is financially liable for the cost of treatment that is not reimbursed by his or her health insurance , and is not eligible for reimbursement under current law .

this bill was introduced on may 2 , 2006 .

on june 22 , the senate veterans' affairs committee voted to report s. 2694 , as amended , and included provisions derived from several original measures introduced in the senate .

the bill was passed by the senate on august 3 , 2006 .

the bill is awaiting house action .

this section provides a brief summary of provisions that have a legislative impact on veterans' health care .

as stated previously , va has established six padreccs .

similarly , in 2003 , va established two multiple sclerosis centers of excellence ( mscoe ) in three locations to serve the health care needs of approximately 28,000 veterans with multiple sclerosis .

these centers are located in seattle , washington , and portland , oregon ( collectively known as mscoe , west ) , and in baltimore , maryland ( known as mscoe , east ) .

s. 2694 would permanently authorize the six padreccs and the two mscoes , subject to appropriations .

in providing a statutory basis for these centers , the committee's intent is to ensure their continued existence .

the state veterans' nursing home program is a federal - state partnership to construct or acquire nursing home , domiciliary , and adult day health care facilities .

va provides up to 65% of the cost to states to construct , acquire , remodel , or modify state homes .

in addition to providing grants to states for construction , va also provides a fixed per diem to the state for each veteran provided care in a state veterans' home .

in 2006 , that rate is $63.40 per veteran per day .

each state has different methods of funding the balance of the cost of care .

some states bill the balance amount in full to the veteran , and others bill medicare or medicaid for those veterans who qualify for those programs .

s. 2694 would require va to pay state nursing homes the full cost of care for veterans who have a service - connected disability rating of 70% or more .

the committee believes that the current reimbursement methodology is "unfair and irrational. .

under current law , if a veteran who is service - connected and rated 70% or more receives long - term care at a vha facility or at a vha - contracted facility , the care is provided at no cost to the veteran .

however , if the same veteran receives long - term care at a state veterans' nursing home , the veteran may likely be charged out - of - pocket expenses .

vha dispenses medications only to those veterans who are enrolled for , and who actually receive , va - provided care .

generally , vha does not provide medications to veterans unless those medications are prescribed by a physician employed by or under contract with vha .

however , there are two exceptions to this general requirement: vha is required to provide medications , upon the order of any licensed physician , to 1 ) veterans receiving additional disability compensation under chapter 11 of title 38 of the united states code ( u.s.c .

 ) , as a result of being permanently housebound or in need of regular aid and attendance due to a service - connected condition , or veterans who were previous recipients of such compensation and in need of regular aid and attendance ; and 2 ) veterans who are receiving nonservice - connected pensions under chapter 15 of title 38 u.s.c .

as a result of being permanently and totally disabled from a nonservice - connected disability , and who are permanently housebound or in need of regular aid and attendance .

this creates a condition whereby vha is required to provide medications to service - connected veterans residing in state veterans nursing homes who are receiving an additional aid and attendance allowance , and to veterans who are receiving a va pension for a nonservice - connected condition and an additional aid and attendance allowance .

however , vha cannot provide medications to veterans with service - connected conditions residing in state veterans homes who do not receive an additional aid and attendance allowance — although by definition , veterans residing in state veterans homes are receiving regular aid and attendance .

the committee believes that this situation is "simply irrational. .

s. 2694 would require vha to provide medications for the treatment of service - connected conditions to veterans residing in state veterans homes , regardless of whether they receive an aid and attendance allowance , and to provide medication for any condition — service - connected or nonservice - connected — to all veterans with a 50% or more service - connected disability rating who reside in state veterans homes .

s. 2694 would authorize a three - year pilot program that would require a va to deem 100 beds in non - va nursing facilities as eligible to receive state veterans' nursing home per - diem payments .

s. 2694 would create a new office in the department to develop strategies and solutions to help reduce disparities in access to care between rural and non - rural veterans .

va currently provides a variety of support services to aging veterans and their families .

among these services are adult day care , respite care , case management and coordination , transportation services , home care services , hospice , and general caregiver support such as education and training of family members .

s. 2694 would require the department to conduct a two - year pilot program to improve assistance provided to caregivers , particularly in home - based settings .

under this provision , $5 million would be authorized for the purpose of carrying out the pilot program .

this amount of funding would be in addition to whatever other funds va is already spending on caregiver assistance services .

this bill was introduced on june 6 , 2006 .

on june 22 , the senate veterans affairs committee voted by voice vote to report favorably s. 3421 , as amended by chairman craig .

the bill was passed by the senate on september 26 , 2006 .

s. 3421 , among other things , would authorize major medical facility projects in new orleans , louisiana ; biloxi , mississippi ; and denver , colorado ; extend the period during which va is authorized to enter into contracts for major medical facility construction projects originally authorized as cares projects by the veterans health care , capital asset , and business improvement act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-170 ) ; and authorize fy2006 and fy2007 major medical facility leases .

s. 3421 would also authorize $15 million for improvements to the va hospital in san juan , puerto rico .

the house bill ( h.r .

5815 ) did not include such a provision .

the house bill did authorize $70 million for the reconstruction of a co - located , joint - use major medical facility project in charleston , south carolina , with the medical university of south carolina .

however , s. 3421 did not include a provision authorizing this project .

h.r .

5815 and s. 3421 are awaiting conference .

appendix a. map of all 21 veterans' integrated services networks appendix b .

priority groups and their eligibility criteri .

