since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , the enforcement of our nation's immigration laws has received a significant amount of attention .

some observers contend that the federal government has scarce resources to enforce immigration law and that state and local law enforcement entities should be utilized .

still , many continue to question what role state and local law enforcement agencies should have in light of limited state and local resources and immigration expertise .

states and localities bear the primary responsibility for defining and prosecuting crimes .

but beyond enforcing the laws or ordinances of their state or locality , state and local officials may also have the authority to enforce some federal laws , especially criminal laws .

immigration law provides for both criminal punishments ( eg , for alien smuggling , which is prosecuted in the courts ) and civil violations ( eg , lack of legal status , which may lead to removal through a separate administrative system ) .

states and localities have traditionally only been permitted to directly enforce certain criminal provisions that fall under their jurisdictions , whereas the enforcement of the civil provisions has been viewed as a federal responsibility with states playing an incidental supporting role .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) ( 8 u.s.c .

§§1101 et seq . ) .

currently provides limited avenues for state enforcement of both its civil and criminal provisions .

in previous congresses , several proposals had been introduced , however , that would appear to expand the role of state and local law enforcement agencies in the civil regulatory aspects of immigration law ( i.e. , identifying and detaining deportable aliens for purposes of removal ) .

adding the enforcement of civil immigration law to the role of state and local law enforcement could , in essence , involve the agencies in a seemingly unfamiliar mission .

this potential expansion has prompted many to examine the legal authority by which state and local law enforcement agencies may enforce immigration law , particularly the civil enforcement measures .

this report examines the role of state and local law enforcement in enforcing immigration law .

the discussion is limited to the role of state and local law enforcement in the investigation , arrest , and detention of all immigration violators .

the report does not discuss the prosecution , adjudication , or removal of aliens who violate the law .

the report opens with a brief discussion of the types of immigration interior enforcement activities that the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) pursued and the current immigration activities that are now the focus of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

a discussion of the legal authority that permits state and local law enforcement to enforce immigration law under certain circumstances follows .

current administrative efforts to involve state and local law enforcement in enforcing immigration law as well as selected issues are discussed .

the report concludes with a discussion of the potential pros and cons of such a policy and an analysis of possible policy approaches for congress .

the enforcement of immigration laws in the interior of the united states has been controversial .

traditionally , the debate posed concern over large numbers of "lawbreakers" ( i.e. , illegal aliens ) depressing wages against perceptions that foreign labor benefits the economy and promotes relations with "source" countries .

nonetheless , after the attacks of september 11 , attention refocused on the adequacy of interior immigration enforcement , especially the perceived lack of federal resources .

prior to the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the ins had fewer than 2,000 immigration agents to enforce immigration laws within the united states .

with the merger of the interior enforcement function of the former ins with the investigative arm of the u.s. customs service ( customs ) into dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the number of interior agents have increased .

in spite of the increase in interior enforcement agents , many continue to believe that the number is still insufficient .

moreover , although the consolidation increased the number of interior enforcement agents , they now have multiple missions , which include enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states , stemming the flow of illicit drugs , and deterring money laundering , among other things .

currently , there are express provisions in federal law that provide state and local law enforcement the authority to assist federal officers with the enforcement of immigration law under certain circumstances .

such authorities were enacted into law in 1996 in §439 of the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act ( aedpa ; p.l .

104-132 ) and§133 and §372 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ; p.l .

104-208 ) .

in addition to the provisions enacted in aedpa and iirira , the dhs has several initiatives with state and local law enforcement agencies to facilitate the investigation , arrest and apprehension of foreign nationals who have violated the law , as discussed below .

although there is quite a bit of debate with respect to state and local law enforcement officers' authority to enforce immigration law ( see discussion below ) , as a matter of practice , it is permissible for state and local law enforcement officers to inquire into the status of an immigrant during the course of their normal duties in enforcing state and local law .

this practice allows state and local law enforcement officers to play an indirect role that is incidental to their general criminal enforcement authority .

for example , when state or local officers question the immigration status of someone they have detained for a state or local violation , they may contact an ice agent at the law enforcement support center ( lesc ) .

the federal agent may then place a detainer on the suspect , requesting the state official to keep the suspect in custody until a determination can be made as to the suspect's immigration status .

however , the continued detention of such a suspect beyond the needs of local law enforcement designed to aid in the enforcement of federal immigration laws may be unlawful .

indirect state participation by means of immigration detainers is not without controversy .

many have alleged such abuses as state detentions premised on immigrant status alone and custodial arrests for traffic violations or similar offenses as pretexts for verifying an individual's status with immigration authorities .

past allegations of abuse at times have led to states and localities entering into consent decrees that strictly limit their role in the enforcement of immigration law .

on the other hand , some localities have been concerned that an active role in enforcing immigration law may stretch resources and hinder community cooperation in curbing criminal activity .

 ( see later discussion under selected issues. ) .

the power to prescribe rules as to which aliens may enter the united states and which aliens may be removed resides solely with the federal government , particularly with the congress .

to implement its plenary power , congress has enacted and amended the ina — a comprehensive set of rules for legal immigration , naturalization , deportation , and enforcement .

concomitant to its exclusive power to determine which aliens may enter and which may stay , the federal government also has power to proscribe activities that subvert these rules ( eg , alien smuggling ) and to set criminal or civil penalties for those who undertake these activities .

in examining the ina , it is crucial to distinguish the civil from criminal violations .

mere illegal presence in the u.s. is a civil , not criminal , violation of the ina , and subsequent deportation and associated administrative processes are civil proceedings .

for instance , a lawfully admitted non - immigrant alien may become deportable under civil provisions if his visitor's visa expires or if his student status changes .

criminal violations of the ina , on the other hand , include felonies and misdemeanors and are prosecuted in the federal courts .

these types of violations include , for example , 8 u.s.c .

§1324 , which addresses the bringing in and harboring of certain undocumented aliens ; §1325 ( a ) , which addresses the illegal entry of aliens ; and §1326 , which penalizes the reentry of aliens previously excluded or deported .

congress also has exclusive authority to prescribe procedures for determining who may enter or stay and the right of aliens in these proceedings , subject to the individual rights all aliens in the united states enjoy under the constitution .

however , exclusive authority to prescribe the rules on immigration does not necessarily imply exclusive authority to enforce those rules .

while enforcement standards and procedures may differ between the criminal and civil aspects of immigration law , congress may authorize the states to assist in enforcing both , and state officers may exercise this authority to the degree permitted under federal and state law .

there is a notion , however — one being more frequently articulated by the federal courts and the executive branch — that states have "inherent" authority to enforce at least the federal criminal law related to immigration .

this inherent authority position is now apparently beginning to be expressed with regard to the enforcement of the civil aspects of immigration law as well .

state enforcement , nonetheless , must always be consistent with federal authority .

even assuming states have some inherent authority to enforce immigration law , federal law preempts inconsistent state law where concurrent jurisdiction exists .

congress' power to preempt state law arises from the supremacy clause of the constitution , which provides that "the laws of the united states ... shall be the supreme law of the land ... any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding. .

congressional intent is paramount in preemption analysis ; accordingly , a court must determine whether congress expressly or implicitly intended to preempt state or local action .

generally , a court will determine that congress intended to preempt a state regulation or enforcement when ( 1 ) congress expresses preemptive intent in "explicit statutory language," ( 2 ) when a state entity regulates "in a field that congress intended the federal government to occupy exclusively," or ( 3 ) when a state entity's activity "actually conflicts with federal law. .

setting the rules on the entry and removal of aliens is unquestionably an exclusive federal power and some would argue that uniformity in enforcing those rules is critical to the exercise of sovereign authority ( i.e. , it should not be enforced by states ) .

accordingly , it has been suggested that state involvement in immigration law should be strictly limited to express congressional indication for such participation .

on the other hand , congress can not compel the states to enforce federal immigration law and to do so in a particular way .

from the states' point of view , the federal government's exclusive power over immigration does not preempt every state activity affecting aliens .

and it generally has been assumed that state and local officers may enforce the criminal provisions of the ina if state law permits them to do so but are precluded from directly enforcing the ina's civil provisions .

this view may be changing , however .

state enforcement of the criminal provisions of the ina is seen as being consistent with the state's police power to make arrests for criminal acts and the expectation that states are expected to cooperate in the enforcement of federal criminal laws .

civil immigration law enforcement , on the other hand , has generally been viewed as strictly a federal responsibility: the civil provisions of the ina have been assumed to constitute a pervasive and preemptive regulatory scheme — leaving no room for a direct state or local role .

the distinction between civil and criminal violations in the ina has been seen to suggest a bifurcated role for states and localities .

for example , state and local law enforcement officers cannot arrest someone solely for illegal presence for the purpose of deporting them because it is a civil violation , but they can arrest someone for the criminal offense of entering the country illegally .

to the degree that it is not preempted , the authority of state and local law enforcement officers to investigate and arrest for violations of federal law is determined by reference to state law .

this may be done through express authorization in state law .

however , this may not be necessary according to some recent decisions from the tenth circuit that appear to suggest that state and local law enforcement officers may possess "inherent authority" within their respective jurisdictions to investigate and make arrests for criminal immigration matters .

the following sections briefly examine department of justice , office of legal counsel ( olc ) opinions that have examined immigration enforcement authority , analyze the major cases on the issue , and describe current provisions in law that authorize state and local involvement in the enforcement of immigration law .

as mentioned above , iirira amended the ina by authorizing the ag ( now the secretary of homeland security ) to enter into written agreements with states or political subdivisions of a state so that qualified officers could perform specified immigration - related duties .

this authority was given new urgency following the terrorist attacks in september 2001 .

in 2002 , the ag proposed an initiative to enter into such agreements in an effort to carry out the country's anti - terrorism mission .

under such agreements , commonly referred to as 287 ( g ) programs , state and local law enforcement officers could be deputized to assist the federal government with enforcing certain aspects of immigration law .

to date , ice has entered into such agreements with several jurisdictions .

following is a discussion of selected moas .

in addition to the legal complexities that may arise with respect to utilizing state and local law enforcement to enforce immigration law , several additional issues have been noted .

determining what the proper role of state and local law enforcement officials is in enforcing immigration law is not without controversy .

lawmakers , scholars , observers and law enforcement officials have all expressed their opposition or support for increasing the role of state and local law enforcement with respect to enforcing immigration law .

following is a discussion of a few of the issues that have arisen in this debate .

as congress continues to debate the use of state and local law enforcement officers to enforce immigration law , it may want to consider several policy options , which may represent a choice among the options listed below or a combination .

congress may also choose to take no action , which could leave it to the courts to define these boundaries .

under current practice , state and local law enforcement officials have indirect access to the immigration status of aliens through lesc and direct access to absconders through the fbi's ncic .

some law enforcement officials argue that direct access to databases that contain information on the immigrant's status would assist them in carrying out their responsibilities more efficiently and effectively .

opponents , on the other hand , argue that providing state and local law enforcement officials with direct access to an alien's personal information could lead to abuse of such information by the law enforcement official .

some raise questions about the quality of the various databases and the potential for false positives , which could lead to the incarceration of innocent people .

while there are critics on both sides of the issue , there may be a consensus that state and local law enforcement officials need access to certain information on aliens with whom they come into contact .

according to some , other issues arise when addressing state and local law enforcement's access to immigration databases: ( 1 ) how much access should be granted to state and local law enforcement officials ; ( 2 ) who should have access to the databases ; ( 3 ) what level of background clearance would be sufficient for the officers accessing the database ; ( 4 ) what type of privacy protection should be given for individuals whose personal information is being accessed ; and ( 5 ) how can the quality of the databases be improved to avoid potential problems such as "false positives" and individuals with similar names , which could potentially clog up the system .

congress could appropriate additional funding to state and local law enforcement agencies for their cooperation with enforcing immigration law .

a common argument made by local law enforcement officials against enforcing immigration law is the lack of resources .

many states are facing budget crises and police departments have seen decreases in federal funding for some law enforcement programs .

over the past several years , states and localities have seen a reduction in federal reimbursement for the scaap .

scaap provides payment assistance to states and localities for the costs incurred for incarcerating undocumented aliens being held as a result of state or local charges .

scaap funding was at a historical high in fy2002 when congress appropriated $565 million for the program , and while it has received increased funding when compared to the previous year , its fy2007 appropriations of just under $400 million remains lower than its fy2002 peak .

at the center of the current debate to permit state and local law enforcement to enforce immigration law is whether state and local law enforcement has the inherent authority to enforce civil immigration violations , such as a nonimmigrant who overstays his visa .

while this issue still appears somewhat unclear from a legal perspective ( see earlier discussion in "authorities to enforce immigration law" and "state involvement in the enforcement of immigration law" ) , by criminalizing all civil immigration violations , state and local law enforcement agencies could seemingly arrest and detain all immigration violators .

while some view this option as closing the existing loophole , others express concern that state and local law enforcement officials are not adequately trained to ascertain the difference between a bonafide asylum seeker and an individual who may be fraudulently trying to circumvent the system .

others express concern that the pool of violators is great ( 8 million or more undocumented aliens ) and the immigration system is already overburdened .

observers question that if civil immigration violations were to become criminal would it be retroactive , and if so to what date ; and would it preempt aliens who have civil immigration violations from adjusting their status ? .

appendix a .

list of law enforcement entities participating in 287 ( g ) program appendix b .

legislation in the 110 th congress in the 110 th congress , a number of bills were introduced that would have provided state and local law enforcement officers immigration enforcement authorities or that would have otherwise supported the enforcement of immigration law by state and local law enforcement officers .

s. 1348 , the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 , included provisions concerning the state and local enforcement of immigration laws that were similar to those contained in the version of s. 2611 that passed the senate in the 109 th congress ( see appendix c for a discussion of s. 2611 and other legislation in the 109 th congress ) .

s.amdt .

1150 , the secure borders , economic opportunity , and immigration reform act of 2007 , which was proposed as a substitute to s. 1348 , and s. 1639 contained similar provisions .

specifically , all three legislative proposals would have created a border relief grant program for eligible law enforcement agencies to address criminal activity that occurred near the border .

under the program , the secretary of dhs would have been authorized to provide grants to law enforcement agencies located within 100 miles of the northern or southern border or to agencies outside 100 miles , located in areas certified as "high impact areas" by the secretary .

s. 1348 , s.amdt .

1150 , and s. 1369 would also have authorized dhs to reimburse state and local authorities for certain training , equipment , transportation , and incarceration costs related to immigration enforcement , and certain costs associated with processing criminal illegal aliens through the criminal justice system .

other provisions of these legislative proposals would have , among other things , required dhs to ( 1 ) verify the immigration status of aliens apprehended or arrested by local police ; ( 2 ) take possession of illegal aliens within 72 hours after the local police apprehend an alien or complete the charging process ; and ( 3 ) designate at least one federal , state or local prison , jail , private contracted prison or detention facility within each state as the central facility for that state to transfer custody of aliens to dhs .

unlike s. 1639 and s.amdt .

1150 , s. 1348 as introduced also contained a provision reaffirming a state's inherent authority to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens in the united states , though this provision only concerns the enforcement of the criminal provisions of the ina .

s. 1348 also contained a provision requiring the secretary of dhs to provide specified information on certain aliens to the ncic .

h.r .

842 would have given state and local law enforcement personnel the authority to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens within the united states .

state or local governments that continued to prohibit their law enforcement officers from assisting or cooperating with federal immigration law enforcement entities two years after the bill's enactment would no longer have been eligible for funding under the state criminal alien assistance program .

the bill would have required dhs to designate one detention facility within each state as a central facility for law enforcement entities within that state to place aliens .

dhs would also have been required to take aliens into federal custody within 48 hours of their apprehension by state and local law enforcement officers .

h.r .

1645 would have affirmed state and local law enforcement officers' right to enforce the criminal provisions of the ina in the normal course of carrying out their regular law enforcement duties .

the bill would also have created a border relief grant program to provide funding to state and local law enforcement agencies to address criminal activity within their jurisdiction relating to the lack of security at the border .

funding would have be available to all communities within 100 miles of the u.s. border and to some communities further than 100 miles from the border that had been designated as "high impact areas" by dhs .

h.r .

1962 would have authorize dhs to provide grants to units of local government to offset increasing expenses related to unauthorized aliens within their jurisdictions , including , among other things: law enforcement activities , inmate transportation , and reduction in jail populations .

appendix c. legislation in the 109 th congress several bills in the 109 th congress would have enhanced the role of state and local law enforcement agencies in the enforcement of immigration law .

only a few bills , however , passed their respective chambers , and no bill with significant local law enforcement measures in the immigration context was passed by the 109 th congress .

most provisions affecting the role of state and local law enforcement were contained in senate - passed s. 2611 , the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2006 , and house - passed h.r .

4437 , the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 .

the following discusses in more detail h.r .

4437 , s. 2611 , and other bills that passed their chambers during the 109 th congress .

h.r .

4437 , as passed by the house , would have "reaffirm[ed] the existing inherent authority of states," as sovereign entities ( including their law enforcement personnel ) , to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens in the united states in the course of carrying out routine duties .

other provisions in h.r .

4437 would have authorized the secretary of dhs to make grants to state and local police agencies for the procurement of equipment , technology , facilities , and other products that were directly related to the enforcement of immigration law .

h.r .

4437 would have further allowed a state to reimburse itself with certain dhs grants for activities that were related to the enforcement of federal laws aimed at preventing the unlawful entry of persons or things into the united states and that were carried out under agreement with the federal government .

h.r .

4437 would have also required designated sheriffs within 25 miles of the southern international border of the united states to be reimbursed or provided an advance for costs associated with the transfer of aliens detained or in the custody of the sheriff .

the act would have also required dhs to establish a training manual and pocket guide for state and local law enforcement personnel with respect to enforcing immigration law .

similar to h.r .

4437 , the department of homeland security authorization act for fy2006 , h.r .

1817 , as passed by the house , would have authorized state and local law enforcement personnel to apprehend , detain , or remove aliens in the united states in the course of carrying out routine duties .

likewise , it would have reaffirmed the existing general authority for state and local law enforcement personnel to carry out the activities mentioned above .

no action was taken on h.r .

1817 in the senate during the 109 th congress .

in the senate , s. 2611 would have , among other things , reaffirmed the inherent authority of states to enforce the criminal provisions of the ina , reimbursed states and localities for various costs associated with the apprehension and detention of unauthorized aliens , and required dhs to promptly take into custody illegal aliens who had been apprehended by local authorities .

as mentioned previously , the provisions contained in s. 2611 concerning state and local enforcement of immigration laws are largely identical to those found in s. 1348 , the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 , which is currently being considered in the 110 th congress and is discussed in greater detail in the previous section .

