in 2003 , u.s. consumers bought more than $1 billion in prescription drugs from canada — twice as much as the year before , by some estimates .

although the 2004 and 2005 increases slowed , congressional efforts to allow american consumers to buy prescription drugs from foreign sellers did not .

many u.s. residents use the internet or mail - order pharmacies ; others simply go to a drug store when they travel outside the united states , especially to canada or mexico .

the reason is clear .

brand - name prescription drugs often cost less abroad — particularly for the uninsured and many of the elderly who pay retail prices .

under current law , only the manufacturer of a prescription drug may legally bring it into the united states .

the law allows u.s. pharmacists and wholesalers to do so only if the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) first certifies that those drugs would be safe and that the program lowered drug costs for u.s. consumers .

after issuing that certification , the secretary must issue regulations allowing individuals to import prescription drugs .

because no hhs secretary has ever taken that step , consumers , pharmacists , and wholesalers are prohibited from importing prescription drugs .

given the difference between prices in the united states and elsewhere , many americans , including some members of congress , want legislation eliminating the restrictions on imports .

this report does not address whether drug prices are too high or unfair .

it does focus on the issues recent legislative proposals raise in attempting to help u.s. consumers — themselves or through importing pharmacists and wholesalers — gain access to safe and less expensive food and drug administration ( fda ) - approved prescription drugs from abroad .

the report begins with an overview of the domestic drug distribution system and how congress has handled prescription drug importation .

it then discusses the current situation following its upsurge in the volume of drug imports , state and local government initiatives , the drug industry and fda's reactions , and the legislative proposals introduced to consider this issue .

it goes on to examine three broad sets of issues surrounding importation .

the first involves ensuring drug safety and effectiveness , by attending to product integrity and appropriate use .

the next set explores whether a drug import program would be feasible administratively and in the context of international trade and pharmaceutical research and development .

the report concludes by discussing the likelihood that a drug import program would save u.s. consumers money .

 ( a separate crs report provides a detailed side - by - side comparison of current law and selected major importation bills introduced but not passed during the 109 th congress .

other crs reports focus in more detail on legal and drug price issues. ) .

since 1938 , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca , p.l .

75-717 ) has required that drugs sold to u.s. consumers be safe .

with its 1962 kefauver - harris amendments ( p.l .

87-781 ) , all drugs had to be proven effective as well .

the ffdca is the major law that set up the current u.s. system of drug regulation ; subsequent legislation amends it .

in the last 17 years , congressional and fda actions have addressed the importation of prescription drugs by , in turn , limiting imports , establishing exceptions to those restrictions , and attempting to broaden access to imports .

although congress passed the mma with provisions to permit drug imports from canada , the act contained the requirement that , to implement the program , the secretary first must certify that all imports would be safe and at reduced cost to u.s. consumers .

 ( see appendix , drug regulation in canada. ) .

the current secretary refused to make this determination , therefore , absent a change in his position , the program cannot take effect .

in the first week of the 110 th congress , members introduced drug importation bills: s. 242 and h.r .

380 , the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2007 ( introduced january 10 , 2007 , by senators dorgan and snowe and representatives emanuel and emerson ) ; and s. 251 , the pharmaceutical market access act ( introduced january 10 , 2007 , by senator vitter ) .

members of the 109 th congress had introduced three pairs of bills , none of which was reported .

because numerous academic and policy panels , news and professional journals , and committee hearings discussed them , this report uses the provisions in the bill pairs of the 109 th in its presentation of issues that this congress faces .

as public discussions of the bills introduced in the 110 th congress build , updates of this report will reflect them .

the bills from the 109 th congress are: the pharmaceutical market access act of 2005 : s. 109 , introduced by senator vitter on january 24 , 2005 , and h.r .

328 , introduced by representative gutknecht on january 25 , 2005 ; referred to in this report as the vitter - gutknecht bills .

the safe importation of medical products and other rx therapies act of 2005 , or the safe import act of 2005 : s. 184 , introduced by senator gregg on january 26 , 2005 , and h.r .

753 , introduced by representative bradley on february 10 , 2005 ; referred to in this report as the gregg - bradley bills .

the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2005 : s. 334 , introduced by senator dorgan on february 9 , 2005 , and h.r .

700 , introduced the same day by representative emerson ; referred to in this report as the dorgan - emerson bills .

on july 21 , 2005 , senator dorgan successfully offered the drug importation provisions as an amendment to the federal trade commission reauthorization bill ( s. 1392 ) approved by the senate commerce , science and transportation committee ( but there was no further action on that bill ) .

all the bills seek to balance the availability of imported prescription drugs — for both commercial and personal use — with the assurance that those imports would be safe and effective .

the underlying goal is to reduce or restrain the growth of the financial burden that prescription drugs place on u.s. consumers .

they all would act primarily by replacing or amending section 804 of the ffdca .

a striking difference between these bills and current law is their elimination of the provision that has so far been the chief obstacle to imports: hhs secretary certifications about risk and cost .

throughout the following discussion of issues , this report refers to provisions in these bills .

an individual imports a drug for personal use .

a pharmacist or wholesaler imports a drug for commercial use .

a manufacturer imports one of its own drugs .

each of these situations involves two issues that are at the heart of congressional debate: can we ensure that imported drugs — and how they would be used — would be safe and effective ; and if congress chooses to proceed , how could it craft an administratively feasible statutory and regulatory drug import framework that results in u.s. consumers' gaining access to lower priced prescription drugs .

clearly , the high cost of prescription drugs affects the purchasing power of individual consumers and public and private entities .

also , the trend is toward the development of evermore sophisticated drugs , with complex dosing schedules and intense patient - monitoring requirements , which cost more to make and to administer medically .

together , these factors are ratcheting up overall healthcare spending ( particularly in the united states , which has not traditionally controlled utilization ) .

in addition , the new outpatient prescription drug benefit for medicare beneficiaries began on january 1 , 2006 .

it is too early to draw conclusions about its long - term prospects for reducing drug cost burden on u.s. consumers ( medicare - covered and others ) .

what impact it will have on costs for the elderly is uncertain ; it will provide coverage that many have not had .

because the government will now be paying for a larger proportion of drugs used by people in the united states , many believe that the government will have a stronger interest in the comparative costs , safety , and effectiveness of various available drugs .

if congress wants to lower the cost of drugs to u.s. consumers , there are options — some more feasible than others — other than importation .

these include encouraging the use of generics and disease management techniques , providing research and development incentives to industry , studying the comparative effectiveness of similar drugs and applying that information judiciously in benefit package and prescribing decisions , instituting price controls or other regulatory measures on prescription drugs in this country , encouraging more market action ( such as with purchasing agreements ) , encouraging reciprocal arrangements with other nations' regulatory authorities , and promoting or providing insurance coverage for pharmaceuticals to a wider population than have it today .

such steps are beyond the scope of this report .

current law and the various pending bills designate canada as the first or only country from which u.s. consumers or commercial importers could import if the program were implemented .

safety and effectiveness canada's drug regulatory requirements are quite similar to those of the united states , and health canada and fda operate with similar procedures when ensuring the safety and efficacy of pharmaceutical products .

in a february 12 , 2004 letter to health canada , then fda commissioner mcclellan stated that: ... we have no reason to doubt the safety of canadian drugs regulated by health canada and distributed within the regulated distribution systems in canada .

rather , it is the practice of cross - border internet pharmacies in canada that primarily , or entirely , serve americans — not canadians — and the associated gaps between our two drug regulatory systems that remain of great concern to us .

canadian officials seem to concur that there is a gap between the two countries' responsibilities .

health canada has already said that it does not assume regulatory oversight of drugs exported to u.s. addresses and is therefore neither willing nor able to guarantee the safety of those drugs .

on november 18 , 2003 , the united states and canada signed a memorandum of understanding to share information on ( 1 ) pharmacies that export drugs to either nation , ( 2 ) quality defects or product recalls , ( 3 ) new regulations or policies regarding drugs , and ( 4 ) post - market surveillance results .

canadian pharmacies are regulated by provincial and federal authorities and are required to have licenses .

these pharmacies cannot dispense a prescription drug without a prescription written by a physician licensed in canada .

even though legitimate internet or mail - order pharmacies require faxed or e - mailed prescriptions from a u.s. - licensed health care provider , there are some canadian pharmacies ( called "rogue" by fda ) that have apparently been set up only to dispense pharmaceuticals by mail .

for some of these , canadian physicians rewrite a u.s. prescription or initiate a canadian original , not necessarily following whatever regulations canada might require nor being available for the level of monitoring required in the united states .

canadian pharmacies may soon find it difficult to hire physicians to write prescriptions for u.s. patients .

the canadian medical protective association , a large malpractice insurance company for physicians ( about 95% of the doctors licensed to practice in canada are members ) , has notified canadian doctors that it would no longer provide coverage to "risky activity" meaning if the physician did not originate the prescription but instead co - signed it for americans in search of cheaper drugs without examining the patients in person .

the co - signing has been denounced by provincial and territorial licensing bodies .

it also is illegal , according to canadian law , for any canadian entity to import drugs in finished dosage form from a foreign country for the purpose of subsequent export , according to the canadian international pharmacy association .

cost and price u.s. and canadian pharmaceutical markets are significantly different .

for example , approximately 98% of canadian citizens over the age of 65 have some form of prescription drug coverage , mainly through their provincial government health programs .

this allows the government to negotiate bulk purchasing contracts for pharmaceutical products .

by federal law , canada's patented medicine prices review board keeps drug costs in check by regulating a drug's price based on guidelines involving the cost of alternate drugs , cost of the same drug in other developed countries , and changes in the consumer price index .

in addition , both public and private benefit plans actively manage costs using price and cost - effectiveness data , international price comparisons , reference pricing , substantial generic substitution , and pharmacy reimbursement policies .

