with few exceptions , countries with bse can trace the first case ( s ) to importation of affected animals or infected by - products .

in this section , u.s. import controls to prevent bse are examined , within the context of internationally accepted standards .

worldwide , some 24 countries , including the united states , had reported one or more indigenous cases of bse , and several others reported only imported cases , as of early 2007 .

the united kingdom ( uk ) , where bse was first reported , has experienced some 183,000 of the approximately 187,000 cases worldwide , and most of the rest have been found elsewhere in europe .

annual bse cases peaked in the uk in 1992 at more than 37,000 , and have been declining there since then .

as the uk was coping with a then - rising number of bse discoveries , usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , the lead agency for controlling animal diseases , began to impose a series of import restrictions here .

during 1989 , aphis first began to ban ( by not issuing import permits ) the importation of live ruminants ( i.e. , cattle , sheep , goats , deer , elk , buffalo ) and most ruminant products from the uk and other countries where bse has been diagnosed .

on december 6 , 1991 , aphis published formal rules banning the importation of ruminants , ruminant meats and related products from bse countries ( these rules essentially superseded the policy of not issuing import permits ) .

on december 12 , 1997 , as bse cases were emerging in other parts of europe , aphis instituted a ban on importing ruminants and most ruminant products from all of europe .

on december 7 , 2000 , usda began to prohibit imports of all rendered animal protein products , regardless of species , from europe out of concern that feed of nonruminant origin was potentially cross - contaminated with the bse agent .

 ( these prohibitions on imports are distinct from the fda's domestic feed controls , described later in this report. ) .

usda ( fsis ) is responsible for the safety of meat produced in facilities under federal inspection .

in addition , under memoranda of understanding with fsis , many states have programs to inspect meat for in - state sale only .

state - regulated safety measures , including all bse prevention measures , must be equivalent to those in federally - inspected plants .

therefore , all food safety measures announced by usda to control bse apply to state meat inspection facilities as well as federal facilities .

fsis earlier had been considering a number of policy options for protecting the human food supply from possible contamination by bse agents .

these measures were summarized in a january 15 , 2002 , "current thinking" paper .

a number of these possible options related to designating various types of cattle parts as "specified risk materials" ( srm , thereby making them unfit for human consumption ) , or to restricting the use of certain mechanical systems for recovering meat from vertebral columns ( notably so - called advance meat recovery systems , or amr ) .

the agency announced a number of steps to ensure the safety and proper labeling of amr products , but major new regulatory actions did not come until after the discovery of the first u.s. bse cow .

the secretary of agriculture announced these new preventive measures on december 30 , 2003 .

the "three firewalls" had been in place , but they primarily were intended to prevent the emergence of bse or its spread in cattle .

most of these newer fsis measures involve changes in meat inspection and human food safety protections , interventions that had been regarded by usda and fsis to be unnecessary before bse was known to be present in the united states .

officials and an advisory panel have subsequently noted that these measures , which remove all designated high - risk material from the food supply , regardless of test findings on specific animals or measures of bse prevalence nationwide , represent the strongest actions to protect public health since the first u.s. finding of bse .

federal dollars devoted to bse - related activities have risen significantly in recent years , from less than $6 million in appropriated funds in fy2001 to an estimated $90 million in fy2006 , and a requested $98 million in fy2007 .

these figures do not include transfers of an additional $157.4 million from the ccc account ( which the secretary is permitted to do under standing authority ) .

most of these ccc funds were used to pay for the enhanced surveillance program .

more specifically , usda's bse spending ( exclusive of the ccc money ) has increased from less than $500,000 in fy2000 to $60 million in fy2006 and a requested $68 million in fy2007 .

within these totals , $7 million has been budgeted for research by usda's agricultural research service ( which wants an increase to $15 million for fy2007 ) , $17 million for aphis ongoing surveillance , and $3 million for fsis meat safety activities .

aphis also includes another $33 million annually within this total to continue the establishment of a national animal id system , but this program is intended to support efforts to address any animal disease , not just bse .

fda spending for bse - related work has risen from less than $4 million in fy2001 ( the first year for which figures are available ) to nearly $30 million in each of fy2005-fy2007 ( estimated ) .

within this total , $16 million annually is for federal feed inspections , more than $3 million for state feed inspections , and about $10 million for a variety of regulatory , educational , and research activities .

the administration's final fy2007 budget for usda and for fda was not cleared by the 109 th congress , so programs for these ( and most other federal ) agencies and activities have been funded under a series of continuing resolutions , including the fourth and final one , h.j.res .

20 ( p.l .

110-5 ) .

the 110 th congress in spring 2007 was beginning to consider the fy2008 usda and fda appropriations requests .

although the administration's requests for bse - related appropriations generally have not been highly contentious , efforts to constrain the federal budget deficit , along with the observations of some that bse is a diminished threat to u.s. cattle and people , could be factors in future spending decisions .

following the first u.s. report of a cow with bse in late december 2003 , the secretary of agriculture promised to take the lead in implementing an animal id program capable of identifying all animals of interest within 48 hours of a disease discovery ( bse or other ) .

many animal producers support establishment of a nationwide identification ( id ) system capable of quickly tracking animals from birth to slaughter .

many of them already keep records on the identities of each of their animals , primarily for herd management and marketing purposes .

still , though animals often may be identified individually as part of an animal disease program , no nationwide comprehensive u.s. animal id system is in place .

some observers have suggested that such a system , for example , would have enabled usda to find more of the cows imported from canada with the december 2003 bse cow .

aphis officials acknowledged that they had concluded their investigation of the u.s. outbreak after positively identifying only 28 of the 80 cattle that were imported with the bse cow .

"the limitations of the cattle identification system necessitated a more extensive tracing exercise than would otherwise have been necessary in order to identify the cattle to be culled in accordance with international standards , thus enabling the identification of some animals only by process of elimination," the international panel of experts reported on february 4 , 2004 .

however , despite years of effort on an animal id program for disease purposes , many contentious issues remain unresolved .

for example , should it be mandatory or voluntary ? .

what types of information should be collected , on what animal species — and who should hold it , government or private entities ? .

how much will it cost , and who should pay ? .

usda has committed through fy2006 about $85 million to a program , with another $33 million sought for fy2007 ; all states now have systems for registering animal premises .

in april 2006 , usda had published a new implementation plan envisioning an "incremental" series of implementation steps leading to full producer participation by 2009 .

by november 2006 , usda had further revised its thinking on how to achieve implementation .

it unveiled a draft "user guide," which stated that it was "the most current plan for the nais and replaces all previously published program documents , including the 2005 draft strategic plan and draft program standards and the 2006 implementation strategies. .

the document seeks to reassure producers that usda will not require them to participate in the program , and that it is bound by law to protect individuals' private and confidential business information .

the draft user guide describes three successively greater steps toward full participation , if a producer chooses to do so , which include premises registration , animal identification , and selection of an animal tracking database to report animal movements ( actually a series of privately or state - administered databases rather than a central usda system ) .

some industry groups and lawmakers have criticized usda for moving too slowly and / or not providing a clearer path toward a universal id program .

others believe that usda's progress to date simply reflects the deep divisions among producers and other interests over the many unresolved questions .

meanwhile , a vocal number of livestock producers , many of them smaller - scale , are opposing any effort to establish broader programs , fearing they will be costly and intrusive .

the 108 th and 109 th congresses were asked to address animal id issues .

the house agriculture committee held hearings in 2005 on the feasibility of establishing a privately held system .

a provision in the house - passed usda appropriation for fy2007 ( h.r .

5384 ) would have conditioned the use of the next $33 million in spending for animal id on publication in the federal register of a "complete and detailed plan" for the program , "including , but not limited to , proposed legislative changes , cost estimates , and means of program evaluation. .

however , a house floor amendment to prohibit all id program funding was defeated by a wide margin .

the senate committee - reported version of h.r .

5384 requested a gao review of usda's efforts .

other bills in the 109 th congress included h.r .

1254 , the national farm animal identification and records act , h.r .

1256 , to limit animal id information disclosure , and h.r .

3170 , creating a private livestock identification board to oversee the program .

a provision of s. 2002 would have required usda to establish a ruminant id program .

continuing differences over animal id have propelled the issue into the 110 th congress .

many observers expect that these differences could be resolved in a part of the next omnibus farm bill , which the house and senate agriculture committees hope to complete in 2007 .

as of mid - may , two animal id bills had been introduced: h.r .

1018 , to prohibit usda from implementing a mandatory program ; and h.r .

2301 , to establish a producer - governed program .

u.s. law requires most imports , including many food items , to bear labels informing the "ultimate purchaser" of their country of origin .

various raw agricultural products have been exempt .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) required many retailers to provide , starting september 30 , 2004 , country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) on fresh fruits and vegetables , and unprocessed red meats , fish , and peanuts .

past congresses delayed the implementation deadline several times .

the conference report on the omnibus fy2004 appropriation , which included usda funding ( h.rept .

108-401 ; p.l .

108-199 ) delayed the effective date for mandatory cool for two years , until september 30 , 2006 ( except for fish ; that portion is now in effect ) .

the fy2006 appropriation for usda ( h.r .

2744 ; p.l .

109-97 ) postpones cool for an additional two years , until september 30 , 2008 .

meanwhile , debate over the pros and cons of cool continues into the 110 th congress , where some members still oppose the delay , and have expressed their intention to require implementation sooner .

others are working to make cool a voluntary , not mandatory , program for industry .

among the reasons that cool is needed , according to supporters , is that consumers have a right to know where their food is from , particularly in light of recent animal health and food safety concerns such as the two bse cases in canadian - born cows .

cool critics have countered that it is a thinly - disguised trade barrier intended to increase the costs of imports , and that it undermines u.s. efforts to reform world agricultural trade ; moreover , they argue that , as designed , the mandatory program for industry will be extremely expensive to maintain , and might hold them legally accountable for inadvertent or minor mistakes in records .

prior to enactment of mandatory cool in 2002 , industry leaders were seeking from usda a voluntary program for labeling beef of u.s. origin .

although such labeling already is permitted so long as existing fsis conditions are satisfied , presumably a newer , more specific origin program would have been more attractive to the industry .

separately , after the may 2003 canadian bse discovery , japanese officials said they would require proof , effective september 30 , 2003 , that beef shipped from the united states was of u.s. origin .

japan's aim was to ensure that no products came from canada .

hoping to satisfy japanese ( and korean ) demands , the department unveiled in august 2003 a "beef export verification" ( bev ) program as a voluntary , user - fee funded service .

exporters desiring to sell beef to japan ( or any other country that may request similar documentation ) were to apply for bev certification from usda after satisfying a list of requirements so that the agency could verify that their beef is from cattle slaughtered in the united states .

as noted , bev is considered voluntary , even though it has been widely viewed as a minimum prerequisite for gaining access to the japanese and other foreign markets .

bills offered earlier in the 109 th congress ( h.r .

384 / s. 108 ) the canada rule ( see " trade restrictions " ) unless mandatory cool were implemented .

other bills would have made cool voluntary for meats ( h.r .

2068 ; s. 1333 ) , and for meats and other commodities ( s. 1300 ) .

the house - passed usda appropriation for fy2006 ( h.r .

2744 ) would have prohibited use of funds to implement cool for meats .

on the other hand , s. 1331 would have accelerated implementation for mandatory cool to january 30 , 2006 .

although this bill did not pass , new proposals have been offered in the 110 th congress to accelerate implementation to september 30 , 2007: h.r .

357 , by representative rehberg , and s. 404 , by senator thomas .

another bill , s. 1308 , would prohibit usda from allowing the importation of additional types of canadian cattle until the implementation of country of origin labeling requirements .

the national organic program ( nop ) prohibits the feeding of "mammalian or poultry slaughter by - products to mammals or poultry," if they are to be labeled "organic. .

numerous news reports have implied a safety benefit from beef grown using organic or other alternative practices , now that there have been domestic bse cases .

the nop was developed to assure that labeling claims reflect defined and verifiable production and handling practices .

usda endorses no claims that organically produced food is safer or more nutritious than conventionally produced food .

chronic wasting disease ( cwd ) , a tse , is a fatal neurological disease of farmed and wild deer and elk in north america .

cwd is generally similar to bse , and is thought to be caused by a similar type of infectious prion protein .

cwd differs from bse in a number of significant ways , however , including the types of tissues involved and the fact that it is contagious among animals in a herd .

a study under experimental conditions suggested that cwd may be transmissible through contaminated environments long after infectious animals were no longer present .

since 1997 , cwd has been detected in captive cervid herds in nine states: colorado , kansas , minnesota , montana , nebraska , new york , oklahoma , south dakota , and wisconsin .

as of early december 2006 , there were five known positive captive herds in the united states: four elk herds in colorado , and one deer herd in wisconsin .

federal and state policy is to depopulate ( destroy ) these herds ( see below ) .

cwd has been detected in wild cervids in 11 states: colorado , illinois , kansas , nebraska , new mexico , new york , south dakota , utah , west virginia , wisconsin , and wyoming .

it has also been found in canada and the republic of korea .

the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) says , regarding the potential for cwd transmission to humans: it is generally prudent to avoid consuming food derived from any animal with evidence of a tse ( a "transmissible spongiform encephalopathy," or prion disease such as bse and cwd ) .

to date , there is no evidence that cwd has been transmitted or can be transmitted to humans under natural conditions .

however , there is not yet strong evidence that such transmissions could not occur .

to further assess the possibility that the cwd agent might occasionally cause disease in humans , additional epidemiologic and laboratory studies could be helpful .

such studies include molecular characterization and strain typing of the agents causing cwd in deer and elk and cjd ( the human form of prion disease ) in potentially exposed patients .

ongoing national surveillance for cjd and other neurological cases will remain important for continuing to assess the risk , if any , of cwd transmission to humans .

with regard to the potential for cwd transmission to cattle , possibly causing bse or a related disease that could pose a food safety hazard , usda says: during the approximately two decades of monitoring , researchers have not found any evidence that cwd can be transmitted to domestic cattle under natural conditions .

ongoing experiments involving oral exposure and contact exposure on heavily cwd contaminated sites have not resulted in infection of cattle .

these experiments , however , require additional time before they are completed .

cwd has been experimentally transmitted by artificial means to mice , ferrets , mink , goats , squirrel monkeys , and calves .

fda prohibits the feeding of rendered deer and elk to ruminants .

in addition , fda prohibits the use of known - cwd positive animals in any animal feeds , and recommends against the use of rendered deer and elk material considered high - risk in any animal feeds .

activities related to cwd control are also conducted by usda's agricultural research service ( ars ) and cooperative state research , education and extension service ( csrees ) and several agencies in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

in recognition that cwd was being found in more areas , and that resource limitations and program inconsistencies exist among the states , a national cwd task force was formed in 2002 "to ensure that federal and state agencies cooperate in the development and implementation of an effective national cwd program. .

this task force , initiated between usda , doi , and state wildlife and agriculture agencies , produced the strategic plan ( see footnote ) , which , among other things , states that the primary federal role will be to provide coordination and assistance with research , surveillance , disease management , diagnostic testing , technology , communications , information , education , and funding for state cwd programs .

the task force has working groups with action plans organized around most of these topics , though there have been concerns about delays in its implementation .

aphis , whose regulations govern cooperative programs to control animal diseases , had published a final rule in the july 21 , 2006 , federal register to establish a captive herd certification program for cwd , and rules on interstate movement of cervids .

the rule was to take effect on october 19 , 2006 , but aphis subsequently announced an indefinite delay in the effective date and an extension of the comment period through january 3 , 2007 .

the agency had received petitions raising concerns about the rule , such as whether federal interstate movement regulations should preempt state requirements for importation , and the scientific basis underlying federal interstate movement requirements .

a revised rule had not been published as of mid - may 2007 .

feline spongiform encephalopathy ( fse ) was first identified in domestic cats in britain in 1990 , and is believed to result from eating bse - affected beef .

 ( when brain tissue from cats with fse was inoculated into mice , the pattern of incubation periods and lesions in the mice was indistinguishable from that produced by bse. ) .

there have been more than 100 cases of fse in europe , mostly in the uk .

no cases have been reported in the united states .

the fda feed ban both prior to and since the announcement of enhanced safeguards in january , 2004 , permits beef by - products in u.s. commercial cat food , which is technically regulated as "feed. .

since the finding of bse in the united states , some have expressed concern about the welfare of cats , and others about the risks faced by people who consume cat food .

the cornell feline health center comments that "the risk of bse - contaminated pet food is very small indeed," for the following reasons: none of the rendered by - products from u.s. bse - positive cows were released into manufacturing channels for pet food ; imports of rendered products prohibited from cattle feed but intended for pet food must originate from countries free of bse ; and , imported pet foods may not contain mammalian - derived material .

