allegations of abuse of iraqi prisoners by u.s. soldiers at the abu ghraib prison in iraq raisequestions about the applicability of the law of war to interrogations for military intelligencepurposes .

particular issues involve the level of protection to which the detainees are entitled underthe geneva conventions of 1949 .

after photos of prisoner abuse became public , the defensedepartment ( dod ) released a series of documents disclosing policy deliberations about appropriatetechniques for interrogating persons the administration had deemed to be unprotected by the genevaconventions with respect to the global war on terrorism ( gwot ) .

 ( 1 ) investigations related to theallegations at abu ghraib revealed that some of the techniques discussed for "unlawful combatants"had come into use in iraq , although none of the prisoners there was deemed to be an unlawfulcombatant .

this report outlines the provisions of the conventions as they apply to prisoners of war andto civilians , and the minimum level of protection offered by common article 3 of the genevaconventions .

the report analyzes key terms that govern the treatment of prisoners with respect tointerrogation , which include torture , coercion , and cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment .

finally,the report discusses and analyzes the various interrogation techniques approved or considered foruse during interrogations of prisoners at abu ghraib .

gathering of military intelligence has always been a top priority for belligerents , and capturedenemy soldiers could be expected to have at least some knowledge pertinent to militaryoperations .

 ( 2 ) as aconsequence , prisoners of war ( pows ) can expect to be questioned by their captors , who can beexpected to employ whatever means are available to them for extracting such information .

possiblydue in part to the inherent interest of belligerents both in procuring intelligence information and inprotecting their own information and soldiers , ground rules developed for fair play in exploiting theintelligence value of captives .

the emergence of "total war" in the twentieth century increased themilitary utility of economic data , industrial secrets , and other information about the enemy that incenturies past might have been of little interest to warriors , increasing the intelligence valuedetainees might have , but not necessarily improving their treatment .

 ( 3 ) .

despite the absolute - sounding provisions described above , whether certain techniquesemployed by interrogators are per se violations of the geneva convention remains subject to debate .

presumably , all aspects of prisoner treatment fall into place along a continuum that ranges frompampering to abject torture .

the line between what is permissible and what is not remainselusive .

 ( 23 ) tocomplicate matters , interrogators may employ more than one technique simultaneously , and thecourts and tribunals that have evaluated claims of prisoner abuse have generally ruled on the totalityof treatment without specifying whether certain conduct alone would also be impermissible .

notsurprisingly , governments may view conduct differently depending on whether their soldiers are theprisoners or the interrogators , and may be unwilling to characterize any conduct on the part of theadversary as lawful .

human rights advocates may tend to interpret the treaty language in a strictlytextual fashion , while governments who may have a need to seek information from prisoners appearto rely on more flexible interpretations that take into account military operational requirements .

nonetheless , it may be possible to identify some threshold definitions .

in the aftermath of the disclosure of photographs and reports of abuses at the abu ghraibprison in bagdad , the defense department released a series of documents related to policy withrespect to the interrogation of prisoners there and at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay,cuba , where detainees captured in afghanistan or elsewhere are being held as ( unlawful ) "enemycombatants. .

the released documents reveal deliberations about appropriate techniques forinterrogating persons the administration had deemed to be unprotected by the geneva conventions .

the following sections analyze the interrogation methods that were suggested or approved for useat the abu ghraib prison .

the descriptions of the various methods in the dod documents aresomewhat sketchy , however , and the sensitive nature of intelligence methods and the lack of detailedinformation about how the methods have been put into practice make comparison between thesemethods and past practices difficult .

the list of approved methods for interrogation of terror suspects consisted , for the most part,of methods described in fm 34-52 .

 ( 102 ) according to fm 34-52 , "the geneva and hague conventionsand the ucmj set definite limits on the measures which can be used to gain the willing cooperationof prisoners of war. .

it does not , however , elaborate on what the "definite limits" are , ( 103 ) or the extent to whichthey apply to persons who are not prisoners of war .

 ( 104 ) some of the techniques might be considered coercive for thepurposes of a criminal prosecution , and would likely be inadmissible were they used to elicitstatements from an accused soldier prior to a court - martial .

 ( 105 ) some techniqueswould very likely be unpleasant , possibly contravening gpw art .

17 if used against pows whorefuse to answer , but it appears to be the army's position that the approved techniques below do notbreach the law .

 ( 106 ) most of the techniques do not appear to violate any provisions of the geneva conventions on theirface , but military experts do not always agree among themselves as to their propriety and boundaries .

the "approach phase" begins when the interrogator first comes in contact with thesource ( 107 ) andcontinues until the prisoner begins answering questions pertinent to the objective of theinterrogation. .

 ( 108 ) the effort generally consists of the establishment of control over the source and the interrogation,establishment of rapport between the interrogator and the source , and the manipulation of thesource's emotions and weaknesses to gain his willing cooperation .

 ( 109 ) an interrogator mayemploy more than one technique simultaneously to elicit the desired information .

direct .

this approach involves thestraightforward questioning of the detainee without the interrogator adopting any of the tacticsdescribed below .

the interrogator simply asks the prisoner for the information , without concealingthe interrogator's purpose or using deception of any kind , and is most effective when the prisoner iscooperative .

as long as there is no exploitation of circumstances to cause fear or suffering , thegeneva conventions' prohibition on coercion would not seem to be implicated .

while it may beacceptable to exploit a detainee's initial shock upon capture to obtain information , ( 110 ) exploiting a detainee'ssuffering by interrogating a wounded prisoner would be more problematic , and could constitute abreach of the obligation to provide medical treatment .

 ( 111 ) as noted above , it is generally agreed that the genevaconventions allows any question to be posed to a prisoner of war , so long as the prisoner is notunlawfully compelled to give an answer .

 ( 112 ) incentive / incentive removal .

the incentiveapproach rewards the source for his cooperation .

according to fm 34-52 , the approach is based on"the application of inferred discomfort upon [a detainee] who lacks willpower. .

 ( 113 ) it states thatinterrogators are not to withhold anything the prisoner is entitled to receive by right under thegeneva conventions , but may withhold privileges .

 ( 114 ) under this view , it would be improper to use as an incentivesomething that is required for the health or survival of the detainee , such as adequate nutrition andnecessary medical care .

however , comfort items might serve as lawful incentives .

 ( 115 ) for example , it wouldbe improper to withhold water or food until a prisoner begins to cooperate , but it would not beimproper to reward a cooperative prisoner with food he may regard as a "treat. .

what qualifies as a "comfort item" or a "privilege" may be subject to debate , but the languageof the geneva conventions suggests that in addition to items necessary for basic subsistence , itemsnecessary for human dignity , such as clothing , would make inappropriate incentives .

 ( 116 ) however , it might notbe considered inhumane or degrading to compel prisoners to wear prison uniforms or clothing notto their particular liking , so long as the clothing is adequate for conditions ( gpw art .

27 ) and theresult is not degrading or dehumanizing .

 ( 117 ) such a practice might nonetheless breach other provisions,for example , gpw art .

18 ( pows are entitled to retain their personal articles other than weapons andmilitary equipment not for personal protection or identification ) ; gpw art .

40 ( pows are allowedto wear their badges of rank and nationality , as well as decorations ) ; gpw art .

34 and gc 38 ( rightto practice religion ) ; gc art .

27 ( protected persons are entitled to respect for their religiousconvictions and practices , and their manners and customs ) .

fm 34-52 suggests that "realistic incentives" be used to establish rapport , such as "a meal,shower , [opportunity to] send a letter home" for the short term , or for the long term , repatriation orpolitical asylum .

 ( 118 ) whether the use of "privileges" or "entitlements" is appropriate under the geneva conventions maydepend on the circumstances .

prisoners of war and interned civilians are entitled to adequatenutrition and hygiene and , except for civilian internees who are definitely suspected of posing asecurity threat , to communicate with family members .

making these privileges available ( or varyingtheir quantity and quality ) based on the cooperation of each detainee during interrogations could runafoul of the gpw prohibition on disadvantageous treatment of any kind , ( 119 ) as well as otherprovisions outlining rights .

 ( 120 ) for example , one u.s. court found that depriving pows ofany opportunity at all to communicate with the outside world amounted to "torture. .

 ( 121 ) however , allowinga cooperative detainee the opportunity to send three letters home per month , where other prisonersare only allowed to send the two required by gpw art .

71 and gc art .

107 , may be permissible .

states whose prisoners of war have been subjected to the use of incentives to elicitinformation have criticized the technique as inhumane under the particular circumstances .

indescribing the conditions to which the u.s. prisoners of war ( 122 ) held by north koreawere subjected , the defense department told congress: water was often scarce ; bathing became difficult.barracks were foul and unsanitary .

in the best of the camps the men behind the barbed wire weresometimes given tobacco , a few morsels of candy , occasional mail .

as will be noted , such itemswere usually offered as rewards for "cooperative conduct. .

 ( 123 ) a british report describing the lot of their pows held by the chinese noted that supplies of food,medicine , and standards of accommodation the pows received depended "to a large extent on thedegree of cooperation with their captors," and deplored the use of physical violence and solitaryconfinement as "incentives" for cooperation .

 ( 124 ) the report also described how the chinese manipulated mailas an inducement for cooperation , commenting that the refusal to allow pows the chance to writehome to let their families know they were alive was a breach of the geneva convention .

 ( 125 ) emotional love / hate .

using the emotionalapproach , an interrogator seeks to exploit the source's emotions in order to override his rationale forresisting .

according to fm 34-52 , love or fear for one person may be exploited or turned into hatefor someone else .

 ( 126 ) for the emotional love approach , the interrogator focuses on the source's anxiety brought on by hispredicament .

the interrogator then makes use of the love the source feels toward his family,homeland , comrades , etc. , to devise an effective incentive , such as communication or promisedreunification with the source's family , a quicker end to the war to save his comrades' lives , and soforth .

fm 34-52 states that a "good interrogator will usually orchestrate some futility with anemotional love approach to hasten the source's reaching the breaking point .

this places a burden onthe source and may motivate him to seek relief through cooperation with the interrogator. .

the emotional hate approach focuses on any genuine feelings of hatred , or possibly a desirefor revenge , the source may feel toward his country's regime , his immediate superiors , officers ingeneral , his fellow soldiers or the like .

the interrogator might hint at an opportunity for revenge ifthe source cooperates and divulges certain information .

the manipulation of emotions as described does not seem to violate any prohibitions of thegeneva conventions on its face .

the success of the technique relies on the arts of perception andpersuasion , which most commentators agree are not out of bounds .

however , if the emotional lovemethod , for example , were to involve threats against the lives of family members , for example , itsuse could contravene the conventions' prohibitions of threats .

fear up harsh / mild .

according to fm 34-52,the aim of the "increased fear up harsh" technique is to convince the source who appears to behiding something that he does indeed have something to fear ( not necessarily from the interrogator ) and that he has no option but to cooperate .

the interrogator will behave in a heavy , overpoweringmanner , using a loud and threatening voice , and perhaps throwing objects around the room toheighten the source's implanted feelings of fear .

 ( 127 ) of the questioning methods approved by the manual , thisapproach is said to have greatest potential to violate the law of war , ( 128 ) presumably becauseit could lead to threats or violence against the subject .

the 'mild' version of the 'fear up' approach seeks to exploit circumstances that point to theinterrogatee's involvement in some activity that could bring harsh punishment .

the interrogator doesnot raise his voice or behave in an overbearing manner ; instead , he uses a "credible distortion of thetruth" as a subtle means to blackmail the subject into cooperating .

the interrogator persuades thesubject that he has good cause for fear under the circumstances , but the interrogator might intimatethat he might be willing to conceal or alter the reported circumstances of the source's capture , as longas the source cooperates .

reduced fear .

the "decreased fear down"approach is to be used primarily on a source who is already in a state of fear .

the technique involvescalming the source and convincing him that he will be properly and humanely treated , or that he issafer in captivity than in combat , for example .

 ( 129 ) using a soothing tone of voice , the interrogator attempts tocreate rapport with the source by engaging in small talk until the source is ready to answer morepressing questions .

it is difficult to conceive of an implementation of this approach that would causea violation of the conventions .

pride & ego up / down .

the "pride and ego"approach concentrates on tricking the source into revealing pertinent information through the use offlattery or abuse .

the pride and ego up variation is used on sources who feel inferior , especially lowranking enlisted personnel or junior grade officers , who might respond to the opportunity todemonstrate their intellect or importance .

the interrogator speaks as if he is very impressed with theaccomplishments of the subject , engendering positive feelings on the source's part that he is finallygetting the recognition he deserves .

the source may reveal pertinent information in order to solicitmore laudatory comments from the interrogator .

the "pride and ego down approach," in contrast , exploits a source's sense of inferiority by attacking the source's sense of personal worth , criticizing his loyalty , intelligence , abilities , technicalcompetence , leadership qualities , slovenly appearance , or any other perceived weakness .

theinterrogator uses a sarcastic , caustic tone of voice to express distaste or disgust .

if the tactic works,the source will become defensive and try to prove the interrogator wrong .

in his attempt to vindicatehis pride , according to fm 34-52 , the source will usually involuntarily provide pertinentinformation .

 ( 130 ) theapproach could contravene the geneva conventions' prohibition of insults and degrading treatment .

futility .

the "futility" approach is used to exploitthe doubts and misgivings already in the source's mind to make him believe that it is useless to resistthe interrogation efforts .

fm 34-52 describes multiple techniques for accomplishing the desiredeffect .

 ( 131 ) by makingthe situation appear hopeless , the interrogator allows the source to rationalize his cooperation .

thisapproach , as described , appears to be permissible as "guile," but extreme treatment designed toinduce a feeling of overall futility could cause mental suffering severe enough to raise questionsunder the geneva conventions .

we know all .

the "we know all" approachinvolves making a source believe that the interrogator already knows everything about thesource .

 ( 132 ) theinterrogator compiles all available data on the source and his unit .

the interrogator then asksquestions to which he already has the answer .

when the source refuses to answer or provides anincomplete or false response , the interrogator himself supplies the correct answer .

the interrogatortries to convince the source that all information is already known , so he may as well cooperate .

when the source begins to give accurate and complete information , the interrogator beginsinterjecting questions for which he does not have the answers .

this appears to be an unobjectionabletactic involving more wile than coercion , and seems to be widely accepted as legitimate .

establish your identity .

in the "establish youridentity approach," the interrogator insists that the source has been identified as an infamous criminalwho is merely posing as someone else to avoid punishment .

 ( 133 ) the source may betricked into giving detailed information on his unit to establish or substantiate his true identity inorder to refute the interrogator's allegations .

the technique appears to involve trickery that mightbe acceptable under the geneva conventions , but could conceivably be applied in a threatening orcoercive manner .

repetition .

the interrogator may repeat the samequestion many times in order to get a hostile source to cooperate .

 ( 134 ) the source becomesbored with the procedure and may give more complete and candid answers simply in order to gainrelief from the monotony .

 ( 135 ) taken to extremes , for example , during prolongedinterrogations , it might be said to induce mental suffering file & dossier .

the "file and dossier" approachis a variation of the "we know all approach," but uses a prop .

prior to the session , the interrogatorprepares a dossier containing all available information obtained from records and documentsconcerning the source or his organization , possibly padding it with extra paper to create the illusionthat it contains much more information than is really there .

the interrogator confronts the sourcewith the dossier , exploiting the known facts about the source to convince him that resistance wouldbe futile .

rapid fire .

fm 34-52 describes the "rapid fire"approach as a "psychological ploy based upon the principles that everyone likes to be heard whenhe speaks , and it is confusing to be interrupted in midsentence with an unrelated question. .

 ( 136 ) one or twointerrogators ask a series of questions without allowing the source time to answer them completelybefore the next question is asked .

the source may become confused and contradict himself , whichthe interrogator can exploit by confronting the source with the inconsistencies .

the source mayreveal more than he intends in attempting to clarify his answers .

silence .

the silence approach involves aninterrogator who says nothing to the source , but "looks him squarely in the eye , preferably with aslight smile on his face," in an effort to make the subject nervous and force him to break eye contactfirst ( 137 ) .

the sourcemay begin to talk or ask questions to break the tension .

when the interrogator eventually begins toask questions , the subject may feel relieved and more willing to divulge information .

the methods listed below were authorized to be used under certain conditions but requiredthe approval of the commanding general .

these methods are not described in fm 34-52 , althoughsome resemble techniques described as coercive by the cia manual .

 ( 138 ) some appear toinvolve the "environmental control" techniques of the sort that led to the revision of fm 34-52 in1992 , ( 139 ) to cause"debility," ( 140 ) or fear .

some have argued that these techniques amount to torture , but pentagon officials reportedly said thatsuch methods can be applied within the framework of the geneva convention , as long as theprisoner's basic physical needs are met .

 ( 141 ) change of scenery down .

for this technique,the interrogator removes the detainee from the standard interrogation setting to one that may be lesscomfortable , but would not constitute a "substantial change in environmental quality. .

 ( 142 ) the purpose of achange of scenery is to throw the detainee off balance psychologically .

as long as it is not seen aspunishment for failure to cooperate , and the environment does not fall below the standards for healthand hygiene , a change of scenery would not seem to violate the geneva conventions .

dietary manipulation .

this technique involveschanging the diet of a detainee , not in such a way as to deprive him of food or water , affect hishealth , or interfere with his religious practices .

this could involve a substitution of cold rations forhot , according to the dod working group report .

the object is probably to disorient the detaineeby upsetting his regular routine .

 ( 143 ) environmental manipulation .

this methodinvolves alteration of the environment to create moderate discomfort , by means of adjusting theroom temperature or introducing an unpleasant smell , without bringing about conditions that wouldinjure the detainee .

 ( 144 ) subjecting prisoners of war to inhospitable climate conditions has long formed the basis forcomplaints about inhumane treatment in violation of the law of war .

 ( 145 ) purposeful exposureof prisoners of war to temperature extremes for interrogation purposes has been found to beill - treatment under the 1929 geneva conventions .

 ( 146 ) sleep adjustment .

the detainee's ordinary sleepschedule is disturbed by , for example , reversing the sleep cycles from night to day , but withoutdepriving the detainee of sleep .

the method likely induces a feeling of disorientation similar to "jetlag. .

"sleep management" for a maximum of 72 hours was approved for use at abu ghraib with thecommander's approval .

the dod working group distinguished "sleep management" from "sleepdeprivation," which it defined as "[k]eeping the detainee awake for an extended period of time ( allowing individual to rest briefly and then awakening him , repeatedly ) not to exceed four daysin succession. .

 ( 147 ) the dod working group noted , "as a matter of policy," that other nations consider sleepdeprivation to amount to torture or cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment .

 ( 148 ) sleep deprivation is an age - old method for weakening the subject physically .

however , thecia manual recommended sleep disruption as a more effective method of coercion: another objection to the deliberate inducing of debilityis that prolonged exertion , loss of sleep , etc. , themselves become patterns to which the subjectadjusts through apathy .

the interrogator should use his power over the resistant subject's physicalenvironment to disrupt patterns of response , not to create them .

meals and sleep granted irregularly,in more than abundance or less than adequacy , the shifts occurring on no discernible time pattern,will normally disorient an interrogatee and sap his will to resist more effectively than a sustaineddeprivation leading to debility .

 ( 149 ) isolation .

the detainee would be isolated fromother detainees ( for no longer than 30 days ( 150 ) ) , but otherwise complying with the basic standards oftreatment .

the dod working group recommended isolation as an "exceptional" ( 151 ) technique , and notedthat its use could implicate the definitions of torture or cruel , inhumane and degrading treatmentunder cat , ( 152 ) andthat , if applied to pows , it would violate articles 13 ( prohibiting intimidation ) , 14 ( requiring respectfor the person ) , 34 ( prohibiting coercion ) and 126 ( entitlement to access and basic standards oftreatment ) .

 ( 153 ) presence of military working dogs .

introducingthe presence of military dogs without directly threatening action or endangering the detainee wassuggested as a method for creating anxiety but not terror or mental trauma .

 ( 154 ) the dod workinggroup framed the technique as an example of "increasing anxiety by use of aversions," which itflagged as inconsistent with policies followed by u.s. allies and possibly violating the cat .

sensory deprivation .

the dod working groupdid not describe "sensory deprivation," but the cia manual offered a discussion of it as a byproductof solitary confinement and isolation: the chief effect of arrest and detention , and particularlyof solitary confinement , is to deprive the subject of many or most of the sights , sounds , tastes , smells,and tactile sensations to which he has grown accustomed .

 ( 155 ) artificially limiting the extent to which a person is able to sense his environment has beenfound to induce stress and when taken to the extreme , can cause hallucinations and delusions .

the apparent reason for these effects is that a personcut off from external stimuli turns his awareness inward , upon himself , and then projects the contentsof his own unconscious outwards , so that he endows his faceless environment with his ownattributes , fears , and forgotten memories .

[one expert] notes , "it is obvious that inner factors in themind tend to be projected outward , that some of the mind's activity which is usually reality - boundnow becomes free to turn to phantasy and ultimately to hallucination and delusion. .

 ( 156 ) the cia theorized that the more completely the place of confinementeliminates sensory stimuli , the more rapidly and deeply will the interrogatee be affected .

resultsproduced only after weeks or months of imprisonment in an ordinary cell can be duplicated in hoursor days in a cell which has no light ( or weak artificial light which never varies ) , which issound - proofed , in which odors are eliminated , etc .

an environment still more subject to control , suchas water - tank or iron lung , is even more effective .

 ( 157 ) stress positions .

the dod working group didnot define stress position , but suggested "prolonged standing" ( not to exceed four hours in a 24-hourperiod ) , which it described as lengthy standing in a "normal" position ( non - stress ) .

 .

.not enforcedby physical restraints .

 ( 158 ) prolonged standing is explicitly prohibited against civilianinternees as inhuman treatment .

 ( 159 ) the use of stress positions has been found to constitute tortureor cruel , inhumane and degrading treatment in the past .

the kubark manual included prolongedstanding in its discussion of "coercive interrogation" methods , recommending that a subject's"resistance is likelier to be sapped by pain which he seems to inflict upon himself" rather than bydirect torture , and suggests forcing the detainee to stand at attention for long periods of time .

 ( 160 ) it seems likely that theuse of stress positions would violate the geneva conventions for all categories of persons under theirprotection if were to induce the requisite amount of suffering or humiliation , but the extent ofsuffering necessary to cross that line is not firmly established .

removal of clothing .

depriving detainees ofclothing probably serves to divest them of their identity , but could endanger a detainees healthdepending on environmental conditions .

the dod working group stated its goal as creating afeeling of helplessness and dependence , but cautioned "it must be monitored to ensure theenvironmental conditions are such that this technique does not injure the detainee. .

 ( 161 ) forced nudity withoutthreats or sexual assault may not rise to the level of an "outrage upon human dignity," but wouldprobably be considered inhumane and degrading .

removal of all comfort items , including religiousitems .

this technique is a harsher version of the "removal of incentives" approachdescribed above .

whether it violates the geneva conventions depends on the nature of the itemsconsidered to fall under the "comfort" rubric .

the removal of religious items could entail a violationof gc art .

27 , providing that protected persons are entitled to respect for their religious convictionsand practices , or gpw art .

14 , respect for the person of the prisoner of war .

forced grooming .

the dod working groupdescribed forced grooming as shaving of hair or beard ( accomplished without risking injury to thedetainee ) .

it may be viewed as a violation of the respect for the person under gpw art .

14 , or as aviolation of a prisoner's religious rights under gc art .

27 .

by itself , it would not seem to constitutean outrage on human dignity , ( 162 ) but could be seen as inhumane or degrading .

use of scenarios designed to convince the detainee that deathor severely painful consequences are imminent .

this technique was listed as a"category iii technique" that could only be used to interrogate the most uncooperative detainees atguantanamo with the approval of the commanding general .

 ( 163 ) category iii techniquesalso included exposure to cold weather or water ( with medical monitoring ) and "the use of a wettowel and dripping water to induce a feeling of suffocation. .

 ( 164 ) there seems to be littledoubt that such methods would violate the geneva conventions , ( 165 ) as constitutingcoercion , threats , and possibly mental torture .

 ( 166 ) as such , these techniques are also likely to be consideredinhumane by geneva convention standards .

