on april 9 , 2018 , the senate approved h.r .

3445 , the african growth and opportunity act and millennium challenge act modernization act , which authorizes the mcc to conduct regional compacts .

the legislation was approved by the house on january 17 , 2018 .

on april 3 , 2018 , the mcc board approved a $35 million threshold program for togo that will focus on reform in information and communication technology and land tenure .

in approving the program , the board directed the mcc to closely monitor citizen rights to freedom of expression and association in light of recent political unrest related to opposition to the president's possible bid for a third term in office and other matters .

on march 23 , 2018 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , was signed into law , providing $905 million for the mcc , the same level as in fy2017 .

on february 12 , 2018 , the trump administration issued its fy2019 budget request , including $800 million for the mcc , a cut of $105 million ( - 11.6% ) from fy2017-enacted levels .

on december 19 , 2017 , the mcc board selected timor - leste to develop a compact and the gambia for a threshold program .

it also reselected burkina faso , lesotho , mongolia , senegal , sri lanka , and tunisia to continue developing their compacts .

the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , established in 2004 , arose out of a widespread frustration with then - existing foreign aid programs and represented a significant change in the way the united states delivered economic assistance .

the mcc is based on the premise that economic development succeeds best where it is linked to free market economic and democratic principles and policies , and where governments are committed to implementing reform measures in order to achieve such goals .

the mcc concept differs in several fundamental respects from past and current u.s. aid practices a competitive selection process that rewards countries for their commitment to free market economic and democratic policies as measured by objective performance indicators ; the pledge to segregate the funds from u.s. strategic foreign policy objectives that often strongly influence where u.s. aid is spent ; a mandate to seek poverty reduction through economic growth , not encumbered with multiple sector objectives or congressional directives ; the requirement to solicit program proposals developed solely by qualifying countries with broad - based civil society involvement ; the responsibility of recipient countries to implement their own mcc - funded programs , known as compacts ; a compact duration limited to five years , with funding committed up front ; the expectation that compact projects will have measurable impact ; and an emphasis on public transparency in every aspect of agency operations .

the original proposal , made by president george w. bush in a speech on march 14 , 2002 , also differed from previous aid efforts in the size of its commitment to reach an annual level of $5 billion within a few years , an aim never even approximately met .

congress approved the new initiative in january 2004 in the millennium challenge act of 2003 ( division d of p.l .

108-199 ) .

it established the mcc as an independent government entity separate from the departments of state and the treasury and from the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

the mcc headquarters staff level is currently about 286 , with a total of 26 additional u.s. direct hire employees in compact countries .

the agency is headed by a chief executive officer ( ceo ) , a post currently awaiting a trump administration nomination .

a board of directors oversees the mcc and makes the country selections .

it is chaired by the secretary of state and composed of the secretary of the treasury , the usaid administrator , the u.s. trade representative , the corporation's ceo , and four individuals from the private sector appointed by the president drawn from lists submitted by congressional leaders .

since its inception , congress has closely followed mcc implementation .

the 115 th congress may consider mcc funding , a possible reauthorization , and operational issues .

one of the distinctive features of the mcc is the manner in which it selects the countries that receive its assistance .

no other aid agency , u.s. or foreign , has adopted a similar methodology .

country selection moves chronologically through a number of steps: candidate countries are identified , eligibility criteria are formulated and applied , compact and threshold program - eligible countries are selected .

elements in this process are discussed below .

the mcc operates two types of assistance programs: a long - term , large - scale investment in a country - developed and country - implemented set of projects , known as a compact , and a short - term , more narrowly defined , donor - managed effort to help prepare possible candidates for compact eligibility , termed a threshold program .

these programs are discussed below .

concerns regarding the mcc have been expressed at various points in time on its level of funding , its operations , and its ability to ensure project sustainability ; aspects of procurement ; and the risk of corruption .

these and other issues are discussed below .

when the mcc was proposed , it was expected that , within a few years , the level of funding would ramp up to about $5 billion per year .

for a variety of reasons , not least of which is the limitation on available funding for foreign aid more broadly , the mcc never achieved anywhere near that level of funding .

in fact , in most years since the mcc was established , its enacted appropriation has been below the president's request .

on may 23 , 2017 , the trump administration issued its fy2018 budget request , including $800 million for the mcc , a cut of $105 million ( - 11.6% ) from fy2017-enacted levels .

on july 24 , 2017 , the house appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2018 state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations ( h.r .

3362 ) , providing $800 million for the mcc in fy2018 , matching the trump administration request and $105 million less than it received in fy2017 .

on september 14 , the house approved h.r .

3354 , an omnibus appropriations act , including the state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations ( division g ) , providing $800 million for the mcc in fy2018 .

on september 7 , 2017 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2018 state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations ( s. 1780 ) , providing $905 million for the mcc , equal to the fy2017 level and $105 more than the administration request .

on march 23 , 2018 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) was signed into law , providing $905 million for the mcc , the same level as in fy2017 .

on february 12 , 2018 , the trump administration issued its fy2019 budget request , including $800 million for the mcc , a cut of $105 million ( - 11.6% ) from fy2018-enacted levels .

in recent years , several proposals have been made to expand the mcc's range of possible partners and activities , all so that it may better meet its mandate of poverty reduction through economic growth .

these options are discussed below .

at its december 2014 meeting , the mcc board stated its support for possible efforts by the agency to consider developing regionally oriented partnerships , especially in south asia .

compacts addressing regional issues , mcc argues , could provide higher rates of return on mcc investments , benefitting from economies of scale and supporting trade between nations .

to enable the possibility of working on a regional basis , the mcc proposed legislation in its fy2016 , fy2017 , and fy2018 budget presentations that would allow it to undertake concurrent compacts — more than one in an individual country at the same time .

the agency argues that being able only to do one compact at a time , as the existing mcc authorization requires , is a major barrier to pursuing regionally oriented programs .

bills supporting the concept of regional - purpose compacts and containing the concurrent compact authorization language were introduced in the 114 th congress in both house and senate — approved by the former , but not taken up by the latter .

in the 115 th congress , h.r .

3445 , the african growth and opportunity act and millennium challenge act modernization act , was approved by the house on january 17 , 2018 , and by the senate on april 9 , 2018 .

the argument for concurrent compacts as a condition for regional programs is that , as compacts are bilaterally based and awarded to countries only rarely , the opportunity to initiate compacts at the same time in two contiguous countries is unlikely to arise .

the most probable scenario for a compact that would address regional barriers to economic growth would be one in which country #1 already has a compact and another , contiguous country ( country #2 ) is subsequently made compact eligible .

at that point , it might be possible to then add another compact to country #1 while simultaneously developing a compact with a regional element in country #2 .

to add another compact to an existing compact country , concurrent compacts must be permitted .

nepal , currently developing its first compact , is a possible candidate for a regional concurrent compact .

its close relationship with india — which passes the performance indicators , but has not been offered compact eligibility — opens the door to exploring power or transport sector themed compacts whose economic impact might be strengthened by having a regional element .

similarly , there are regional possibilities that might be explored with cote d'ivoire , ghana , benin , niger , senegal , and burkina faso in west africa and with malawi and zambia , which are all currently compact eligible and at different stages of compact implementation or development .

a few further challenges remain .

development of regional compacts would still depend on the right timing and coincidence of contiguous countries .

mcc's budget for multiple compact activities is limited .

the existence of a regional compact might raise the possibility that a misbehaving country's suspension or termination would also force suspension or termination of a compact benefitting the partner country with an unblemished policy performance record .

in making regional compacts operational , the mcc reports that it would still have to find potential investments to be cost beneficial , countries would still have to want such investments to be made ( and not just because mcc wanted to do them ) , and the investments would still have to address economic constraints to growth as do all other compacts .

currently , upper - middle - income countries are excluded from participation in mcc programs by the mcc authorization .

yet , it is argued by observers in the development community that the relative wealth of upper - middle countries is not broadly shared and that the line between lower - middle - income and upper - middle is arbitrary .

the recent moves of both mongolia and tunisia back and forth across the line between lower - and upper - middle income highlight this problem .

in the case of mongolia , the mcc chose to continue working with mongolia on its second compact despite its move to upper - middle status one year after selection for eligibility .

mongolia moved to upper - middle - income status due to the growth of its mining economy , a change that has hardly made a dent on its poverty .

that mongolia has , one year later , moved back to lower - middle status seems , in the view of some observers , to justify the mcc position .

some suggest that the income exclusion be redefined or removed and some other measure be used that will take into account the existence of significant poverty within relatively wealthier countries .

on the other hand , when establishment of the mcc was debated in 2003 , the development community argued that aid should be channeled to those countries in greatest need ; the prohibition on upper - middle income and the funding preference given to low - income countries in the authorization legislation reflect that view .

mcc currently works on a bilateral basis with individual country national governments .

some , including former mcc ceo dana j. hyde , have suggested that , in certain cases , poverty reduction could be better addressed at more local levels of government — the regional or sub - regional level .

such a move would require new authorization legislation .

the mcc would also have to work out how to establish such partnerships in a way that would be acceptable to national governments .

the mcc places considerable weight on demonstrating measurable results .

during project development , it predicts a set of outcomes — using cost - benefit analyses and calculated economic rates of return — that helps determine which projects will be funded .

during implementation , it gathers data to establish baselines and monitor performance .

and , at project completion , it supports independent evaluations of achievements .

it promises to release these findings to the public , regardless of the results , with the intention of improving the agency's performance in meeting its purpose of reducing poverty through economic growth .

project outputs .

foreign assistance programs have multiple levels of results , some more measurable than others .

on the most elementary level , assistance program inputs — financing , technical expertise , construction , etc. — produce outputs .

the mcc tracks these throughout program implementation and reports quarterly on progress made in achieving performance indicators .

cumulatively from 2004 to september 2017 , the agency claims that its programs have trained 330,814 farmers , built 772 educational facilities , completed 2,500 miles of roads , formalized 321,508 land rights , and constructed 2,683 miles of electricity lines , among other achievements .

project outcomes .

some of these outputs have led to medium - term outcomes , such as an increase by 20,000 in the number of new registered businesses in albania as a result of administrative reforms made in business licensing under its threshold program .

an independent analysis of the burkina faso threshold program found that construction of 132 primary schools led to increased enrollment for both boys and girls by about 20% and for girls over boys by 5% .

among the outcomes of its port of cotonou modernization project under the benin compact , according to mcc , are annual savings of $2.1 million in dredging and maintenance costs and a decrease in average customs clearance time .

project impact .

the most important measure of mcc activity is the long - term impact compacts can have on poverty reduction through increased incomes among poor people — the legislative mandate of the agency .

independent postcompact impact evaluations are meant to explore the relationship between an mcc investment and such an outcome , if any , so as to provide lessons for future compacts .

twenty - two independent impact evaluations of compact projects ( and another four of threshold programs ) have been completed as of december 2017 , and another 23 of closed compact projects are planned or ongoing .

in addition , 39 performance evaluations of closed compact projects ( and 7 of threshold programs ) have been completed and another 34 are planned or ongoing .

while impact evaluations focus on changes that are directly attributable to project interventions , performance evaluations review how the program was implemented and other questions related to program design , achievements , management , and operational decisionmaking .

the decision to choose one type or the other may depend on whether expected accountability and learning is worth the extra cost of impact evaluations .

the first impact evaluations were published in october 2012 .

examining farmer training programs conducted in five compact countries , the evaluations affirmed that the average of individual outputs anticipated for a country , such as the number of farmers trained and hectares under production with mcc support , met or exceeded their targets in all five cases ( although for two countries a number of indicators had no targets ) .

while the evaluations found increases in farm income in three countries — no measurements could be undertaken in a fourth country — in no case were they able to identify increases in household incomes .

this finding may be due to a household reallocating other income sources to farming or because household income is too difficult to measure .

in any case , mcc is looking for alternative methods for measuring household income for application to future compacts .

a 2013 impact evaluation of road construction in georgia found a significant increase in industrial investment in communities near the improved road , but no evidence of impact on household - level income , consumption , or utilization of health and education services .

the varied reasons for the lack of impact suggest the difficulties of impact evaluation in general — these include a possible poor choice of comparison road ; a too - short time frame for measuring change as the data were derived in some cases less than a year after construction ; and a focus on beneficiaries living adjacent to the project road , whereas beneficiaries may live far from the roads where they transport their goods .

the mcc has indicated that these early impact evaluations have taught it to better design projects as well as future impact evaluations .

the "mcc effect. .

above and beyond the standard measures of results , the mcc claims for itself an impact made by the mcc process itself .

under the so - called "mcc effect," countries are said to be establishing reforms in an effort to qualify under the 20 performance indicators .

yemen has been cited in this regard because , following its suspension from the threshold program in 2005 , it approved a number of reforms to address indicators where its performance had lapsed ( and subsequently was reinstated and then later suspended for different reasons ) .

niger passed the natural resources protection indicator in fy2013 as a consequence of establishing a large new protected area .

house - and senate - approved resolutions in 2007 ( h.res .

294 and s.res .

103 ) noted the role the mcc played in encouraging lesotho to adopt legislation improving the rights of married women .

it can also be argued that the establishment of local compact implementation mechanisms — the mcas — has served a capacity - building function and influenced some governments' procurement policies .

these extraordinary results are reported only anecdotally , but if documented and measured appropriately , might prove to be of significant development value .

capacity building .

as discussed in the " compact implementation " section earlier in this report , one possible development effect of the mcc program that goes unmeasured arises from its operational model which promotes "country ownership" and country implementation of compacts .

some countries , cape verde and honduras among them , have reportedly adopted the mcc transparent procurement methodology for general use .

honduras has made its local mca compact implementing institution permanent ( as invest - honduras ) and made it responsible for managing infrastructure , rural development , and food security donor funds .

gao observations .

on occasion , gao has reviewed and commented on the mcc record in predicting and achieving compact outcomes .

a 2007 gao report highlighted a concern that , in the case of vanuatu , projected impacts had been overstated .

the gao noted that the mcc estimated a rise from 2005 per capita income in vanuatu of about 15% ( $200 ) by 2015 when the data suggest it would rise by 4.6% .

although the mcc stated that the compact would benefit 65,000 poor , rural inhabitants , the data , according to the gao , did not establish the extent of benefit to the rural poor .

further , the mcc projections assumed continued maintenance of projects following completion , whereas the experience of previous donors is that such maintenance has been poor .

the mcc response was that , although there may be varying views on the degree of benefit , both agencies agree that the underlying data show that the compact would help vanuatu address poverty reduction .

a september 2012 gao report called into question the quality of data used to determine beneficiary numbers in seven transportation projects in seven countries , pointing to mistakes made in formulas used , a failure to apply a methodology to all compacts , and a failure to update numbers in public documents .

a june 2012 gao report questioned the quality of work done on a road construction project in georgia and noted an array of problems that have kept part of a port constructed by mcc in benin from full operability .

sustainability concerns were raised for both projects ( see below for discussion ) .

an important factor in assessing the success of development assistance programs , one strongly emphasized by the mcc , is the extent to which assistance efforts are sustainable after donor support ends .

this question is of particular significance in the case of the mcc as most of its assistance is in the form of infrastructure , which developing countries , historically , have had difficulty maintaining due to lack of funds for physical upkeep or lack of trained technical personnel for regular maintenance .

the mcc often conditions compact aid on country adoption of policy reforms that enhance sustainability .

in tanzania , for example , the government electric power services were required to reform their tariff schedules in order to fully recover their costs , and , in those countries with road projects , provisions have been included to ensure establishment or improvement of a road fund to pay for upkeep .

gao reports in the period 2007 to 2012 on completed compacts , however , questioned the effectiveness of mcc sustainability efforts in the cases it examined .

in cape verde , the road fund reportedly met only half of maintenance requirements , and water fees , established to fund infrastructure maintenance for the watershed and agricultural support project , were not being collected in one of the three watersheds .

in honduras , a required increase in the national road maintenance budget was believed to be insufficient to meet needs .

further , farm - to - market roads provided under the honduras compact were the responsibility of municipalities that , reportedly , lacked equipment , expertise , and funds for road maintenance .

gao noted that , while the mcc included conditions precedent in its compact with georgia requiring the government to maintain a level of funding for road maintenance , the government "shows limited ability to keep the road operational and well maintained. .

it has also questioned the ability of benin's port authority to operate key components .

the usaid office of inspector general ( oig ) , which also acts in that capacity for the mcc , has repeatedly pointed to sustainability concerns as among the top mcc management challenges in its annual letter to the agency .

in fy2017 , it made this case by suggesting that the mcc had not provided timely training for moldovan water user associations to ensure sufficient experience operating and maintaining compact - funded irrigation systems .

the mcc responded by noting that the oig's views , about sustainability and other identified challenges , were reiterations of "old findings ... based on dated fieldwork. .

with regard to moldova , the mcc listed a number of actions it had taken to build sustainability , including sustainability training provided to 11 water user associations the compact had established , postcompact technical support to the associations offered by usaid , and a commitment of $8 million by the government of moldova to continue operation of the local compact implementing agency for an additional two years .

the extent to which government efforts to combat corruption is a factor in mcc judgment of compact eligibility and in the implementation of compacts has long been an interest of congress .

most recently , the statement of conferees of the fy2016 state , foreign operations appropriations required the mcc to submit a report on progress made to strengthen the application of the "control of corruption" indicator , and , in july 2017 , the house appropriations committee called on the mcc to keep it informed of efforts to seek better data on governance and other measures of corruption .

with developing countries themselves implementing mcc - funded programs , corruption is a major concern of the mcc , in the selection process , in threshold programs , and in compact implementation .

aiming to safeguard u.s. aid dollars , mcc programs are designed to prevent corrupt contracting .

among other things , mcc requires a transparent and competitive process and mandates separation of technical and financial elements of a bid .

the mcc reviews each decision made by the procurement entity and must register approval for many of them , and it provides funds directly to contractors rather than through the government implementing entity .

mcc argues that , in following this process , recipient governments learn how to do procurement in a corruption - free way .

the degree to which a country controls corruption is one of the performance indicators that help determine whether a country should be eligible for compact funding .

in fact , it is a "pass - fail" indicator .

passing the indicator , however , does not mean there is little or no corruption — an unrealistic expectation for most developing countries .

it only demonstrates that a country's performance is above the median relative to other countries at the same economic level .

as suggested in the discussion of country selection , the mcc board does not depend on indicator scores alone to determine the selection process .

these scores change from year to year , depending on fresh data and the relative scores of competing countries .

taking this into account , the mcc board uses discretion by looking at a number of factors , including the many underlying data sources that make up indicators , as well as recent steps taken by the government in question to address corruption ( or , in some cases , recent increased allegations of corruption ) .

accordingly , a country can be selected that technically falls near or below the median if mitigating factors occur .

alternatively , countries that pass the corruption indicator may be the subject of intense debate over incidences of alleged corruption .

because of data lags , countries passing the indicator may fail a year or two later , once a compact is in place .

this can be true of all the indicators , particularly when a country "graduates" into a higher income category , thereby changing the medians .

the mcc attempts to address this concern by looking for a pattern of behavior on the part of the government in order to judge the severity of any proposed corrective action .

in the fy2014 compact eligibility selection process , two countries that had been selected in fy2013 — benin and sierra leone — were dropped from compact consideration due to their failing grades on the "control of corruption" indicator .

in its december 2014 meeting , the mcc board issued a warning to tanzania that , although reselected for a second compact , such a compact would not be approved unless its declining corruption score was reversed with "firm concrete steps. .

at the september 2015 meeting , the board noted that , unless tanzania passed the corruption indicator , its compact would not be voted on .

tanzania passed the fy2016 scorecard ; its reselection , however , has been suspended due to unresolved governance concerns , apart from those of corruption .

in the fy2017 selection , a failing grade in corruption caused the board to move kosovo from its compact - eligible status to threshold eligible .

because mongolia had demonstrated more consistent improvement over a number of years , its failure to pass the corruption indicator in fy2017 did not eliminate it from compact eligibility , but the board still required an improvement in the score prior to actual compact approval .

mongolia passed the indicator in fy2018 .

appendix a .

past and active mcc compacts at a glance appendix b .

active compact descriptions descriptions and key developments in the 11 active board - approved or signed compacts undertaken by the mcc are provided below in alphabetical order .

not all have entered into force at this time .

compact funding totals include administrative and monitoring costs .

benin ii the five - year , $375 million compact will focus entirely on electric power infrastructure and related policy reforms .

assistance will go to the new regulatory authority ( $41 million ) ; to solar , thermal , and hydro generation facilities ( $136 million ) ; to distribution facilities ( $110 million ) ; and to off - grid access ( $46 million ) .

in addition , the government of benin is contributing $28 million to the compact effort .

cote d'ivoire the five - year , $525 million compact targets constraints to growth in education and transport .

a skills for employability and productivity project will seek to improve secondary education in two regions through school and teacher training facility construction and policy reform at the national level .

it will also develop a new model of private sector management of new technical and vocational education training .

the abidjan transport project will seek to improve mobility of goods and people by rehabilitating and maintaining four primary roads in the capital and improving infrastructure management skills and technical capacities for road planning and maintenance .

el salvador ii the $277 million , five - year second compact with el salvador consists of three projects .

one will address constraints in the investment climate by developing an independent institution seeking regulatory improvement and will build the capacity of government to partner with the private sector in public service delivery ( $42.4 million ) .

a second project will focus on development of human capital , reforming education policy to increase school hours and strengthen the curriculum , and would also address skills needed by the labor market ( $100.7 million ) .

the third project will meet identified infrastructure needs — expansion of an important roadway and border crossing improvements related to commerce ( $109.6 million ) .

el salvador will contribute $88 million to project implementation .

georgia ii the five - year , $140 million second compact would address education concerns in three ways .

one project seeks to improve the quality of education through infrastructure improvements and training of educators ( $76.5 million ) .

a second project will focus on meeting labor market needs through skills development ( $16 million ) .

a third project will modernize the teaching of science , technology , and math ( $30 million ) .

ghana ii the five - year , $498 million compact addresses electric power problems through investments in power generation and distribution and reforms in power sector policy .

of the total , $190 million is conditional on the government making agreed - upon reforms .

the introduction of private - sector participation is a significant requirement of the project .

the government of ghana is expected to contribute at least 7.5% of total mcc funding toward compact implementation .

liberia the five - year , $257 million compact targets two constraints to economic growth — a lack of access to reliable and affordable electricity and inadequate road infrastructure .

the energy project ( $201.6 million ) will provide a new hydropower turbine to an existing facility , provide training to liberia electric corporation employees , and help establish an independent regulator .

the roads projects ( $21.1 million ) will assist in the creation of five regional maintenance centers and a road fund administration to build sustainability and will provide technical assistance to build capacities in multiple aspects of road planning , maintenance , and policy development .

malawi the five - year , $350.7 million malawi compact , signed in april 2011 , focuses on just one sector — electric power .

the program aims to reduce power outages , reduce costs to business and homes , and improve the economic environment .

one element will upgrade and modernize generation and distribution capacity ( $283 million ) ; another will reform electric power supply institutions in the country ( $25.7 million ) .

in july 2011 , the compact , which had not yet entered into force , was put on operational hold in response to concerns raised by several antidemocratic actions taken by the government , including suppression of the media and prevention of peaceful protests .

in march 2012 , the compact was suspended in view of the continuing pattern of actions "inconsistent" with good governance .

on june 26 , 2012 , the mcc reinstated its compact with malawi .

a change in the country's leadership and subsequent steps to restore democratic society led the board to change its position .

morocco ii the five - year , $450 million second compact focuses on secondary education and workforce development and on land policy and implementation .

the education and training for employability project ( $220 million ) will pilot a new model for educating a modern workforce in 90-100 secondary schools and support private - sector training centers for technical and vocational education .

the land productivity project ( $170.5 million ) addresses industrial and rural land use issues and seeks to strengthen the enabling environment for investment .

the government of morocco will contribute $67.5 million , 15% of the u.s. contribution , to compact implementation .

nepal the five - year , $500 million compact focuses on electric power and transport .

an electric transmissions projects seeks to address the lack of adequate power by constructing 300 kilometers of high voltage transmission lines and three substations .

it will also seek to strengthen the electricity regulatory commission and increase skills and capacity of power management and technical personnel .

the road maintenance project will seek to prevent further deterioration of roads and improve administration of road maintenance through technical assistance to the department of roads and attempting to increase government spending on road maintenance by matching spending annually for three years .

niger the five - year , $437 million compact targets two economic constraints: the lack of water for productive uses and institutional and physical barriers to trade .

an irrigation and market access project ( $254.6 million ) will focus on increasing agricultural productivity in two regions in the country .

it seeks to rehabilitate and construct irrigation systems , establish a framework for land allocation , establish water user associations , build roads to improve market access , and promote policy reforms to facilitate these projects' success .

a climate - resilient communities project ( $96.5 million ) intends to improve livestock value and sales through health and vaccination improvements and modernizing local market infrastructure , among other efforts .

it will similarly target agriculture through improved utilization of fertilizer and seeds , protection of watersheds from erosion , increased access to irrigation , and other activities .

zambia the $354.8 million , five - year compact focuses entirely on the water and sanitation sector in the lusaka area .

most of the funds ( $284 million ) will be used to rehabilitate and improve infrastructure ; other funds will go for strengthening management and policy controlling the water sector .

appendix c. active threshold programs descriptions and key developments in the four active board - approved or signed threshold programs undertaken by the mcc are provided below in alphabetical order .

currently , one other country — the gambia — is eligible to develop a threshold program .

funding totals include administrative and monitoring costs .

guatemala the $28 million guatemala threshold program , signed on april 8 , 2015 , has two elements .

one $5.8 million effort seeks to increase government revenue by targeting corruption in tax and customs administration .

a $19.7 million education project focuses on the quality of secondary education , addressing teacher skills and the effectiveness of technical and vocational education and training .

honduras the three - year , $15.6 million honduras threshold program , signed on august 28 , 2013 , aims to improve government financial management ; help government provide services more efficiently and inexpensively by improving budget formulation and execution , procurement capacity , and management ; and increase civil society oversight , among other efforts .

kosovo the $49 million kosovo threshold program , signed on september 12 , 2017 , addresses two constraints to growth — an unreliable energy supply and weak rule of law .

the energy project will encourage use of nonelectric sources of heating and the development of finance mechanisms for independent power producers .

the rule of law project seeks to make the judicial system more transparent .

it will also support the innovative use of data to help civil society adopt a problem - solving role in partnership with government .

sierra leone the $44.4 million sierra leone threshold program , signed on november 17 , 2015 , targets improved government delivery of water and electricity services , focusing on the freetown area .

the project is assisting the new independent electricity and water regulatory commission ( ewrc ) and is attempting to increase transparency and accountability in delivery of public services .

togo the $35 million togo threshold program , approved by the mcc board on april 3 , 2018 , will focus on reform in information and communication technology ( ict ) and land tenure .

the ict project is aimed at expanding public access to high - quality and affordable services by increasing competition , establishing independent regulation , and supporting a universal service fund to help get internet and mobile services to remote parts of the country .

the land project will help formalize and legitimize land rights through implementation of a new land code and testing of methodologies at five sites for eventual rollout nationwide .

in approving the program , the board directed the mcc to closely monitor citizen rights to freedom of expression and association in light of recent political unrest related to opposition to the president's possible bid for a third term in office and other matters .

appendix d. mcc performance indicators fy201 .

