it is fairly common practice for the embassies and consulates of foreign states , including theunited states , to encourage their citizens abroad to register with the consulates so that they canreceive standard consular services , be notified if necessary , and be located upon inquiry by relativesand authorities .

consular registration has been widely recognized and protected under internationallaw for many years , most recently by the vienna convention on consular relations of 1963 .

the current debate about consular identification cards in the united states has centeredaround the matrã­cula consular , the consular card issued by the mexican government to its citizensin the united states when they register with a consulate .

as a result , this report focuses mainly onthe mexican identification card , although guatemala , ecuador , and brazil also issue such cards , andother nations , including el salvador , honduras , peru , and poland , are reportedly considering similarprograms .

legislation introduced in the 108th and 109th congresses , discussed below , wouldgenerally apply to consular identification cards from any country .

according to mexican officials , mexico has been issuing consular identification cards since1871 , but demand for the cards has grown dramatically in recent years .

the number of cards issuedhas increased significantly under the administration of mexican president vicente fox ( 2000-2006 ) ,who has emphasized service to citizens abroad , and since the terrorist attacks of september 2001,when identity documents became increasingly necessary in the united states .

following the terrorist attacks in the united states , mexico redesigned and added newfeatures to the matrã­cula consular to make it a more useful and secure document .

the new verisonof the card , which the mexican government calls the "high security consular registration" ( matrã­culaconsular de alta seguridad , mcas , in spanish ) , first became available in the united states in march2002 .

 ( 1 ) each of the newcards has the photograph , name , signature , date and place of birth , and u.s. address of the bearer,as well as a serial number , date of issue and expiration , and the name of the issuing consulate .

thecards have a number of security features that are designed to make the cards tamper - proof andnon - duplicable .

 ( 2 ) according to mexican officials , to obtain a matrã­cula consular card , an applicant must appearin person and must present the following documentation: ( 1 ) a birth certificate or other documentdemonstrating mexican citizenship ; ( 2 ) a document with a picture demonstrating identity , such asa voter identification or a driver's license ; and ( 3 ) proof of a local address in the united states , suchas a utility bill .

the cards are issued for a five - year period upon payment of a $26 fee .

in responseto past criticisms , ( 3 ) a july2004 document provided by the mexican embassy claims that mexico has developed a nationaldatabase of passport and consular data that can be used to prevent the issuance of duplicate andfraudulent cards .

it also has the ability to check the persons identity against the large mexican voterregistration database and against a "stop list" of approximately 13,000 records of non - acceptablepersons , including fugitives or people who have attempted to use fake documents in the past .

according to mexican officials , 2.2 million of the high security identification cards were issued frommarch 6 , 2002 , to july 18 , 2004 .

they estimate that almost 4 million mexicans in the united stateshave consular id cards of the older and newer versions .

they note that by march of 2007 all of theold cards will have expired and will have been replaced by the new high - security cards .

in recent years , mexican consulates in the united states and other interested parties havesought , with some success , to gain acceptance of the matrã­cula consular as identification for a varietyof purposes .

according to the july 2004 white paper provided by the mexican embassy , thematrã­cula consular is accepted as valid identification in 377 cities , 163 counties , and 33 states , aswell as 178 financial institutions and 1,180 police departments in the united states .

additionally,12 states recognize the card as one of the acceptable proofs of identity to obtain a driver's license .

it is also accepted by numerous telephone and utility companies , hospitals , and video stores , amongother establishments .

some entities , however , have decided against accepting the cards .

citing security concerns,the new york city police department has declined to recognize the matrã­cula consular .

the newyork state department of motor vehicles has also refused requests to add the matrã­cula consularto its list of acceptable identity documents for obtaining a driver's license .

in colorado , a recentlyenacted law states that public entities can accept only identification documents that are issued by astate or federal jurisdiction or that are recognized by the u.s. government .

at the federal level , the treasury department , along with other agencies , issued finalregulations on may 9 , 2003 , setting forth the identifying information that banks had to obtain , at aminimum , from a customer prior to opening an account .

 ( 4 ) section 326 of the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) directedthe treasury department to prescribe such regulations .

under the may 2003 regulations , therequired customer information includes an identification number .

for non - u.s. persons , thisidentification number can be one or more of four specified numbers , one being the "number andcountry of issuance of [a] government - issued document evidencing nationality or residence andbearing a photograph or similar safeguard. .

 ( 5 ) the rule became effective on june 9 , 2003 , and banks had to bein compliance by october 1 , 2003 .

in an october 2002 report to congress also mandated by section326 of the patriot act , which referenced the regulations in proposed form , the treasury departmentspecifically addressed the matrã­cula consular .

a footnote in the report stated: "thus , the proposedregulations do not discourage bank acceptance of the 'matricula consular' identity card that is beingissued by the mexican government to immigrants. .

 ( 6 ) following publication of the final rule in may 2003 , the treasury department re - opened thequestion of accepting certain forms of foreign government - issued identification to verify customeridentity .

on july 1 , 2003 , it published a notice of inquiry in the federal register requestingadditional input on this issue and recordkeeping provisions .

 ( 7 ) in the notice , it posed a seriesof questions about whether the regulations should preclude financial institutions from acceptingcertain forms of foreign government - issued identification .

the notice further indicated that after thecomments had been considered a determination would be made about whether to proposeamendments to the may 2003 regulations .

on september 18 , 2003 , the treasury departmentannounced that after reviewing over 34,000 comments , it had decided not to recommend any changesto the rules .

 ( 8 ) further developments relating to the acceptance or non - acceptance of consular identificationcards are expected .

a federal interagency working group chaired by the department of homelandsecurity , with representatives from various executive branch agencies , has been developingrecommendations for a federal policy on these cards , and the 9 / 11 commission recommended thatthe united states set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and sources of identification , suchas driver's licenses .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , approved indecember 2004 in response to the 9 / 11 commission recommendations , requires the secretary ofhomeland security to propose , subject to congressional approval , minimum standards foridentification documents to be used by airline passengers ( and , after a report , for entry to designatedfederal facilities ) and establishes strict default standards in the event of congressional disapproval .

on february 10 , 2005 , the house passed h.r .

418 , the real id act of 2005 ( sensenbrenner ) , that would establish identity card standards for the issuance of drivers' licenses thatwould seem to preclude the use of consular id cards for those purposes .

this measure was attachedby the house to the emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2005 ( h.r .

1268 ) as division b on march 16 , 2005 .

following conference , h.r .

1268 was passed with thespecified provisions by the house and senate in early may 2005 , and it was signed into law ( p.l.109-13 ) on may 11 , 2005 .

the acceptance of the matrã­cula consular for various purposes by the treasury departmentand by local governments and other public and private entities in the united states has raised anumber of questions for u.s. policy .

the possible domestic policy implications - - as well as foreignpolicy implications - - were initially discussed at two june 2003 oversight hearings on consularidentification cards held by the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration , bordersecurity , and claims .

 ( 9 ) subsequently , these implications have been discussed in the context of the treasury department july2003 reopening of the question of accepting certain forms of foreign government - issuedidentification to verify customer identity , and in the context of the consideration of the variouslegislative proposals mentioned below , especially the real id act of 2005 .

domestic policyquestions about acceptance of the matrã­cula consular fall mainly in the overlapping areas ofimmigration , public safety and law enforcement , and homeland security .

the foreign policy implications of the matrã­cula consular may be viewed under three mainheadings: the u.s. - mexico bilateral relationship , reciprocity of treatment of citizens abroad , andconsular notification in law enforcement situations .

legislation related to consular identification cards was considered by the 108th congress .

one set of measures related to acceptance of the cards for banking purposes .

the major measure inthat area was the transportation - treasury appropriations for fy2005 , incorporated into the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 ( h.r .

4818 / p.l .

108-447 ) approved innovember and december 2004 .

as enacted , the measure restored funding , without the previouslypassed prohibitions , for treasury department implementation of regulations permitting financialinstitutions to accept the matrã­cula consular cards as identity documents for banking purposes .

asecond set of measures attempted to set conditions on the issuance of consular cards by foreignmissions .

the foreign relations authorization act for fy2004-fy2005 ( h.r .

1950 ) ,with conditions on foreign missions' issuance of these cards , was passed by the house in july 2003,but the senate never took similar action .

a third set of measures related to acceptance of consularidentification cards by u.s. federal government entities , and the major legislation in that area wasthe intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( s. 2845 / p.l .

108-458 ) ,approved in december 2004 , that requires the secretary of homeland security to propose , subjectto congressional approval , minimum standards for identification documents to be used by airlinepassengers ( and , after a report , for entry to designated federal facilities ) .

a fourth set of measureswould have made possession by an alien of a consular identification card prima facie evidence thatthe alien is deportable .

legislation related to the acceptance of consular identification cards as identity documentsby government and banking institutions is being considered in the 109th congress .

the real idact of 2005 ( h.r .

418 ) that would establish identity card standards was passed by thehouse on february 10 , 2005 , and this measure was attached by the house to the emergencysupplemental appropriations for fy2005 ( h.r .

1268 ) as division b on march 16,2005 .

following conference , h.r .

1268 was passed with the specified provisions by thehouse and senate in early may 2005 , and it was signed into law ( p.l .

109-13 ) on may 11 , 2005 .

three measures have been introduced that deal with the acceptance of consular id cards byfederal and state entities , and one of the measures ( h.r .

418 ) was subsequentlyattached to the fy2005 emergency supplemental ( h.r .

1268 ) as division b and wasenacted into law ( p.l .

109-13 ) on may 11 , 2005 .

as introduced , two related measures , h.r .

368 , which deals solely with drivers' license standards , and h.r .

418 ,which contains additional provisions , would establish identity card standards for the issuance ofdrivers' licenses that would seem to preclude the use of consular id cards .

as enacted , p.l .

109-13 includes provisions that require a determination that the applicant is lawfully present in the unitedstates and that specify that an official passport is the only acceptable foreign identity document .

athird measure ( h.r .

925 ) would prohibit a federal agency from accepting a form ofindividual identification issued by a foreign government , except for a passport authorized for certainuses by existing legislation .

h.r .

368 , drivers' license security and modernization act .

this bill wasintroduced on january 26 , 2005 , by representative tom davis of virginia , and referred to the housecommittees on government reform and the judiciary .

h.r .

368 would establishidentity card standards for federal recognition and the issuance of drivers' licenses .

the provisionsare similar to title ii - - improved security for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards,sections 201-207 , in h.r .

418 , and title ii ( with the same title ) of division b of thefy2005 emergency supplemental appropriations ( see below ) .

 ( 21 ) h.r .

418 , the real id act of 2005 / h.r .

1268 , emergencysupplemental appropriations for fy2005 .

h.r .

418 was introduced on january 26,2005 , by representative sensenbrenner , as a holdover from consideration of the intelligence reformand terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( s. 2845 / p.l .

108-458 ) in december 2004 ( seeabove under legislation in 108th congress ) .

the bill was referred to the house committees on thejudiciary , homeland security , and government reform , but no formal consideration wasundertaken .

it would , among other things , establish identity card standards for the issuance ofdrivers' licenses to be used for official federal purposes .

these standards would seem to precludethe use of consular id cards for those purposes .

h.r .

418 was considered on february9-10 , 2005 , under a structured rule , and was approved , with amendments , by a 261-161 vote onfebruary 10 , 2005 .

 ( 22 ) the bill was attached to the emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2005 ( h.r .

1268 ) as division b , on march 16 , 2005 .

following conference , h.r.1268 was passed with the specified provisions by the house and senate in early may 2005,and it was signed into law ( p.l .

109-13 ) on may 11 , 2005 .

as enacted , subsection 201 ( 3 ) of h.r .

1268 states that the term "officialpurpose" includes but is not limited to accessing federal facilities , boarding federally regulatedcommercial aircraft , entering nuclear power plants , and any other purposes that the secretary [ofhomeland security] shall determine .

subsection 202 ( a ) provides that beginning three years after thedate of enactment , a federal agency may not accept , for any official purpose , a driver's license oridentification card issued by a state to any person unless the state is meeting the specified standards .

in addition to proof of identity , birth , and principal residence , the minimum issuance standards insubsection 202 ( c ) include ( 1 ) proof of the person's social security number or verification that theperson is not eligible ; and ( 2 ) evidence of lawful status in the country in one of several specifiedcategories , with issuance of easily recognizable temporary drivers' licenses for those with temporaryauthorized stays .

subsection 202 ( c ) ( 3 ) under the heading of verification of documents requires thatthe state shall not accept any foreign document , other than an official passport , to meet the minimumstandards , and it requires that not later than september 11 , 2005 , the state shall agree to use thenational automated system known as systematic alien verification entitlements to verify the legalpresence of non - u.s. citizens in the country .

subsection 202 ( d ) ( 5 ) provides that in the event thata presented social security account number is already registered to another person , "the state shallresolve the discrepancy and take appropriate action. .

section 203 requires that for a state to beeligible for financial assistance it must participate in the interstate compact regarding the sharing ofdrivers' license data , known as the driver license agreement .

h.r .

925 , identification integrity act of 2005 .

introduced on february 17,2005 , by representative gallegly , this bill would prohibit a federal agency from accepting a formof individual identification issued by a foreign government , except for a passport if it is authorizedfor certain uses by federal law at the date of enactment of this legislation .

this would seem to clarifythat consular id cards would not be accepted by federal agencies .

h.r .

925 was referredto the house government reform , judiciary , house administration and armed servicescommittees .

one measure ( h.r .

815 ) has been introduced to prohibit the use of anyidentification documents issued by foreign governments other than passports for opening bankingaccounts .

this would seem to preclude the use of consular id cards for such purposes .

h.r .

815 , financial customer identification verification improvementact .

introduced on february 15 , 2005 , by representative garrett , this bill would amend section5318 ( 1 ) of title 31 , united states code ( relating to identification and verification of account holders ) to prohibit the use of any identification documents issued by foreign governments other than officialpassports for the purpose of opening accounts with financial institutions .

h.r .

815 wasreferred to the house committee on financial services .

