research published by the kaiser family foundation ( kff ) indicates that two - thirds of parents say they are "very" concerned that children in this country are being exposed to too much inappropriate content in the media , and a substantial proportion think sex ( 55% ) and violence ( 43% ) in the media contribute "a lot" to young people's behavior .

thirty - two percent of parents cite tv as the medium that concerns them the most , but the proportion who cite the internet has increased over the past two years from 16% to 21% .

sixty - six percent of parents say they favor government regulations to limit the amount of sex and violence on tv during the early evening hours , a proportion that is virtually unchanged from 2004 .

although exposure to inappropriate material has long been a concern to parents , only since the telecommunications act of 1996 has there been a nationwide effort to provide parents with a tool to control their children's television viewing — the v - chip .

the v - chip , which reads an electronic code transmitted with the television signal ( cable or broadcast ) , is used in conjunction with a television programming rating system .

using a remote control , parents can enter a password and then program into the television set which ratings are acceptable and which are unacceptable .

the chip automatically blocks the display of any programs deemed unacceptable ; use of the v - chip by parents is entirely optional .

since january 1 , 2000 , all new television sets with a picture screen 13 inches or greater sold in the united states have been required to be equipped with the v - chip .

additionally , some companies also offer devices that can work with non - v - chip tv sets .

the initial ratings system was developed during 1996 and 1997 , but encountered criticism from within congress as well as from groups such as the national parent - teacher association .

in response to those concerns , an expanded ratings system was adopted on july 10 , 1997 , and went into effect october 1 , 1997 .

on april 25 , 2007 , the fcc released a report on the "presentation of violent programming and its impact on children. .

in the report , the fcc — found that on balance , research provides strong evidence that exposure to violence in the media can increase aggressive behavior in children , at least in the short term ; noted that although viewer - initiated blocking and mandatory ratings would impose lesser burdens on protected speech , skepticism remains that they will fully serve the government's interests in promoting parental supervision and protecting the well - being of minors ; stated that the v - chip is of limited effectiveness in protecting children from violent television content ; observed that cable operator - provided advanced parental controls do not appear to be available on a sufficient number of cable - connected television sets to be considered an effective solution at this time ; stated that further action to enable viewer - initiated blocking of violent television content would serve the government's interests in protecting the well - being of children and facilitating parental supervision and would be reasonably likely to be upheld as constitutional ; found that studies and surveys demonstrate that the voluntary tv ratings system is of limited effectiveness in protecting children from violent television content ; stated that congress could develop an appropriate definition of excessively violent programming , but such language needs to be narrowly tailored and in conformance with judicial precedent ; suggested that industry could on its own initiative commit itself to reducing the amount of excessively violent programming viewed by children ( eg , broadcasters could adopt a family hour at the beginning of prime time , during which they decline to air violent content ) ; observed that multichannel video programming providers ( mvpds ) could provide consumers greater choice in how they purchase their programming so that they could avoid violent programming .

 ( eg , an a la carte regime would enable viewers to buy their television channels individually or in smaller bundles ) ; and found that congress could implement a time channeling solution and / or mandate some other form of consumer choice in obtaining video programming , such as the provision by mvpds of video channels provided on family tiers or on an a la carte basis ( eg , channel blocking and reimbursement ) .

on march 2 , 2009 , the fcc adopted and released a notice of inquiry ( noi ) to implement the child safe viewing act of 2007 .

the child safe viewing act directed the fcc to initiate a proceeding within 90 days after the date of enactment to examine "the existence and availability of advanced blocking technologies that are compatible with various communications devices or platforms. .

congress defined "advanced blocking technologies" as "technologies that can improve or enhance the ability of a parent to protect his or her child from any indecent or objectionable video or audio programming , as determined by such parent , that is transmitted through the use of wire , wireless , or radio communications. .

congress's intent in adopting the act was to spur the development of the "next generation of parental control technology. .

in conducting this proceeding , the fcc will examine blocking technologies that may be appropriate across a wide variety of distribution platforms and devices , can filter language based upon information in closed captioning , can operate independently of pre - assigned ratings , and may be effective in enhancing a parent's ability to protect his or her child from indecent or objectionable programming , as determined by the parent .

the noi covered not only broadcast , cable , and satellite television , but also wireless devices , non - networked devices , and internet content .

the fcc released its report based on the noi on august 29 , 2009 .

in the report , the fcc concluded that a market exists for advanced blocking technologies and other parental empowerment tools , although data is lacking in certain key areas , such as awareness and usage levels , which warrant further study .

educational programs to increase awareness of parental control technologies have the potential to accelerate the rate of development , deployment , and adoption of these technologies .

parental control technologies vary greatly among media platforms , and even among different providers within the same media platform , with respect to various criteria .

while there are technologies in existence for each media platform , there is not currently a universal parental control technology that works across media platforms .

to explore these issues and how to maximize benefits and minimize harms to children , the fcc issued a second noi exploring these issues and others relating to protecting children and empowering parents in the digital age on october 23 , 2009 .

in the second noi , the fcc asked to what extent children were using electronic media , the benefits and risks this presents , and the ways in which parents , teachers , and children can help reap the benefits while minimizing the risks of using these technologies .

the fcc also recognized that a wealth of academic research and studies exist on these issues and asked commenters to identify additional data and studies , and to indicate where further study is needed .

the noi additionally seeks comment about the effectiveness of media literacy efforts in enabling children to enjoy the benefits of media while minimizing the potential harms .

the noi recognizes that other federal agencies are addressing similar issues , at least with respect to online safety , and asks what the fcc can do to assist with these efforts .

no report has been released as a result of this noi , but since the beginning of 2011 , there have been renewed discussions at the fcc over possibly updating the ratings system using this proceeding as a vehicle .

there was no legislative action on the v - chip in the 111 th congress and no legislative action thus far in the 112 th congress .

on december 2 , 2008 , then - president bush signed into law the "child safe viewing act of 2007. .

this law was originally introduced by senator mark pryor and , as discussed above , requires the fcc to examine the existence and availability of advanced blocking technologies that parents could use across a variety of communications devices or platforms .

the senate and the house of representatives each held one hearing on issues related to the v - chip during the 110 th congress: the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation held a hearing , "impact of media violence on children," on june 26 , 2007 .

the hearing focused on issues related to the impact of violent television programming on children , including issues raised by the fcc report , "violent television programming and its impact on children. .

the house committee on energy and commerce subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet held a hearing , "images kids see on the screen," on june 22 , 2007 .

the hearing included discussion of advertising for junk food aimed at children and on the inability of the v - chip to screen out undesirable advertising .

from 1998 through 2007 , the kaiser family foundation ( kff ) conducted research into the impact of media violence on children and the effectiveness of the v - chip and television ratings as tools for parents to control access to undesirable television content .

in the foundation's most recent report , published in june 2007 , two - thirds of parents say they are "very" concerned that children in this country are being exposed to too much inappropriate content in the media , and a substantial proportion think sex ( 55% ) and violence ( 43% ) in the media contribute "a lot" to young people's behavior .

thirty - two percent of parents cite tv as the medium that concerns them the most , but the proportion who cite the internet has increased over the past two years from 16% to 21% .

sixty - six percent of parents say they favor government regulations to limit the amount of sex and violence on tv during the early evening hours , a proportion that is virtually unchanged from 2004 .

overall , the parents interviewed for the study stated that they were more concerned about inappropriate content on tv than in other media: 32% said tv concerned them most , compared to 21% who said the internet , 9% movies , 7% music , and 8% video games .

half ( 50% ) of all parents said they have used the tv ratings to help guide their children's viewing , including slightly more than one in four ( 28% ) who said they use them "often. .

furthermore , the study revealed that while use of the v - chip has increased substantially since 2001 , when 7% of all parents said they used it , it remains modest at just 15% of all parents , or about four in 10 ( 42% ) of those who have a v - chip in their television and know it .

nearly two - thirds ( 61% ) of parents who have used the v - chip said they found it "very" useful .

other significant findings reported included: after being read arguments on both sides of the issue , nearly two - thirds of parents ( 63% ) said they favored new regulations to limit the amount of sex and violence in tv shows during the early evening hours , when children were most likely to be watching ( 35% are opposed ) .

a majority ( 55% ) of parents said ratings should be displayed more prominently and 57% said they would rather keep the current rating systems than switch to a single rating for tv , movies , video games , and music ( 34% favor the single rating ) .

when read the competing arguments for subjecting cable tv to the same content standards as broadcasters , half of all parents ( 52% ) said that cable should be treated the same , while 43% said it should not .

most parents who have used the tv ratings said they found them either "very" ( 38% ) or "somewhat" ( 50% ) useful .

about half ( 52% ) of all parents said most tv shows are rated accurately , while about four in ten ( 39% ) said most are not .

many parents do not understand what the various ratings guidelines mean .

for example , 28% of parents of young children ( 2-6 years old ) knew what the rating tv - y7 meant ( directed to children age 7 and older ) while 13% thought it meant the opposite ( directed to children under 7 ) ; and only 12% knew that the rating fv ( "fantasy violence" ) is related to violent content , while 8% thought it meant "family viewing. .

in releasing the survey results , vicky rideout , vice president and director of the kaiser family foundation's program for the study of entertainment media and health , commented , "while many parents have used the ratings or the v - chip , too many still don't know what the ratings mean or even that their tv includes a v - chip. .

a number of groups conducted research and published opinion pieces questioning the usefulness and / or legality of the v - chip and the ratings system after the 1996 telecommunications act was enacted ( eg , the progress and freedom foundation , the american civil liberties union , cato institute , morality in media ) .

since that time , opposition has waned and even the controversies over inappropriate content being broadcast live did not renew it .

further , while the v - chip and the ratings system can block objectionable or indecent programming when used in tandem , since the incidents were broadcast "live" and did not have ratings that would have blocked them , neither the v - chip nor the ratings system would have been effective in either case .

therefore , some could claim that the v - chip and the ratings system , while useful tools in many cases , remain unreliable tools for parents because they cannot guarantee all objectionable content will be blocked .

in the child safe viewing act , congress addressed most of the issues that have been raised by various interest groups about the v - chip .

however , the issue that appears not to be able to be addressed through legislation , which is to educate parents and make them aware of the tools available to them , still remains .

according the 2004 kff study , parents also indicated that they would like to see the ratings displayed more prominently to make it easier to notice them .

such findings are consistent with a lack of wide - spread usage or even awareness of the v - chip .

specifically , as noted above , the 2004 kff study indicated that even after years of being available , only 42% of parents who have a v - chip and are aware of it actually use it .

however , of the parents that had used the v - chip , 89% found it "somewhat" to "very" useful .

those figures would indicate that increased knowledge of the v - chip would substantially increase parents' perceptions of control over their children's television viewing .

one of the easiest approaches to increasing the use of the v - chip may likely be to step up parental awareness programs through , for example , public service announcements on television , educational materials on the fcc website , and possibly public service advertisements in print media .

additionally , such educational materials could be made available on congressional member websites for constituents to download .

such actions would not require any new legislation or additional work by the ratings board or related entities ; however , some initially may require funding .

"the perils of mandatory parental controls and restrictive defaults," progress and freedom foundation , april 2008 , http: / / www.pff.org / issues - pubs / pops / pop15.4defaultdanger.pdf .

"parents , media , and public policy: a kaiser family foundation survey," kaiser family foundation , fall 2004 , http: / / www.kff.org / entmedia / entmedia092304pkg.cfm .

"v - chip frequently asked questions," children now , http: / / www.childrennow.org / media / vchip / vchip - faq.html .

"summary of focus group research on media ratings systems," a study commissioned by psv ratings , inc. , spring 2003 , http: / / www.independentratings.org / parents_views.pdf .

federal communications commission v - chip information , http: / / www.fcc.gov / vchip / .

