this report examines the economic side of u.s. leverage with north korea and reviews u.s. policy and legislation .

the security side of u.s. - dprk relations is addressed in other crs reports .

here we examine the economy of north korea in the context of u.s. confrontation with that country over its nuclear weapon and missile programs .

this report provides an overview of the north korean economy , surveys its economic relationships with major trading partners , and examines various u.s. policy options .

the issue with respect to the economy of the democratic people's republic of korea and its economic relations deals with what actions the united states could take that would lead to a verifiable halt to the dprk's nuclear weapons program ; the lessening of tensions between the dprk and south korea , japan , and the united states ; the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons and missile material by north korea ; and the betterment of human rights and the standard of living of north korean non - elites .

the year 2009 may turn out to be the tipping point in the quest by the dprk to become a de facto nuclear - armed state , although its ability to deliver a nuclear weapon remains problematic .

in 2009 , the dprk embarked on a course that included a major shift in power toward the military , emphasis on ideological purity , rising criticism of the united states , an attempt to restart its nuclear plant at yongbyon , the test of a potential long - range ballistic missile in spite of sanctions and objections from much of the rest of the world , the sentencing of two american news reporters , the capture of a south korean worker from the joint kaesong industrial complex , and the test of its second nuclear weapon as well as short - range missiles .

north korea also has indicated that it would not return to the six - party talks on denuclearization .

then suddenly in late 2009 , the dprk entered into the second phase of what appears to be a policy cycle of: ( 1 ) threats and aggressive actions ; ( 2 ) diplomacy and a "charm offensive" with promises made by the dprk and negotiating partners ; ( 3 ) deliveries of economic and humanitarian assistance to the dprk ; and ( 4 ) another cycle of broken promises , threats , and aggressive actions .

the current "charm offensive" by the dprk has included the release of the two american reporters to former president william clinton ; the release of the south korean worker captured from the kaesong industrial complex , a visit to south korea by a high - level north korean delegation to honor former south korean president kim dae - jung ; a resumption of activity at the kaesong industrial complex ; bilateral talks between u.s. special envoy stephen bosworth and pyongyang officials under the rubric of the six party talks ; high - level exchanges between china and the dprk ; attempts by the dprk to attract more foreign investment ; and other diplomatic events .

meanwhile , north korea's military has been somewhat subdued , although it periodically reminds the world of its presence with a provocative action , such as attempting to ship 35 tons of weapons ( reportedly including explosives , rocket - propelled grenades , and components for surface - to - air missiles on a manifest that stated the cargo was oil drilling machinery ) using a georgian ilyushin cargo plane that was intercepted when it made an emergency landing to refuel in thailand .

for some time in 2008 and 2009 , dprk leader kim jong - il was not seen in public and speculation was rampant about a possible successor .

following an apparent stroke ( and possible cancer ) , in august 2008 , the country appeared to be preparing for succession at the same time it also was preparing for the 100 th anniversary in 2012 of the birth of kim il - sung , the nation's founder .

in jockeying for position , the military and its activities related to national security took policy priority over the civilian side of government and over issues related to economics , international trade , and society at large .

in addition , pyongyang's leaders seemed to be leaning more toward nationalism , purity of thought , and loyalty both to the communist party and to the party's ideals .

the result was a policy shift in which north korea's domestic issues were taking priority over foreign considerations , leading to increased isolation from the rest of the world .

it appears that kim jong - il has designated his youngest son , kim jong - un , as his heir apparent .

this , however , is not confirmed .

as kim jong - il faced possible death , one prominent theory was that he was indulging hard - line elements in the armed forces in order to secure military backing for his chosen successor .

another possibility was that the military was preparing to name its own leader to succeed kim jong - il .

as leader kim has recovered , official preparation for succession seems to have abated .

since kim jong - un is in his mid - 20s , if he becomes the successor to kim jong - il , he likely will undergo a period of grooming before actually assuming power .

according to news reports , kim jong - il's brother - in - law , jang seong - taek , ran many of the day - to - day affairs of the dprk on behalf of the ailing kim jong - il .

if kim jong - un succeeds his father , jang seong - taek may run the country through his membership on the national defense commission until kim jong - un is properly trained to take over leadership .

the commission currently is headed by kim jong - il .

kim jong - un reportedly is being given some responsibilities to groom him for future leadership .

it is not clear whether the dprk military and society will accept this "three generation succession" once the dear leader is out of the picture .

for a while , north korean diplomats reportedly were been told to "pay homage to kim jong - un ; " some schoolchildren had been including his name in their songs ; and the military reportedly was referring to him as "brilliant comrade. .

little is know about kim jong - un except that he might have attended the international school of berne ( switzerland ) under an alias or a german - speaking school in koniz .

he graduated from pyongyang's kim il - sung military university .

on december 8-10 , 2009 , u.s. special envoy to north korea stephen bosworth visited pyongyang for bilateral talks conducted in the context of the six party talks ( 6pt ) , although the dprk did not agree with that characterization of the talks .

from the u.s. side , the meetings were considered exploratory on how to restart the 6pt and provided an opportunity for each side to articulate their positions .

bosworth did not meet with kim jong - il , nor did he request such , so there was little propaganda value in the meetings for pyongyang .

ambassador bosworth carried a letter from president obama to the north korean leader .

figure 1 illustrates what appears to be north korea's policy cycle .

it is apparent that the dprk's foreign relations and pyongyang's actions to become a recognized nuclear power have alternated between what appears to be movement toward denuclearization and a warming of foreign relations and actions that move toward nuclearization and a cooling of foreign relations .

the one constant in this cycle is the dprk's drive to develop nuclear weapons and a delivery system for them .

the north korean economy is one of the world's most isolated and bleak , even though it has pockets of modernity ( particularly in pyongyang ) and several grandiose , soviet - style monuments .

it was completely bypassed by the asian "economic miracles" of the past three decades , which brought modern economic growth and industrialization to south korea , taiwan , singapore , and hong kong , as well as rapid growth and trade liberalization to china , thailand , malaysia and other asian nations .

the "stalinist " north korean economy can be characterized by state ownership of means of production ; centralized economic planning ; the lack of basic freedoms necessary for a market economy ( such as freedom of movement and of commerce ) ; political repression ; and an emphasis on military development ( military - first policy ) .

the economic system is designed to be self - reliant and closed .

the irony of the situation is that the longer the economy tries to remain self - sufficient , the poorer its performance and the more dependent the country becomes on the outside world just to survive .

during the 1990s , as many as 2 million people starved to death .

major portions of the north korean population survived primarily through transfers of food and other economic assistance from abroad .

the worst of the food crisis has passed , but shortages still exist , and the country depends on staples from china , and , when allowed , from the u.n. world food program , as well as fertilizer from south korea ( when it was being delivered ) .

in that decade , the inefficiencies of north korea's centrally planned economy , especially its promotion of state - owned heavy industries , along with high military spending — about 15-25% of gdp — joined with drought and floods to push the economy into crisis .

in addition , the collapse of the soviet bloc meant the loss of russian aid , export markets , and cheap oil .

trade with the former soviet union dropped from as much as $3.58 billion in 1999 and to $111 million in 2008 .

this has added to disastrous domestic economic conditions in north korea .

food in north korea has been so scarce that youth there are shorter than those in other east asian nations .

since 1998 , the military reportedly has had to lower its minimum height requirement in order to garner sufficient new recruits .

life expectancy has been contracting .

with the help of the wfp , which had been feeding more than a quarter of north korea's 23 million people , chronic malnourishment among children reportedly fell from 62% in 1998 to about 37% in 2004 .

about one - third of mothers were considered to be both malnourished and anemic .

the food and agriculture organization of the united nations estimated that 7.6 million north koreans were undernourished in the 2002-2004 period .

north korea refers to this period of hardship as the "arduous march," an apparent comparison to the "long march" in chinese revolutionary history .

in january 2006 , pyongyang ordered the wfp to stop food deliveries to the dprk , but limited food assistance ( about 75,000 tons annually ) was resumed after an agreement in may 2006 .

over the winter of 2007-2008 , the abnormally dry and cold weather , reportedly combined with severe flooding during the summer of 2007 , seriously affected the crop growth .

in a december 2008 report , the wfp estimated total food production to be 4.21 million tons for the 2008 / 2009 marketing year ( november 2008-october 2009 ) , leaving the dprk to face a cereal deficit of 836,000 tons , even with commercial imports ( around 500,000 tons ) .

food assistance requirements to feed almost 9 million people were estimated at 800,000 tons until the next harvest in october 2009 .

an extensive analysis of the famine in the 1990s concludes that the "ultimate and deepest roots of north korea's food problems must be found in the very nature of the north korean economic and political system. .

since 2002 , pyongyang has allowed some market - oriented reforms that may ease the economic pressures over the long term .

in a sense , these reforms legitimized what was already occurring following the collapse of the centrally planned economy .

the kim regime refuses to call the economic measures "reforms," but prefers to characterize them as "utilitarian socialism. .

this includes the introduction domestically of market economy elements ( called the july 1 , 2001 , measures ) and in the international arena , the pursuit of normalization of relations with countries that have traditionally been hostile toward their country .

the dprk's gross national product in 2008 in purchasing power parity prices ( ppp ) — prices adjusted to international levels — has been estimated at $40 billion ( cia estimate ) to $54 billion ( global insight estimate ) .

this amounts to national income of about $1,700 to $2,248 per capita in ppp values or roughly in the range of that of zimbabwe , uzbekistan , bangladesh , or the sudan .

this is considerably lower than that of china ( $6,000 ) , indonesia ( $3,900 ) , or japan ( $38,455 ) .

it is also dramatically lower than south korea's $26,000 in ppp values or $18,933 at market prices .

according to the bank of korea , in market prices , north korea's gdp in 2008 was an estimated $26.7 billion compared with $971.3 billion for south korea .

global insight , an econometric consulting firm , estimated north korea's gdp in 2008 in market prices at $28.5 billion and $1,223 on a per capita basis .

a remarkable fact is that in the post - korean war and into the mid - 1970s , living standards were higher in north korea than in either south korea or china .

now , north korea is far behind its rapidly growing neighbors .

as shown in figure 3 , growth in estimated real gross domestic product ( gdp ) in the dprk dropped into the negative for most of the 1990s before beginning to recover in 1999 .

in 2004 to 2006 , growth has been continuing at about 2% , up slightly from earlier years .

in 2006 , the economy shrank by 1.1% and continued to decline by 2.3% in 2007 .

in 2008 , the economy weathered the global recession and grew by a surprisingly large 3.7% .

according to global insight ( an economic consulting firm ) , north korea's economic growth rates is expected to continue at about 2% per year to 2011 .

it should be noted that various scholars and government officials produce a variety of estimates of north korean growth rates and gdp .

some estimates show gradual recovery since the 1990s , but others argue that real per capita gdp has been stagnant or even declining over the past decade .

one problem is that estimates of inflation are difficult to obtain and are inherently unreliable .

the reason is that there is no systematic method of collecting data , and even if there were , households in different sectors of the economy often pay different prices for the same commodities — particularly staples that have been distributed through official channels to some but must be purchased in markets by others .

rice , for example , may be sold in an official market for one price , sold in an irregular market for another , or distributed as a ration to certain households basically for free .

another problem is that officials who report data often are under pressure to meet certain targets .

unlike in the west where data may be "sugar coated" to make them more palatable , in the dprk , the underlying statistics often are "rubberized. .

they may be stretched or compressed according to official expectations .

another problem with north korean data is that there is a huge difference between the official exchange rate and the free market rate .

this problem is avoided in ppp estimates that compare purchasing power and adjust for exchange rate differences .

in estimates of gdp expressed in dollars , however , the exchange rate is used to convert north korean won to u.s. dollars .

tourists can exchange dollars to won at about 140 won per dollar , but the black market rate is about 4,300 won per dollar .

what can be said for certain is that a sizable part of the dprk population lives on the edge of existence .

in few countries today does a small decline in gdp or summer flooding cause massive starvation and growth stunting in children as it does in the dprk .

also , despite the threat of imprisonment for crossing the border into china and being repatriated to north korea , a large number of refugees still attempt to flee the economic and political conditions in the country .

in this land of scarcity , consumer necessities have been rationed and also used to reward party loyalists .

under pyongyang's economic reforms , this system appears to be phasing out , but beginning in the fall of 2005 , north korea has backtracked on many of its economic reforms by forbidding private sales of grains and reinstituting a centralized food rationing system .

pyongyang also reportedly closed its food markets but then opened consolidated markets that carried food and other items .

the reality in much of the dprk is that the official food distribution system does not have sufficient supplies to feed the population .

the food markets , therefore , are essential for the non - elite in society .

the combination of a weak economy unable to provide basic food and necessities and a ruling regime intent on maintaining its power has created economic divisions within society .

north korea reportedly officially classifies its citizens into three ranks and 51 categories based on their ideological orientation .

however , in actuality , the economy has created five classes of people .

the official categories are used to allocate rations for daily necessities , jobs , and housing .

the de facto categories have resulted from the intrusion of market forces and trading on the official class divisions .

the top class consists of the elite who claim the first rewards from society .

they are the party cadres who are leaders in the military and bureaucracy and who enjoy privileges far above the reach of the average household .

while starvation haunts the provinces , many of the privileged class live in pyongyang ( where provincial north koreans cannot enter without special permission ) ; some drive foreign cars , acquire imported home appliances , reside in apartments on a lower floor ( so they do not have to climb too many stairs when the electricity is out ) , and buy imported food , medicines , and toiletries at special hard currency stores .

the elite have a strong vested interest in maintaining the current economic system , despite its problems .

their incomes originate from the treasury , from foreign investors ( mostly south korean ) , remittances from ethnic koreans in japan ( although these have been curtailed ) and south korea , and the country's shadowy trade in everything from missile technology to fake banknotes and narcotics .

after the elites surrounding kim jong - il , the second group comprises business traders with access to foreign capital and international transactions ; the third consists of "organized thugs" who make their money through public trading and markets .

the fourth class is composed of urbanites and others who scrape by on government rations , while the fifth class is farmers who support their way of life through farming private plots and selling goods in markets .

despite hushed grumbling about economic deprivation , forced food deliveries to the central government , and new prohibitions on markets , dissent in north korea remains stifled .

support for the ruling regime appears sufficiently strong — even among the lower classes of people — although this support is often enforced by severe squashing of even the slightest hint of dissent .

even suspicious comments in casual conversations may be reported to the authorities .

the country is far from developing a middle class with independent economic means , personal sources of information , and a thirst for more democratic institutions .

in 2007 , south korea's new president lee myung - bak stated in his plan , "vision 3000: denuclearization and openness," that if north korea denuclearizes and opens , his administration will help to make north korea's national income $3,000 per person within 10 years .

the plan , however , does not provide an alternative if north korea does not denuclearize and has been shelved for now .

the pyongyang regime has pursued a policy of self - sufficiency and isolation from the world economy that they call juche or self - reliance .

juche goes beyond economics as the philosophy has been used since the 1950s to perpetuate power by the central government and to build an aura of the supernatural around their supreme leaders kim — both father and son .

although the regime does not emphasize the connection , the current system of dynastic succession with a paramount father figure also harkens back to confucianism and the powerful dynastic tradition that united the korean peninsula for hundreds of years .

the economic practice of juche has minimized international trade relations , discouraged foreign direct investment , and fostered what it considers to be core industries — mostly heavy manufacturing .

while promoting such heavy industry , for most of the post - korean war period , pyongyang has emphasized the parallel development of military strength .

current head of state , kim jong - il ( often referred to as "dear leader" ) , has given highest priority to the military .

this military - first policy places the army ahead of the working class for the first time in the history of north korea's so - called revolutionary movement .

under kim il - sung ( kim jong - il's father ) , the juche ideology placed equal emphasis on political independence , self - defense , and economic self - support capabilities .

kim jong - il , however , insists that north korea can be a "country strong in ideology and economy" only when its military is strong .

the country , therefore , has been developing its industries within the context of a military - industrial complex with strong links between heavy industry and munitions production .

some of north korea's munitions industries ( manufacturing dual use products ) are virtually indistinguishable from those supplying civilians .

in 1998 at the 10 th supreme people's assembly , the military's national defense commission arguably eclipsed the politburo as the supreme national decision making body in north korea .

in the years since , the term "military - first politics" has been used to signify the privileged status the korean people's army holds and to stress the ascendant position of the military relative to the power of the korean workers' party , the traditional center of the dprk's decision making .

of course , the ultimate decision maker in pyongyang is the dear leader , kim jong - il , who is chairman of the national defense commission .

north korea claims to spend about 15% of its gdp on national defense .

in 2006 , pyongyang's defense budget was an estimated $2.3 billion to maintain its 1.17 million member military .

south korea estimated the north's military expenditures at $5 billion in 2003 .

in 2005 , north korea stated that the defense budget was 15.9% of its total annual budget , but others had put the figure at 27.2% in 2003 .

even a defense budget of $2.3 billion , however , implies an expenditure of $2,090 per member of the military , a woefully small amount .

this implies that the tug of war between "guns and butter" within the north korean regime must be quite intense given the scarcity of resources throughout the country even though the military does operate businesses that bring in additional revenues .

the heavy weight of the military in pyongyang's decision making may help explain what to outsiders seem to be inexplicable actions by the north korean government .

for example , almost immediately after negotiators had issued the september 19 , 2005 , six - party statement in which north korea ostensibly committed itself to abandoning all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs , pyongyang began backtracking and within two months announced a boycott of future six - party talks .

it also may help explain north korea's carrying out its nuclear tests despite being warned not to do so by the united states , china , and other nations .

progress in the six - party talks under which north korea shut down its yongbyon nuclear reactor as required in phase i of the february 13 , 2007 agreement arguably represented a defeat for the military , but the restart of yongbyon and nuclear tests in 2009 indicate a strong resurgence by military interests .

when juche is combined with central planning , a command economy , and government ownership of the means of production , economic decisions that in a market economy would be made by private business and farmers have to go through a few elite in pyongyang .

these decisionmakers may or may not understand advances in agronomy or manufacturing and tend to be motivated by non - economic factors , such as maintaining political power or avoiding blame for initiatives gone awry .

farming methods based partly on crop rotation or new varieties of rice , for example , may be viewed as too risky .

foreign investment also is hindered partly because the regime abhors being "exploited" by capitalists who seek to make profits on their business ventures in north korea and partly because of their deep - seated mistrust of westerners , japanese , and south koreans .

as with other isolationist economies in the contemporary world of globalization and interlinked societies , north korea has been plagued with the negative effects of its attempts at self sufficiency: technological obsolescence , uncompetitive exports , economic privation , and lack of foreign exchange .

much of the reforms , however , have been from the "bottom up" by necessity as the central government faltered on its ability to deliver food and basic necessities through its distribution system .

these difficulties , together with advice from china and russia , have compelled the pyongyang regime to allow some economic reforms .

to the extent possible , they are allowing reforms in the chinese sequence with economic reforms preceding political reforms while eschewing the russian model of political reform preceding and concurrent with economic reforms .

the dprk also has been examining the vietnamese model of development and do moi ( reform ) .

kim jong - il reportedly prefers the vietnamese style of gradual economic reform rather than the abrupt chinese style .

the reforms began in july 2002 when pyongyang announced a series of measures that some had hoped would mark the beginning of the end of the stalinist controls over the economy and the onset of more use of the market mechanism to make economic decisions , particularly production and consumer purchases .

although the government has dubbed the reforms an "economic adjustment policy," in the manufacturing sector , in particular , the actions appear to be a desperate attempt to revive the moribund economy .

the reforms also dovetail with north korea's "military - first" policy .

as kim jong - il has given first priority to the military , the rest of the population has suffered .

this , in turn , has raised pressures on pyongyang to increase the productivity of its economic system .

the adjustments ( reforms ) featured an end to the rationing system for daily commodities ( except for food ) , a huge increase in prices of essentials and in wages , a major devaluation of the currency ( official exchange rate ) , abolishment of the foreign exchange coupon system , increased autonomy of enterprises , authorization of the establishment of markets and other trading centers , and a limited opening of the economy to foreign investment .

prices still remain under centralized control but at levels closer to those existing in peasant ( free ) markets .

north korea has not abandoned the socialist planned economy , but it has been compelled to "adjust" certain aspects of it .

under the initial reforms , overall prices increased by 10 to 20 times .

government prices for many essential items , however , rose by much more .

the price for rice rose by 550 times , for corn 471 times , for diesel oil 38 times , and for electricity 60 times .

wages also were raised but not enough to keep pace with skyrocketing consumer prices .

wages rose by 18 times for laborers and 20 times for managers .

even though not all workers received the promised wage increases , the price and wage reforms caused households to face rampant consumer inflation , and many people ended up worse off financially than before the reforms .

in north korean factories , reforms include greater control over prices , procurement , wages , and some incentives to increase profits in order to distribute them based on individual performance .

the regime also is looking to implement reforms in agriculture similar to those implemented in china ( along the lines of the rural household contract system ) .

in the mid - 1990s , north korea's agricultural work squads had already been reduced in size .

now they are moving toward family oriented operations with farmers allowed to retain more of any production exceeding official targets .

although small farmers' markets have long existed in north korea , pyongyang did not legalize such farmers' markets until june 2003 .

this followed the formal recognition of commercial transactions between individuals and the 1998 revision to the constitution that allowed individuals to keep profits earned through legitimate economic activities .

now free markets and shopping centers that use currency , not ration coupons , are spreading .

the pyongyang central market , for example , became so crowded that a new , three - story supermarket had to be built .

pyongyang's tongil market with its lines of covered stalls stocked with items such as fruit , watches , foreign liquor , clothes , chinese - made television sets , and beer from singapore also is bustling with sellers and consumers reminiscent of those in other asian countries .

visitors to pyongyang in late 2006 indicated that the market was thriving with all types of products and shoppers driving european cars .

the north korean population is gradually becoming re - accustomed to operating in open markets .

this has raised fears by the dprk regime of encroachment by capitalism into their socialist economic system .

on august 26 , 2007 , kim jong - il announced that "markets have become anti - socialist , western - style markets. .

this has led to a steady stream of government edicts restricting market activity across the country .

at first , authorities prohibited women under the age of 40 from selling goods in pyongyang markets .

then on december 1 the authorities banned women under the age of 49 from running businesses in pyongyang .

 ( since males are officially required to be at their assigned workplaces , women generally run the businesses. ) .

certain products , such as videos of south korean dramas , movies , and other so - called non - socialist elements are also banned from central markets .

enforcement of the new regulations at first was spotty , but in late 2007 , it appears to have become more strict .

according to news reports , policing is also being conducted by central government security agencies , organizations that normally deal with issues such as intelligence gathering and sedition .

the extent of the kim regime's attempts to control the development of a market economy can be illustrated by the increased difficulty of acquiring travel permits for persons suspected of being wholesale merchants intending to carry goods from one place to another .

this crackdown on travel also is affecting normal tourist and family trips .

corruption , however , allows some businesses to continue , as certain officials reportedly are receptive to bribes .

secret peddling on streets and other banned activity also continues out of sight of the authorities ( particularly by young and nimble traders ) .

despite north korea's isolation and emphasis on juche , it does trade with other countries .

according to trade statistics compiled by the international monetary fund , the dprk had at least some trade with 80 of the 182 countries or customs territories that report their trade data to the fund .

for pyongyang , the foreign economic sector plays an important role in that it allows the country to import food , technology , and other merchandise that it is unable to produce in sufficient quantities at home .

since north korea does not export enough to pay for its imports , it generates a deficit in reported merchandise trade that must be financed by other means .

pyongyang has to find sources of foreign exchange — other than from its overtly traded exports — to pay for the imports .

experts point out that the dprk has used its military threat to "extort" aid and other transfers from the united states , japan , south korea , and the humanitarian agencies .

this , along with various illicit activities , has helped pyongyang to finance a surfeit of imports .

detailed data on the country's external economic relations suffer from reliability problems similar to those associated with the domestic economy .

the foreign economic data on actual commercial transactions , however , tend to be more accurate since they also are reported by trading partner countries and are compiled by the international monetary fund and united nations .

individual countries , for example , report on their imports from and exports to north korea .

these mirror statistics , however , differ from north korea's actual annual numbers because of differences in data gathering methods , coverage , timing , and reporting .

countries also may misreport trade with the republic of korea as trade with the democratic people's republic of korea .

detailed and reliable data on trade in military equipment and illegal drugs also are notoriously difficult to obtain and to verify .

south korea also compiles statistics on trade with north korea that differ from its data reported to the united nations .

south korea considers trade with the north as inter - korean trade , not foreign trade .

the trade figures that south korea reports to the imf for its commercial transactions with the north are considerably lower than the figures that it reports as inter - korean trade [usually available from the korea trade - investment promotion agency ( kotra ) ] .

the inter - korean trade data reported by south korea also include more detail on non - transactional trade ( mostly foreign aid ) with north korea .

imf data also differ somewhat from those reported by data vending companies ( such as global trade atlas and global insight ) .

this report uses a combination of trade totals ( mirror statistics ) from the imf , partner country data from the global trade atlas , intra - korean trade from south korea's kotra , and references some estimates of total trade from global insight .

the dprk's policy of juche , its suspicion of foreign countries , and the collapse of its industrial production , has resulted in a minimal level of commercial relations with other nations in the world .

this trade has been rising in recent years , although much of this increase can be attributed to investments by south korea and china in dprk mining and manufacturing .

as shown in table 2 , in 2008 north korea exported an estimated $2,801 in merchandise ( up from $2,535 million in 2007 ) while importing $4,127 million ( up from $3,437 million in 2007 ) .

this created an apparent merchandise trade deficit of $1,326 million ( up from $901 million in 2007 ) .

imports from china , in particular , rose 46% from $1,393 million in 2007 to $2,033 million in 2008 .

in recent years , north korea's exports to and imports from china and south korea have risen .

south korea and china account for 60% of north korean exports and 71% of north korean imports .

economic sanctions imposed by japan have reduced that bilateral trade to almost nothing .

the south korea trade - investment promotion agency ( kotra ) has estimated that in 2008 , north korea exported $1,130 million while importing $2,685 million for a trade deficit of $1,555 million .

the kotra data , however , exclude data for about 60 developing countries ( including most countries of the middle east ) and do not include south korean trade with the dprk .

what can be said is that the dprk's trade deficit has been running in the range of $1 billion to $1.5 billion per year .

north korea's major trading partners have been china , south korea , japan , russia , germany , thailand and india ( as well as brazil , singapore , and hong kong ) .

as shown in figure 5 and table 2 , north korea's major import sources have been china , south korea , russia , japan , and thailand .

germany and india also are major suppliers .

major imports by north korea include machinery , minerals , plant products , and chemical products .

in particular , imports of energy materials and foods reflect pyongyang's attempts to remedy these fundamental shortages .

despite current tensions over pyongyang's nuclear program , imports appear to be growing and are estimated to have exceeded their peak in 2001 when a large shipment of food aid from japan ( mainly rice valued at high japanese prices ) artificially increased the import total .

fuel imports from china , food imports from various countries , and supplies of material and components for assembly in the kaesong industrial complex account for most of the increases .

imports from the united states and japan have been virtually nonexistent .

china and south korea have become the largest sources of imports for the dprk , but other sources recently also have become significant .

major export markets for the dprk have been china , thailand , and south korea ( primarily because of production from south korean factories in the kaesong industrial complex ) .

 ( see figure 6 and table 2 . ) .

in europe , germany has been north korea's major trading partner , and in latin america , brazil is developing as a market for north korea's exports .

since 2003 , exports to japan have declined — due to trade sanctions and friction over the dprk's admitted kidnappings of japanese citizens .

north korea's major exports include ores , coal , animal products , textiles , machinery , electronic products , and base metals .

a recent remarkable development has been north korea's increase in exports of primary products ( such as fish , shellfish and agro - forest products ) as well as mineral products ( such as base metallic minerals ) .

pyongyang reportedly has imported aquaculture technology to increase production of cultivated fish and agricultural equipment to increase output of grains and livestock .

it also has imported equipment for its coal and mineral mines .

much of the coal and mineral exports have resulted from partnering with chinese firms through which the chinese side provides modern equipment in exchange for a supply of the product being mined or manufactured .

the production from the kaesong industrial complex also has become significant .

north korean imports from south korea and china both exceeded $1 billion in 2006 , and north korean exports to south korea reached $765 million and to china $582 million .

meanwhile , traditional exports of textiles and electrical appliances have been declining .

this reflects north korea's unstable power supply , lack of raw materials and components imported from abroad , and the need to ship finished goods to china or another third country for final inspection .

this diminishing ability of north korea to provide a reliable manufacturing platform for the least complicated assembly operations without help from foreign investors does not bode well for the country's future ability to generate the exports necessary to balance its trade accounts .

un resolution 1874 includes a ban on all arms transfers from the dprk , including small arms .

data on small arms trade are available to a certain extent , but such exports are likely to be under - reported in official statistics .

table 3 shows imports of small arms and ammunition by trading partner countries from north korea from 2001 to 2008 .

the total reported transactions has been about $5.3 million over the eight years .

the importers have included countries from latin america , europe , southeast asia , and the middle east .

north korea's annual merchandise trade deficit of about $1 billion implies that pyongyang must either be receiving imports without immediate payment required ( aid and capital flows ) or be generating foreign exchange through some means — either legal or illegal .

legal means include borrowing , foreign investments , foreign aid , remittances from overseas north korean workers , selling military equipment not reflected in trade data , and by selling services abroad .

illegal methods include the counterfeiting of hard currency , illegal sales of military equipment or technology , sales of illegal drugs , or by shipping illegal cargo between third countries .

the country also can dip into its foreign exchange reserves .

u.s. trade with the dprk is quite limited .

the united states does not maintain any diplomatic , consular , or trade relations with north korea , and the country does not have normal trade relations ( most favored nation ) status .

this means that north korean exports are subject to the relatively high tariffs existing before world war ii in the united states .

for example , women's blouses of wool or cotton carry a 90% import duty if from north korea but are duty free if from free - trade agreement countries , such as canada , israel , or mexico , or are subject to 9 to 10% duty if from most other nations .

as a communist nation , north korea also does not qualify for duty - free treatment of certain products that are imported from designated developing countries under the generalized system of preferences program .

the united states , moreover , maintains various economic sanctions on north korea because the country is considered a threat to national security , is a communist state , and it proliferates weapons of mass destruction .

in 2008 , however , the bush administration lifted restrictions on the dprk under the trading with the enemy act and removed the dprk from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

some bills in the 111 th congress would relist the dprk .

other sanctions , including u.n. sanctions imposed following north korea's nuclear test , still remain in place .

the united states resumed shipments of food and heavy fuel oil to north korea as humanitarian aid but subsequently halted them .

travel to and trade with north korea in other than dual - use goods are allowed if overarching requirements are met , and there are no restrictions on the amount of money americans may spend in the dprk .

the sanctions that are related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction generally target the offending entities .

north korean assets in the united states frozen prior to june 19 , 2000 , remain frozen .

north korea is on the most restricted list of countries for u.s. exports ( country group e list ) of items such as computers , software , national security - controlled items , items on the commerce control list , and service or repair of such items .

except for the un sanctions , economic sanctions on north korea are essentially unilateral by the united states .

most other nations ( except japan ) allow relatively free trade in non - sensitive goods with the dprk .

in october 2007 , president bush approved the lifting of some sanctions imposed on the dprk under an act governing human trafficking .

this easing allowed the united states to provide assistance in educational and cultural exchanges to the extent that the aid doesn't damage its national interest .

in february 2008 , the new york philharmonic orchestra performed in pyongyang .

the united states uses trade with north korea as leverage and to send a message of disapproval for various activities by pyongyang .

as the six - party nuclear talks progressed , however , the united states expressed its willingness to begin discussions to normalize relations with the dprk , has removed it from the terrorism list , and has indicated its willingness to negotiate a peace treaty to formally end the korean conflict .

these actions , however , are contingent on the dprk returning to the six party talks and abiding by previous agreements .

the way also could be opened for north korea's admission to membership in international financial institutions ( such as the world bank , international monetary fund , and asian development bank ) .

this would allow the dprk to receive development assistance that would help finance additional imports from countries such as the united states .

table 8 shows u.s. merchandise exports , imports , and trade balances with north korea since 1990 .

imports have been zero or relatively low with a peak of $1,495,000 in 2004 .

almost all of these imports from north korea were organic chemicals and woven apparel .

a possible concern is that imports of books , newspapers , and manuscripts have dropped to zero .

for a country with great strategic importance to the united states , information on north korea is not flowing directly into the u.s. market .

u.s. exports at $23,750,000 in 2004 rose from $32,000 in 1990 to $25,012,000 in 2002 and to $52 million in 2008 .

however , much of this has been food and energy assistance provided as part of north korea's process of denuclearization .

the small annual surplus in u.s. trade with north korea arises primarily from food and energy assistance that has been provided to the dprk .

u.s. businesses have virtually no direct investment in north korea , although non - governmental groups do run operations in the dprk in activities such as goat dairy farming and transportation .

economic relations have been a major route for opening relations between north and south korea .

seoul has a major stake in relations with the dprk and the outcome of the current six - party talks .

it seeks a "soft landing" for the current standoff over the north's nuclear program — one that will lead to a lessening of tensions and steady integration of north korea's economy into the global economic and financial system .

as with other countries divided by ideology and a history of hostilities as "pawns" on the chess board of the cold war , the two halves of the peninsula face numerous issues to be resolved before they can normalize relations — let alone contemplate reunification .

south korea has much to gain from rapprochement with the north .

its strategy has been to use its economic leverage and family reunions ( families separated by the division of the korean peninsula ) to open channels with the north korean people while maintaining a credible military deterrent to overt hostile action by pyongyang .

south korea recognizes that essentially it has won the cold war on the korean peninsula , but it recoils at the prospect of funding economic rehabilitation in the dprk as west germany did with east germany .

seoul also recognizes that its economic ties are gradually shifting from reliance on the american market to greater integration with china , japan , and other countries of asia .

its labor costs are rising , and many of its companies are remaining competitive only by manufacturing in china and other low - wage markets .

for them , the prospect of abundant cheap labor just a short distance to the north is appealing and perhaps an alternative to cheap labor in china .

in 2008 , total merchandise trade between north and south korea was $1,820 million , up from $1,797.9 million in 2007 , $1,349.7 million in 2006 , and more than triple the $403.0 million just seven years earlier .

south korean exports , which had reached $1,032.6 million in 2007 , fell to $888 million in 2008 .

south korean imports from north korea rose to $930 million , up from $765.3 million in 2007 .

much of the increase in exports has been in the form of food and industrial goods .

in 2006 , $419.3 million in south korean exports to the north were actually south korean aid shipments .

the major items purchased by south korea from the north include food / aquatic / forestry products , textiles , steel / metal products , and electronics .

the major south korean exports to north korea include chemicals , textiles , machinery , steel / metal products , and food / forestry products .

as indicated in table 6 and table 7 above , south korea also provides the dprk with humanitarian and economic assistance .

since 1991 , this has amounted to a total of $3,337.00 million with $2,221.99 million in humanitarian assistance and $1,115.01 million in economic and other assistance .

since 2008 , this assistance has largely come to a stop .

since 1992 , particularly under the sunshine policy of former south korean president kim dae jung and under the policy for peace and prosperity of former president roh moo - hyun , seoul has permitted its corporations to pursue business interests in north korea .

in 2003 , the government allowed activities by 89 companies including 35 involved in contract processing ( assembly , sewing , or other processing done under contract ) by north koreans .

the companies included daewoo ( jackets , bags ) , samsung electronics ( communications center , switchboard ) , samcholi bicycle , green cross ( medicine ) , international corn foundation ( corn seeds ) , hyundai ( mt .

kumkang tourism , development ) , and hanshin co. ( glass ) .

the korea electronic power corporation's work on the construction of a light water nuclear power plant under the u.s. - north korean 1994 agreed framework has been halted .

one global strategy of south korean businesses is to develop processing sites in north korea to take advantage of low labor costs there ; in some cases , labor costs are competitive with those in china .

the two countries also have taken some halting steps toward linking their economic systems .

in addition to the business relationships , since september 2002 , the two countries have been reconnecting the gyeongui ( seoul - sinuiju ) and donghae ( east sea ) railway lines and adjacent highways .

as discussed in the section above on economic reforms and free trade zones , the focus of north - south economic cooperation now is the kaesong industrial complex ( kic ) .

managed by south korea's hyundai asan and korea land corporation and located just over the border in north korea , this 810 acre complex already has attracted small and medium sized enterprises from south korea .

the kic accounts for much of the increased commercial trade between the north and the south .

in 2008 , the kic produced some $20 million worth of goods each month .

it provides small - and medium - sized south korean firms with a low - cost supply of labor for manufacturing products , provides jobs for north korean workers , and provides needed hard currency for pyongyang .

north korea depends more on south korea in international trade than south korea does on the north .

north korea accounts for less than 1% of total south korean exports , while north korean exports to south korea account for more than a third of total north korean exports .

south korea has access to global markets for many of its world class industries ( automobiles , semiconductors , consumer electronics , etc .

 ) , while north korea faces restricted markets for its limited array of exports .

in his inaugural speech on february 25 , 2008 , president lee myung - bak indicated that south korea attitude toward inter - korean relations should be pragmatic , not ideological .

he reiterated his plan to provide assistance in order to raise the per capita income of north korea to $3,000 within ten years if pyongyang denuclearizes .

in september 2009 , president lee offered north korea a grand bargain to give up its nuclear program in return for aid and security guarantees .

this was rejected by pyongyang .

china remains the dprk's chief ally .

in addition to sharing its status as one of the last communist regimes in the world , china views the korean peninsula as vital to its strategic interests .

beijing values north korea as a buffer between the democratic south korea and the u.s. forces stationed there , as a rationale to divert u.s. and japanese resources in the asia pacific toward dealing with pyongyang and less focused on the growing military might of china , and as a destination for chinese foreign investment and trade .

beijing arguably has more influence in pyongyang than any other nation .

cooperation between the two countries is extensive but often strained .

in 1961 , china and the dprk signed a mutual defense pact , but recently a chinese official reportedly said that they are not "well informed of the internal situation of the north korean military" and that the dprk "does not listen to what china has to say. .

 ( this presumably referred to pyongyang's missile and nuclear tests. ) .

also with respect to north korean refugees , their first destination is usually northeastern china .

according to human rights watch , china labels north korean border - crossers as illegal economic migrants , rather than refugees or asylum seekers , and usually sends them back to north korea .

china also is hosting and facilitating the ongoing six - party talks that seek a resolution to the north korean nuclear problem .

in august 2001 , chinese president jiang zemin visited pyongyang and promised increased humanitarian and economic assistance .

in april 2004 , kim jong - il visited beijing to discuss food aid and nuclear issues .

on october 4 , 2009 , the sixtieth anniversary of diplomatic relations between china and the dprk , chinese premier wen jiabao made a "goodwill trip" to pyongyang , the first by a chinese premier in eighteen years .

he was accompanied by a large delegation of high ranking officials .

both countries vowed to support each other and signed several documents including an agreement on economic and technological cooperation .

according to jane's information group , several issues have arisen to cause friction in the sino - north korean relationship .

these include chinese exasperation at the dprk's failure to reform its economy ; pyongyang's prevarication over the nuclear and peace treaty issues and the consequent dangerous stimulus this provides to proliferation in the region ; the nuclear standoff with the united states and pyongyang's possession of nuclear weapons ; growing economic and political rapport between pyongyang and taipei ; the north korean refugee problem on the china - dprk border ; pyongyang's missile testing , prompting japan to acquire a theater missile defense system , with taiwan wishing to be included ; north korea's construction of underground missile sites close to the chinese border ; and north korea's cavalier attitude towards business .

 ( china occasionally suspends shipments of humanitarian aid to the dprk because pyongyang regularly 'forgets' to return chinese railroad rolling stock. ) .

in 2006 , pyongyang's missile and nuclear tests severely strained relations between china and the dprk .

beijing had warned the dprk not to conduct either of the tests and "lost face" when pyongyang went ahead with them anyway .

as a result , for the first time china agreed to un resolutions imposing sanctions on the dprk and also took measures to halt banking transactions with north korean entities and to curtail shipments of petroleum .

china , however , did not agree to conduct inspections of shipments along its borders with north korea .

some analysts indicate that pyongyang may be growing weary of its lop - sided relations with beijing and may be attempting to become more independent .

pyongyang may view nuclear weapons as a "trump card to intimidate china as much as the united states. .

after north korea's long - range missile test in april 2009 , china agreed to stronger u.n. sanctions on three north korean companies .

after north korea's second nuclear test in may 2009 , china issued a strong statement of condemnation and in june 2009 backed un security council resolution 1874 that provided for additional sanctions on the dprk .

in 2008 , china exported and estimated $100 million to $160 million in luxury goods that now appear to be under sanction by un security council resolutions .

since the collapse of the soviet union , china has been the dprk's largest trading partner and supplier of concessional assistance ( through subsidized trade and direct transfers ) .

as an export market and source of imports , however , north korea plays a relatively minor role for china .

in 2007 , the dprk ranked 64 th among china's export markets — smaller than peru , egypt , or hungary .

as a source of imports , north korea ranked 70 th — below gabon , yemen , or belgium .

table 10 shows china's merchandise trade with the dprk .

china is a major source for north korea of imports of petroleum .

according to chinese data , exports to the dprk of crude oil reached $414 million and shipments of oil ( not crude ) totaled $120 million .

total exports of mineral fuel oil of $585 million accounted for 29% of all chinese exports to the dprk .

china , however , does not appear to be selling this oil to north korea at concessionary prices .

in 2008 , the average price for chinese exports of crude oil to north korea was $0.78 per kilogram , while it was $0.71 for such exports to the united states , $0.66 for south korea , $0.81 for japan , and $0.50 for thailand .

china also provides aid directly to pyongyang .

by bypassing the united nations , china is able to use its assistance to pursue its own political goals independently of the goals of other countries .

it is widely believed that chinese food aid is channeled to the military .

this allows the world food program's food aid to be targeted at the general population without risk that the military - first policy or regime stability would be undermined by foreign aid policies of other countries .

in november 2003 , china reportedly transferred responsibility for securing its border with north korea from the police to its army .

many of china's two million ethnic koreans live along this border , and it is a favorite crossing point for refugees from north korea .

in 2006 , china built a 20-kilometer long fence along its border with north korea .

it is located primarily along areas where the yalu river dividing the two countries is narrow and the river banks low .

much of china's trade with the dprk goes through the port of dandong on the yalu river .

in 2002 , 40% of chinese exports to and 11% of its imports from north korea passed through dandong .

china's major imports from north korea include mineral ores , mineral fuels ( coal ) , woven apparel , fish and seafood , iron and steel , and wood .

china's major exports to north korea include mineral fuels and oil , meat , electrical machinery , machinery , plastic , man - made filament , vehicles , and iron and steel .

 ( see section of this report on foreign investments for activity by chinese firms in the dprk. ) .

japan's economic relations with north korea have declined sharply as tension over pyongyang's nuclear and missile programs has spiked , and there has been no resolution of the japanese abducted by north korea's intelligence agency .

north korea's may 2009 test of a nuclear device reinforced existing trends in dprk - japan economic relations .

trade and investment flows have virtually stopped .

after north korea test launched several missiles in july 2006 and then detonated a nuclear device in october 2006 , japan imposed strict unilateral sanctions , causing bilateral trade to plummet .

japan banned imports and most north korean nationals from entering japan , prohibited all north korean ships from entering japanese ports , and outlawed the export of "luxury goods" to north korea , including caviar , jewelry , liquor , and any food known to be favored by north korean leader kim jong - il .

tokyo has also ceased sending any humanitarian aid to north korea , and has refused to provide economic or energy assistance until their concerns with pyongyang are resolved .

this pattern is a reversal of earlier economic relations .

although japan and north korea have never established official diplomatic relations , the two nations maintained significant economic ties for well over a decade .

from the end of the cold war , japan was second only to china among north korea's top trading partners .

bilateral trade declined considerably in the 1980s , but the drop was attributed primarily to the steep overall downturn of the north korean economy as much as the state of bilateral relations .

before relations deteriorated , japanese leaders made several efforts to normalize relations with north korea , promising considerable economic assistance to the country .

since 2002 , however , north korea's provocative missile and nuclear device tests , along with the issue of japanese citizens kidnapped by north korean agents in the 1970s and 1980s , has stalled any further diplomatic progress and retarded economic relations .

from 2001-2005 , japan's share of north korean trade declined as china , south korea , and russia expanded trade with pyongyang .

as indicated in table 11 , by 2008 , total trade between japan and the dprk had fallen to $8 million from $1,290 million in 2001 .

in 2007 , japan had no imports from the dprk and reported exports of $8 million .

before japan stopped importing from north korea , seafood made up almost half of the north's exports to japan , followed by electrical machinery , aluminum and articles thereof , mineral fuels , and apparel .

north korean clams and matsutake mushrooms are particularly prized in the japanese market .

japan sent items such as vehicles , electrical machinery , boilers / reactors , manmade filaments , wool , and articles of iron or steel to north korea .

some japanese lawmakers have argued that japan should expand the ban on imports from north korea to cover exports as well .

japan's food aid to north korea has also dwindled as relations soured .

the pattern of japanese aid reflects developments in the political relationship between tokyo and pyongyang: shipments began in 1995 and 1996 when relations warmed , were temporarily suspended periodically as tensions mounted , and eventually ceased altogether in late 2004 because of disagreement over the abduction issue .

between 1995 and 2004 , japan provided 1.2 million metric tons of humanitarian food aid to north korea , mostly through the united nations world food program .

a group of pro - pyongyang ethnic koreans living in japan known as the chosen soren ( chongryun in korean ) in the past provided north korea with additional funds in the form of cash remittances and , possibly , facilitated illicit trade such as drug trafficking and counterfeiting .

although the exact amount of remittances is unknown , the total appeared to be in the neighborhood of $100 million per year but declined sharply since the early 1990s .

a series of scandals involving ethnic korean banks in japan revealed that money was illegally channeled to north korea through the network of chosen soren - affiliated credit unions .

following the missile tests in 2006 , japan froze fund transfers and overseas remittances by 15 groups and one individual suspected of links to north korean weapons programs , and established rules that require financial institutions to report to the japanese government remittances overseas of more than 300 million yen .

russian reforms and the end of the cold war greatly reduced the priority of the dprk in the strategy of russian foreign policy .

following soviet support of north korea in the korean war , the ussr provided assistance to pyongyang that helped equip its military and create its heavy industrial sector .

in 1998 , at the peak of the bilateral relationship , about 60% of north korea's trade was with the soviet union .

much of the trade was in raw materials and petroleum that moscow provided to pyongyang at concessional prices .

relations between the two cooled in the 1990s as russia recognized south korea , announced that trade with north korea was to be conducted in hard currencies , and opted out of its bilateral defense agreement .

recently , overall relations between russia and north korea have been improving .

russia is upgrading its railway connections with the dprk and has been participating in an ambitious plan to build a trans - korean railway .

as is the case with china and south korea , russia is critical to north korean security , since russia shares a border with the dprk , and russian cooperation would be necessary to enforce any security guarantee .

as fuel aid from abroad has decreased , moreover , north korea has turned again toward russia as a source of supply .

an observer of russia - dprk relations views russian policy toward north korea as an important component of moscow's general strategy toward what it considers the critically important asia - pacific region .

russia's strategic course includes a calculating and pragmatic approach toward north korea and the korean peninsula in general .

moscow has gained unique and exclusive communications capabilities with pyongyang based on the development of trust between the leadership of the two states at the highest political levels .

this observer also points out that the perspective of russia on the north korea nuclear issue does not fully coincide with that of the united states .

while moscow has insisted on a denuclearized korean peninsula and the irreversible dismantlement of north korea's nuclear weapons and nuclear development programs , it also firmly supports the peaceful resolution of the issue .

russia is a participant in the six - party talks .

moscow apparently has concluded that the kim jong - il regime does not face impending collapse , and therefore , outside pressure and economic sanctions intended to bring about regime change work only to increase tensions and the probability of a military confrontation .

russia also does not favor a korean peninsula unified by military force with american help .

this would put u.s. forces on the russia - korean border .

rather , russia supports a unified korea that would maintain friendly relations with all countries , including russia , and opposes foreign interference in the unification process .

as is the case with china , russia also is concerned that economic hardships in the dprk push refugees across the border into russian territory .

moscow also supported u.n. security council resolutions in 2006 that condemned north korea's missile and nuclear tests .

this has cooled the relationship to some extent .

russia also condemned the may 2009 nuclear test and supported u.n. security council resolution 1874 .

the dprk's trade with russian lags behind what it has been in the past .

in 2008 , north korea ranked 107 th among russia's sources of imports ( below jamaica and ghana ) and 92 nd in terms of markets for russian exports ( below the virgin islands and gibraltar ) .

the increasing volume of russian mineral fuel exports to the dprk has moved russia past japan , germany , and thailand to become north korea's third largest trading partner .

major russian exports to the dprk include mineral fuels , wood pulp , machinery , non - rail vehicles , iron and steel , and wood .

russian exports of mineral fuels have been declining from a peak of $224.4 million in 2005 to $73.5 million in 2007 and $41.6 million in 2008 .

major russian imports from north korea include machinery , electrical machinery , glass , and plastics .

in december 2006 , russia reportedly agreed to write off some 80% of the $8 billion in debt owed it by the dprk .

north korea had borrowed the funds in the 1960s to build power plants .

this opened the way for russia to engage in more economic cooperation with the dprk .

normalization of diplomatic relations with the dprk would apply to the united states , japan , and south korea .

north korea already has diplomatic relations with china , russia , and the european union ( including an embassy in london ) .

associated with normalizing relations would be a peace treaty formally ending the korean war .

for japan , the dprk would have to resolve certain issues , including a full accounting of the status of kidnapped japanese citizens , north korea's missile firings over japan , and incursions by suspected dprk espionage and drug - running ships into japanese waters .

upon conclusion of these normalization talks , japan is likely to offer $5 billion to $10 billion to north korea in compensation for its occupation .

normalizing diplomatic relations allows countries to communicate with each other in a more direct fashion , enables diplomats to gather information directly , and provides more interaction on a personal level .

normalized relations can help to overcome the pyongyang propaganda machine both within the dprk and on the world stage .

normalization , however , can imply that the united states is willing to tolerate conditions in north korea .

this may be unacceptable to some .

absent normalized relations , washington could seek a relationship similar to that with cuba .

even without diplomatic ties , the u.s. mission in havana is attached to that of switzerland and maintains a staff similar in size to a regular embassy .

 ( north korea has been a member of the united nations since 1991 and has representatives in new york. ) .

japan has initiated talks with pyongyang that could lead to normalized relations , and south korea has been seeking diplomatic ties and possibly some form of reunification in the future .

in 2007 , bilateral talks between japan and the dprk on normalization were stymied by the abduction issue , but they have resumed in 2008 .

after normalization , the united states could negotiate a trade agreement with the dprk that would cover goods , services , and investments and could be modeled after the 2001 bilateral trade agreement concluded between the united states and the socialist republic of vietnam .

upon implementation of the trade agreement , each country would accord the other normal trade relations ( most favored nation ) status .

the immediate effect would be to allow north korean exports to the united states to enter at the lower rates of duty accorded to nearly all other nations of the world .

the trade agreement also could cover investment and other u.s. interests .

although the dprk's market currently is small , eventually it could re - industrialize and become a larger economic player in the region .

liberalization of north korean trade and investment relations , moreover , can work through the economy in the same way that it did in china and russia by exposing the public to the benefits of increased wealth .

the major negative to establishing trade with north korea is that , unless it is part of a larger package that includes other concessions , the united states could be viewed as exchanging an important bargaining chip for minimal gain .

the united states could ease economic sanctions on north korea if the country resolves the issues that caused the sanctions to be imposed initially .

since north korea's other trading partners have more liberal trade with north korea , it is mainly american companies and traders that are impacted by the sanctions .

pyongyang can spend its available foreign exchange in any of a number of world markets — in china , russia , europe , southeast asia , or elsewhere .

moreover , as north korea opens its economy , u.s. businesses would be able to decide whether or not to invest there based on their own economic interests and not because they are hindered from doing so by u.s. law .

the united states could stop blocking the dprk from joining the major ifis , particularly the asian development bank , world bank , and international monetary fund .

pyongyang is particularly interested in joining the asian development bank , but ifi procedures require membership first in the international monetary fund .

the imf requires certain economic data which the world bank or asian development bank needs to evaluate projects and loan requests .

membership in ifis requires that a country establish data gathering and reporting mechanisms as well as open their country to visits , surveys , or assessments by the ifi .

as an incentive , a special fund could be set up in the world bank or asian development bank to assist north korea in its economic transition .

this fund could be financed by japan or south korea in conjunction with their normalization of relations with the dprk .

the bush administration resumed shipping fuel and food aid on a humanitarian basis to the dprk .

south korea also has resumed shipments of fuel , but it has insisted that food and fertilizer aid be sent only if requested by north korea .

when south korea was negotiating the proposed korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( signed but not yet approved by congress ) , they asked that products from the kaesong industrial complex in north korea be included under the fta and be accorded duty - free entry into the united states .

the resulting fta language , however , does not provide for duty - free entry into the united states for products made in kaesong .

annex 22-b to the proposed fta , however , does provide for a committee on outward processing zones ( opz ) to be formed and to designate zones ( such as the kaesong industrial complex ) to receive preferential treatment under the fta .

such a designation apparently would require legislative approval by both countries .

