a particularly interesting facet of the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ; p.l.107-71 ) is the security screening opt - out provision ( sec .

108 ) that allows airports , with the approvalof the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , to implement a system using private screenersin lieu of federal screeners to inspect airline passengers and baggage beginning in november 2004 .

specifically , atsa required the tsa to fully deploy a federal screening workforce within one yearafter enactment , and permits airports to opt out of the federal screening program two years thereafter .

therefore , airports will officially be eligible to opt out of the federal screening program on or afternovember 19 , 2004 .

what distinguishes the opt - out program is that it delegates the authority ofdeciding whether to pursue private screening to airport operators , but leaves the actual oversight andcontract monitoring responsibilities in the hands of the tsa .

the opt - out provision proposes a shared responsibility between the federal government,airport operators , and private screening firms , with specific roles and responsibilities for each to beformally defined in the tsa's implementation of this program .

private screening systems have beenin place at many european airports for some time and are generally regarded as being efficient andeffective .

for example , the u.s. general accounting office ( gao ) reported that airport operatorsare responsible for screening operations at airports in belgium , france , and the unitedkingdom .

 ( 1 ) at many ofthese locations , airports contract with screening companies to conduct screening operations , whilesome airports in the united kingdom directly manage and conduct screening operations .

however,successful implementation of the opt - out program in the united states is likely to be highlydependent on the specific policies and guidelines established by tsa to implement and manage theprogram .

consequently , the implementation of the opt - out provision of atsa is likely to be ofconsiderable interest to congress as it engages in oversight to assess whether the program achievesits intended objectives , or whether the program or its implementation should be modified throughrecommended policy changes or legislative action .

screening contracts awarded under the opt - out provision would be determined by the tsaand federally managed by the tsa .

therefore , the opt - out program , as defined in atsa , does noteliminate the federal responsibility for security screening at airports or place airport operators orairlines directly in charge of security screening contract oversight .

thus , the security screeningopt - out program is not a return to the operational structure for aviation security that existed beforethe passage of atsa , where airlines were directly responsible for screening operations , nor is it aprogram that would place the responsibility for direct oversight of screening contracts in the handsof individual airport operators .

rather , the opt - out program establishes a federally funded andmanaged , contractor - operated framework for security screening at airports .

nonetheless , the opt - outprovision affords each airport operator the opportunity to assume an active role in deciding whetherprivate screening operations are suitable for a given airport and providing recommendations forprivate screening operations .

in some cases , airports may elect to take an active role in privatescreening operations by directly employing screeners and managing screening activities .

the opt - outprovision as defined in statute offers such flexibility in the implementation of private screeningoperations at each airport , leaving it up to tsa to decide if an airport's proposal for private screeningwill meet the desired objectives without compromising security .

on the other hand , while airlinesare clearly major stakeholders in aviation security , their input or involvement in implementingprivate screening operations role is not specifically addressed in the provision , leaving it largely upto tsa to determine how airline input or involvement in the planning , decision - making , andimplementation of private screening operations will be handled .

besides addressing the concerns of airport operators through oversight of tsa'simplementation of the opt - out program and possible legislative action to further define the programand address the above mentioned issues raised by airports , congress may engage in further debateover the merits of the opt - out provision .

the fundamental issue regarding the degree of federalinvolvement in screening operations may re - emerge during this debate .

consequently , congress maydebate options to repeal the opt - out provision or to amend the provision in a manner that would limitits applicability .

on the other hand , congress may consider options to expand or encourageparticipation in the opt - out program if it is believed that increased screening efficiency could berealized through private screening contracts without compromising the level of security provided byfederal screening operations .

in order to examine the relative cost and effectiveness of private screening , atsa containeda provision establishing a pilot program using private screeners at five airports .

under the provision,one airport from each security risk category was selected from the pool of airports that had appliedto participate in the pilot program .

the five airports selected are listed in table 1 .

these fiveairports , dubbed the "pp5" by tsa , have operated under tsa managed contracts for about the last1 â½ years .

table 1 .

airports in the security screening pilotprogram the tsa recently contracted with bearing point and abt associates to develop a comparative assessment technique and conduct a formal evaluation comparing airports in the privatescreening pilot program to airports with federal screeners .

however , the implementation of theprivate screening program has not been without criticism .

this criticism points to perceived flawsin the pilot program that may limit the conclusions that can be drawn from this ongoing evaluation .

first , the limited scope of the pilot program raises concern that inferences drawn fromcomparing these five airports to other airports under the federal screening system may not trulyrepresent differences between private screening contracts and federal screening operations , but maysimply reflect airport specific characteristics unique to the sites chosen for the pilot program .

fiveairports represent only about one percent of the total number of u.s. airports ( currently 445 ) withscheduled passenger service where airport passenger screening is required , and the number oforiginating passengers at these five airports represent less than 4 percent of the nationwidetotal .

 ( 47 ) furthermore,only one airport from each of the 5 airport security risk categories is represented in the pilot program .

so , in essence , the sample size for evaluating the effectiveness of private screening is only one datapoint per risk category .

moreover , the selection of airports was not done randomly .

rather,selections were made from airport who voluntarily elected to apply for private screening under thepilot program .

therefore , there was no process to select a representative sample of airports forparticipation in the pilot program .

because of the limited scope of the pilot program , observations and statistical conclusionsregarding the program are open to criticism regardless of what they indicate .

as advocates forexpanding the pilot program have pointed out , findings from the current pilot program may beskewed by confounding local factors for a given airport or a given security contractor and may notbe representative of private screening operations in general .

for this reason , an expanded pilotprogram , consisting of 5-10 percent of commercial passenger airports , was originally advocated asa means for providing a more meaningful basis for evaluating private screening programs .

 ( 48 ) however , as mandated,the pilot program consists of only 5 airports .

this is not to say that assessments of the pilot program airports cannot reveal valuableinsights and data to assist airports in identifying many of the pros and cons of private screeningoperations , and perhaps identify certain elements of private screening operations that may be usefulin developing proposals for participation in the opt - out program .

the pilot program airports mayserve as insightful case studies for assessing private screening operations and comparing them tofederal screening operations .

also , to assuage some of the concerns over the potential for uniquelocal factors confounding conclusions about specific private screening operations at the pilotprogram airports , the tsa - sponsored comparison study has matched the 5 airports to those airportsusing federal screeners considered to be most similar in security related characteristics .

 ( 49 ) the evaluation compared each of the five pilot program locations to 5 or 6 comparableairports where federal screeners are currently deployed .

the comparison airports were selected fromairports in the same security risk category that had available performance data such as covert testingdata , and were selected based on their similarity to the pilot program airports on 15 variablesreflecting passenger volume at security screening checkpoints , security staffing levels , airportconfiguration , and equipment types for checked baggage screening .

the pilot program locations andtsa screening locations used in the comparison study are listed in table 2 .

besides the small sample size , the pilot program , as implemented , has also been criticizedbecause of its perceived lack of differentiation from tsa's federal screening practices that wouldallow a more robust comparison of alternative practices that may improve the efficiency of screeningoperations or reduce costs .

in its report on the department of homeland security appropriationsbill for 2004 ( h.rept .

108-169 ) , the house appropriations committee expressed its concern thatthe tsa required the five airports in the pilot program to follow virtually identical operatingprocedures to tsa's own federal workforce .

the committee noted that these five airports arerequired to operate at staffing levels and compensate their personnel using tsa policies andprocedures , with little or no flexibility allowing for alternative scheduling or staffing models .

thecommittee noted that using this methodology will not give congress an adequate basis for comparingthe cost and benefits of passenger screening by private security firms at these five airports to tsascreening at other commercial passenger airports .

the committee report directed the tsa to reviewthis policy , and recommended that they provide the contract screener pilot locations as muchoperational flexibility as possible so that a more comprehensive assessment of the advantages anddisadvantages of private screening approaches can be made .

table 2 .

pilot program airports and comparison tsa screeninglocations the tsa , in response , reiterated its policy of flexibility for new , innovative solutions to the existing private screening companies .

 ( 50 ) examples of innovative solutions may include implementingnew scheduling software to better match staffing to passenger demand , or new training programs oncustomer service for screeners .

however , the tsa maintains that the core security functions , suchas training and procedures for carrying out searches of passengers and property , must be standardizedacross the entire system , and these are not subject to modification at individual airports .

tsa alsoreiterated its support for staffing initiatives such as split - shifts and reliance on part - time screenerswhen appropriate to better match staffing levels at security checkpoints to passenger demand .

oneexample of a procedure implemented at san francisco international airport ( sfo ) is the use ofskycaps with background checks to move checked baggage through the screening process , thuseliminating the need for screeners to handle the baggage thereby improving efficiency andthroughput .

despite these efforts , the gao concluded that the tsa provided private screeningcontractors in the pilot program with only limited operational flexibility .

 ( 51 ) in those limited instanceswhere private screening firms were given some latitude in operational aspects , practices adopted byprivate screening companies sometimes enabled them to achieve additional efficiency .

besides theaforementioned use of baggage handlers to improve the efficiency of baggage screening , the gaoalso noted the use of assessment centers to pre - screen screener applicants , and the selection ofscreening supervisors from within the screener workforce rather than from tsa hiring assessmentsas additional examples of flexible operational practices .

nonetheless , gao concluded that the"tsa provided the screening contractors with little opportunity to demonstrate innovations , achieveefficiencies , and implement initiatives that go beyond the minimum requirement of [atsa]. .

 ( 52 ) in general , the tsa - sponsored comparative evaluation of the pp5 program found few notabledifferences between private screening and federal screening .

the evaluation compared privatescreening operations to federal screening operations in terms of effectiveness , cost , and customer andstakeholder impact .

in terms of screening effectiveness , private screening was found to beessentially indistinguishable from federal screening .

private screening costs were found to be onpar with what federal screening would have been expected to cost had it been implemented insteadat the five pilot program airports .

there was a slight trend indicating the private screening may bemore cost advantageous at larger airports like sfo and mci and less cost effective at smallerairports like tup .

however , these results were within the margin of error and therefore wereinconclusive .

also , it is important to reiterate that only one airport per risk category was examinedin the pilot program , so airport unique characteristics affecting cost limit the ability to generalizethese findings .

for example , the higher costs of private screening at tup were largely attributableto the contractor operating with a screening staff that was larger than predicted for a federal operationusing information about staffing patterns at other category iv airports .

finally , in terms of customersatisfaction and stakeholder impact , there were mixed results for the larger airports ( sfo and mci ) .

both of these airports had significantly shorter wait times than comparable airports with federalscreening .

however , while overall customer satisfaction at sfo was better than at comparableairports with federal screeners , customer satisfaction at mci was lower than at comparable airportswith federal screeners .

satisfaction data were not available for the category ii , iii , and iv airports .

there were no significant differences in the number of complaints between pilot program airportsand the comparison airports with federal screeners .

therefore , in general , the pilot programevaluation found little to distinguish private screening contacts from federal screening operations .

the failure of the evaluation to identify significant differences between the contract screeningoperations and federal screening operations significantly limits the usefulness of the pilot programto draw conclusions regarding the effectiveness , cost , and impact of private screening operations .

the failure to identify differences could be attributable to a lack of sensitivity to detect differencesin the methods used to evaluate the program .

furthermore , in light of the aforementioned limitationsof the pilot program , namely its limited scope and the significant constraints imposed upon pilotprogram contractors that limited program flexibility , few , if any , conclusions can be drawn fromthese results .

furthermore , the ambiguous nature of these findings may result in inappropriateconclusions by either advocates for privatizing screening operations or advocates for maintaininga federal screening workforce .

on the one hand , advocates for privatizing screening operations may highlight the lack ofdemonstrated differences in performance between federal and private screeners as an indicator thatsecurity effectiveness will be maintained under private screening contracts .

privatization advocatesmay also point to selected customer and stakeholder impact metrics , such as decreased passengerwait times , to emphasize potential efficiency improvements at private screening airports .

on theother hand , advocates for retaining a federal screening workforce may emphasize the lack ofdifferentiation between federal and private screening to argue that privatization is not necessary .

that is , they may argue that given no foreseeable benefits in terms of performance , efficiency , orcost , privatizing screening operations is unnecessary and could cause unwanted interruptions andsecurity lapses during the transition phase .

neither position is supported by the results of the pilotstudy because the pilot study was largely inconclusive .

even in instances were conclusions couldbe drawn from the pilot study , these results are confounded by the limited scope and flexibility ofthe pilot program .

the failure of the pilot program to develop adequate metrics and methodologiesfor comparing federal and private screening poses a significant challenge to the tsa to develop theframework for assessing screening operations under the opt - out program to meet the requirementsof atsa in a manner that will be acceptable to congress and legally defensible .

the opt - out provision of atsa requires the tsa to determine and certify that the level ofscreening services and protection provided by private screening entities meets or exceeds thatprovided by federal screeners .

this mandate presents a significant challenge to tsa to develop andimplement standard metrics and methods of comparison that will be robust enough to detectperformance differences and serve as a legally defensible means of evaluating the performance ofprivate screening companies .

since no single metric or evaluation method is likely to provide acomplete analysis of screening service and performance , a protocol using multiple metrics andmethods of analysis will likely be needed .

tsa is working toward developing such a protocol byintegrating screening effectiveness metrics into their performance management information system ( pmis ) and developing a screening performance index to assess screening performance at theindividual screener , airport , and system - wide levels of analysis .

however , in november 2003 , thegao cautioned that , while the tsa has a number of methods to measure the effectiveness of itspassenger screening program at its disposal , none are being fully utilized .

 ( 53 ) some of the principlescreening metrics available for assessing screener performance and analysis techniques are discussedbelow .

one of the main objectives of the security screening opt - out provision is to provide forincreased flexibility in work scheduling practices and deployment of security screening personneland resources that can more easily adapt to the dynamic nature of airport operations thereby resultingin reduced operating costs .

the opt - out provision is constrained by statutory requirements thatprivate screeners be compensated with pay and benefits identical to that received by federalscreeners .

consequently , private entities will not be able to reduce unit labor costs compared tofederal screening operations .

therefore , any direct savings that will be realized through the opt outprogram will be derived from modifications to work scheduling practices , reduction of overheadcosts , and so on .

two areas where private screening entities may look to reduce costs are through streamliningthe process of hiring screeners and implementing flexible scheduling practices .

flexible schedulingpractices of private screening entities are likely to rely heavily on the use of part - time screeners .

however , the gao reported that tsa has experienced difficulties in hiring new staff , particularlypart - time staff .

these difficulties in recruiting and retaining part - time screeners appears to be mostacute in areas with tight labor markets , and high costs of living and commuting , which is generallycharacteristic of areas where the larger category x and category i airports are located .

the gaoidentified airport location , lack of accessible and affordable parking or public transportation , andhigh living costs as the main factors contributing to tsa's inability to hire new staff , particularly parttime staff , at large category x airports .

since the largest direct cost savings that can be achieved byimplementing private screening under the opt - out program is likely to be though efficient use ofpart - time staff and increased flexibility in staff scheduling , tsa's current difficulties in meetingstaffing needs suggest that doing so may be a significant challenge , especially at larger airports .

however , even if private screening operations under the opt - out provision cannot realizemeaningful savings in direct costs for aviation security , opt - out proposals may result in significantindirect savings , particularly to airports .

airports are likely to see merit in the opt - out program ifit can result in identifiable cost savings for the airport .

one factor that airports may consider , forexample , is whether private screening operations can be conducted with reduced space demands .

reduced demands for physical space in the airport may translate to more space available for retailshops , restaurants , and other revenue - generating activities .

also , airports are likely to considerwhether private screening operations can improve passenger and baggage throughput which couldtranslate to adequately keeping pace with local growth in demand for air travel and improvingpassenger satisfaction with airport operations .

increasing the efficiency of screening operations could increase public confidence andconsumer satisfaction with airport security thereby increasing the likelihood that they will chooseto take a flight from a particular airport or choose air travel over other transportation alternatives .

since , these indirect cost savings are most likely to benefit airports directly , they are likely to weighheavily in an airport's evaluation and ultimate decision whether to pursue a private screeningprogram .

in 2003 , $30 million dollars were appropriated for third party screening contracts .

theseappropriations were made available in addition to an estimated $100 million dollars received incontract recoveries received by tsa that was made available for private screening contracts infy2003 .

based on this data , private screening contracts accounted for just under 5% of total tsafunding available for system - wide passenger and baggage screening .

in fy2004 , screening pilotsat the five airports were appropriated a total of $119 million , representing about 3.81% of totalappropriations for passenger and baggage screening .

these appropriations appear to be roughlyin - line with the proportion of system - wide screening operations they account for .

originating passenger statistics actually show that appropriations for the pilot programairports may be slightly higher than expected , given the proportion of originating passengers at thesefive airports compared to the system - wide total .

however , several airport specific factors mayaccount for this .

the number of originating passenger is the primary factor for determining screenerworkforce at an airport .

based on tsa's modeling numbers for allocating federal screeners , thenumber of originating passengers at an airport has a correlation ( 63 ) of about 0.97 with thenumber of screeners allocated to that airport , indicating that this factor alone accounts for almost allof the difference between airports in terms of screener workforce and , in turn , operating costs forscreening functions .

 ( 64 ) nonetheless , unique factors among the pilot program airports , such as airport layout , the number ofscreening lanes , and other unique logistic factors , may result in higher comparative costs that shouldbe considered when drawing conclusions about the relative cost of private screening compared tofederal screening .

it is also important to note that some costs associated with administering andevaluating the pilot program may be included in the costs for private screening activities .

also , theabove discussion is based only on appropriated funding levels and does not reflect comparisons ofactual outlays for private screening compared to federal screening .

as part of the tsa contract to evaluate the private screening pilot program , bearing pointand abt associates provided a formal assessment of comparative costs by comparing actual costspaid for contract screening operations to estimated costs assuming that the pilot program airports hadinstead been staffed by federal screeners .

separate cost comparisons were developed for each of thefive pilot program airports and are presented in table 4 .

in general , the cost assessment found that across the five pilot program airports , privatescreening costs were about 3.5% less than the estimated cost of federal screening .

however , thedifference in cost at each of the airports was within the margin of error , so no specific conclusionscan be made regarding the relative costs of private screening compared to federal screening .

sincethere was a statutory mandate requiring the private screening companies in the pilot program toprovide wages and other compensation and benefits at a level that was at least equivalent to that offederal screeners , it would have been unlikely to observe any significant cost savings for privatescreening , especially since significant constraints were imposed on the program that limitedflexibility in: determining screener staffing levels ; utilizing part - time personnel ; and implementingother cost - saving innovations .

 ( 65 ) table 4 .

cost comparison at the pilot programairports ( $ millions ) source: bearing point and abt associates , inc .

private screening operations .

note: costs cover the 12-month period from december 2002 through november 2003 .

in addition to performing the evaluation of screening operations at the five pilot programairports , the tsa has indicated that they are examining the omb's guidelines for federal - commercialcost comparisons , often referred to as the a - 76 process , to identify elements of that process that mayeffectively be incorporated into the evaluation process being developed for the security screeningopt - out program .

however , the tsa maintains that the security screening opt - out program is notappropriately suited for extensive public - private cost comparison studies under the a - 76 process .

this is largely due to the constraints of the opt - out program that require private screening entitiesto provide compensation and other employment benefits to screening personnel at a level equal toor greater than that provided to federal screeners .

the tsa has also indicated that they are examining other federal contract programs suchas the faa's contract tower program to assess best contracting practices that can be incorporated intothe security screening opt - out program .

the faa's contract tower program may provide someinteresting insights for private airport screening operations , however the extent to which desirableattributes of that program can be incorporated into the security screening opt out program is likelyto be significantly constrained .

the faa contract tower program has been able to achievesignificant cost savings as compared to similar federally operated non - radar air traffic control towers .

specifically , the dot office of the inspector general found that contract towers were , on average,79% cheaper to operate compared to federal towers .

 ( 66 ) however , these cost savings have mostly been realized throughlower per unit labor costs and lower staffing levels at contract towers .

by comparison , since thesecurity screening opt - out provision requires that compensation and benefits provided to privatescreeners be at least on par with that provided to federal screeners , any cost savings will likely haveto be realized through other means such as increased flexibility in work scheduling and extensiveuse of part - time screeners .

unlike the faa contract tower program where airports with low levels of activity and noradar operations have been specifically targeted for participation in the program , the securityscreening opt - out program is open to all airports regardless of passenger volume and security riskfactors .

also , unlike the contract tower program where determinations regarding which airportsshould have contract towers have been made by the federal government , under the security screeningopt - out program , it will be left up to individual airport operators and not the tsa to make the initialdecision to pursue private screening .

as requested by the omb , the tsa will not make any specificrecommendations regarding what airports or airport characteristics may be best suited for inclusionin the opt - out program .

rather , the tsa will only provide information , such as results of the pilotprogram evaluation , to airport operators for use in their evaluation of whether or not to apply forprivate screening operations under the opt - out provision .

