the pricing of prescription drugs has become a significant concern for many u.s. consumers .

as spending on health care has risen in recent years , so too has consumer interest in purchasing more affordable medications .

overseas markets provide one possible source of less costly prescription drugs .

some comparative studies of prescription drug prices in the united states and foreign nations have concluded that prices for specific drugs may be significantly lower abroad .

these price disparities in some instances have encouraged individuals and firms , as well as state and local governments , to attempt to import comparable medications from abroad in order to realize cost savings .

the practice of importing patented prescription drugs outside the distribution channels established by the brand - name drug company is commonly termed "parallel importation. .

parallel imports are authentic products that are legitimately distributed abroad and then sold to consumers in the united states , without the permission of the authorized u.s. dealer .

these goods are legitimate in that they are produced by the brand - name drug company or its authorized representative .

in particular , parallel imports are not generic versions of a brand - name drug distributed by a different manufacturer , nor are they pirated copies that form part of the "black market. .

because parallel imports disrupt the marketing arrangements established by the brand - name drug company , however , they are sometimes called "grey market goods. .

current debate surrounding the parallel importation of prescription pharmaceuticals has largely addressed the safety and efficacy of the imported medications .

this practice may also raise significant intellectual property concerns , however .

many prescription drugs are subject to patent rights in the united states .

indeed , because patented drugs usually have no exact generic equivalent available in the marketplace , economic incentives for parallel importation may be strongest for patented medications .

among the rights granted by an issued patent is the ability to exclude others from importing the patented product into the united states .

as a result , even if a foreign drug is judged safe and effective for domestic use , brand - name firms may nonetheless be able to block the unauthorized importation of prescription drugs through use of their patent rights .

legislation introduced before the 110 th congress , s. 1082 , would account for the patent implications of the parallel importation of pharmaceuticals .

in particular , this bill would amend the patent act of 1952 to provide that it is not an act of patent infringement to import into the united states a drug that was first sold abroad by or under authority of the owner or licensee of such patent .

the effect of this bill would be to introduce a doctrine known as "international exhaustion" into the u.s. patent law .

the parallel trade of patented pharmaceuticals involves a fundamental trade - off within the intellectual property law: encouraging the labors that led to technological innovation , on one hand , and promoting access to the fruits of those labors , on the other .

the patent system is built upon the premise that patents provide individuals with an incentive to innovate by awarding inventors exclusive rights in their inventions for a limited period of time .

some observers believe that a diminishment of patent rights will decrease incentives to develop new pharmaceuticals in the future .

yet there is growing concern that drug prices are too high in the united states as compared to other nations .

some commentators believe that the patent system should not be used to regulate the movement of legitimate , lawfully purchased products through the global marketplace .

this report explores the intellectual property laws and policies concerning the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals into the united states .

it begins with a review of patent policy and procedures .

the report then discusses the current legal framework for analyzing the permissibility of the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals , including both the domestic and international exhaustion doctrines .

special consideration is given to state and local governments that have either themselves imported , or have encouraged others to import , patented medications from foreign jurisdictions ; the potential use of label licenses on patented drugs ; and the implications of international trade rules established by world trade organization .

this report closes with a review of legislative issues and alternatives as they relate to intellectual property issues and parallel importation .

in some circumstances , widely divergent drug prices between the united states and other nations have encouraged parallel importation .

price disparities between the united states and other nations create incentives for individuals to purchase medications from abroad , and import them into the united states , in order to lower health care costs or undercut the u.s. distributor .

in this context , the term "parallel imports" refers to patented products that are legitimately distributed abroad , and then sold to consumers in the united states without the permission of the authorized u.s. dealer .

although these "grey market goods" are authentic products that were sold under the authorization of the brand - name drug company , they entered the u.s. market outside the usual distribution channels for that drug .

the legal situation regarding the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals remains somewhat clouded .

in such circumstances , the u.s. patent proprietor may be able to use its patent rights to block the importation of grey market pharmaceuticals .

because this scenario involves the distribution of a patented product that initially sold under the authorization of the patent proprietor , it raises issues concerning the exhaustion doctrine .

one position , favorable to the patent proprietor , is that the u.s. patent is fully enforceable against imports despite the exhaustion doctrine .

under this line of reasoning , the fact that the sale by the patent proprietor or its representative took place outside the united states is significant .

this line of reasoning relies on the fact that u.s. patents exist independently of foreign patents , and that u.s. patents are effective only within the united states .

as a result , this reasoning continues , a foreign sale cannot result in exhaustion of a u.s. patent .

this legal doctrine — which restricts the exhaustion doctrine to domestic sales only — allows the u.s. patent to be used to block unauthorized imports of a patented pharmaceutical .

a competing view is that the exhaustion doctrine is not limited to domestic sales by the patentee or its representative , but to all sales regardless of their location .

this position is commonly referred to as "international exhaustion. .

under this view , because the importer lawfully purchased authentic goods from the patent holder or its representative , the u.s. patent right is subject to "international exhaustion" due to the sale , despite the fact that the sale technically took place under a foreign patent .

in its 2001 decision in jazz photo corp. v. united states international trade commission , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( "federal circuit" ) rejected the "international exhaustion" position and instead limited the exhaustion doctrine to sales that occur within the united states .

there the federal circuit issued a succinct statement explaining: united states patent rights are not exhausted by patent rights of foreign provenance .

to invoke the protection of the first sale doctrine , the authorized first sale must have occurred under the united states patent .

see boesch v. graff , 133 u.s. 697 , 10 s.ct .

378 , 33 l.ed .

787 ( 1890 ) .

some commentators have criticized the federal circuit's reasoning in the jazz photo case , and in particular the court's reliance on the boesch v. graff decision .

in boesch v. graff , the plaintiff owned a u.s. patent for a lamp burner .

an individual named hecht , who was not a party to the litigation , enjoyed a "prior user right" pertaining to the lamp burners under german law .

the german patent statute allowed individuals who had used an invention prior to the date of another's patent application the privilege of continuing to exploit the invention commercially , without regard to the patent .

hecht had met the conditions for this prior user right to apply , and as a result could sell the burners in germany .

hecht eventually sold some burners to the defendants , who in turn imported them into the united states and commenced sales .

the plaintiff brought suit to enjoin the sale of the imported burners in the united states .

in opposing the injunction , the defendants argued that they had lawfully purchased the burners and that the u.s. patent should be subject to the exhaustion doctrine .

the supreme court rejected the defendant's arguments , holding: the right which hecht had to make and sell the burners in germany was allowed him under the laws of that country , and purchasers from him could not be thereby authorized to sell the articles in the united states in defiance of rights of patentees under a united states patent .

.. .

the sale of articles in the united states under a united states patent cannot be controlled by foreign laws .

the facts and holding of boesch have suggested to some commentators that its precedential reach is quite limited .

in boesch , it was a prior user , rather than the patentee or its licensee , which made the foreign sale .

the patentee neither consented to the sale of the invention nor received compensation for that sale .

according to some observers , this is a much different state of affairs than the typical parallel importation case , where either the patentee or an authorized overseas distributor makes a sale as part of an arm's - length commercial transaction .

given this precedential foundation , as well as the limited consideration of the issue in jazz photo , some legal commentators have questioned whether this apparent absolute ban on parallel importation will survive further judicial scrutiny .

the federal circuit has maintained this holding in subsequent case law , however , so the federal circuit's statement in the jazz photo case remains the controlling patent law precedent .

in particular , the federal district courts are bound by the jazz photo decision unless the federal circuit or supreme court alters the rule .

to summarize current law , the federal circuit has taken the position that patent exhaustion applies only to sales that occurred in the united states .

this rule squarely rejects the principle of "international exhaustion. .

as a result , brand - name drug companies may potentially block imports of patented medications into the united states even if the imported good is the patent owner's own product , legitimately sold to a customer in a foreign jurisdiction .

in addition to the issue of patent infringement , the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals potentially raises a number of other complex issues .

this report next considers three of these issues: the status of state and local governments that have either themselves imported , or have encouraged others to import , patented medications from foreign jurisdictions ; the potential use of label licenses on patented drugs ; and the implications of international trade rules established by world trade organization ( wto ) .

should congressional interest continue in this area , a variety of options are available .

if the possibility of an infringement action against unauthorized importers of patented pharmaceuticals is deemed sound , then no action need be taken .

alternatively , congress could confirm the federal circuit's decision in jazz photo , which rejects the doctrine of international exhaustion and confines the exhaustion principle to sales that occurred within the united states .

if legislative activity is deemed appropriate , however , another possibility is the introduction of some form of international exhaustion doctrine into u.s. patent law .

the trips agreement does not seem to require that a country adopt the international exhaustion doctrine as an all - or - nothing proposition , applying either to all patented products or to none .

as a result , if congress chose to limit application of the international exhaustion doctrine to patented pharmaceuticals , or some other specific type of invention , then no ramifications appear to arise with respect to the trips agreement obligations of the united states .

it should be noted , however , that there appears to be no precedent , either domestically or abroad , for establishing an international exhaustion doctrine that is specific to pharmaceuticals .

at least two statutory mechanisms exist for implementing the international exhaustion doctrine into u.s. patent law .

one possible approach would be to declare that importation into the united states of goods sold abroad by a patent proprietor or its representative is not a patent infringement .

legislation introduced before the 110 th congress , s. 1082 , takes this approach with respect to patented pharmaceuticals , specifying that: it shall not be an act of infringement to use , offer to sell , or sell within the united states or to import into the united states any patented invention under section 804 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act that was first sold abroad by or under authority of the owner or licensee of such patent .

in addition to codifying the international exhaustion doctrine with respect to pharmaceuticals , the amendment proposed in s. 1082 may conversely led to the implication that the international exhaustion doctrine does not apply to patented inventions other than pharmaceuticals .

this provision could potentially fortify the ruling in the jazz photo case for inventions outside of the pharmaceutical field .

another statutory mechanism for promoting the importation of patented drugs is to immunize specific individuals from infringement liability .

the patent act takes this approach in the area of patented medical methods , exempting licensed medical practitioners and certain health care entities from patent infringement in certain circumstances .

in the case of drug importation , potential patent infringers include importers , distributors , wholesalers , pharmacies , and individual consumers .

should congress wish to promote parallel trade in patented pharmaceuticals , an explicit statutory infringement exemption could encourage individuals to engage in drug importation .

in considering these or other legal changes to the patent laws , the possibility of label licenses should be kept in mind .

even if congress exempted drug importation practices or practitioners from patent infringement liability , firms may still be able to stipulate through the contract law that a drug sold in a foreign jurisdiction is for use exclusively within that jurisdiction .

if a purchaser instead imported that medication into the united states , then the seller may have a cause of action for breach of contract .

as a result , any legal changes may need to account for the ability of firms to use contractual provisions as something of a substitute for patent protection in the area of prescription drug importation .

in addition , the issue of drug importation may provide an impetus for clarification of the patent infringement liability of state governments .

some states , as well as political subdivisions of the states , have either seriously considered or commenced the practice of drug importation .

to the extent that these authorities continue this trend , their potential eleventh amendment immunity to a patent infringement case in federal court may present another significant issue concerning patents and drug importation .

controlling the costs of prescription drug spending , on one hand , and encouraging the development of new drugs , on the other , are both significant goals .

these aspirations may potentially conflict , however .

although introducing international exhaustion into u.s. patent law may initially lower the price of patented drugs , it might also decrease the incentive of firms to engage in the research and development of new pharmaceuticals , as well as to shepherd new drugs through time - consuming and costly marketing approval procedures .

consideration of patent law reforms would likely be put into the larger context of drug costs , which may be influenced by the pricing policies of foreign nations , profits earned by wholesalers and other intermediaries , the physical costs of shipment into the united states , and other diverse factors .

striking a balance between increasing access to medications and ensuring the continued development of new drugs by our nation's pharmaceutical firms is a central concern of the current drug importation debate .

