members of congress and the public are increasingly concerned about the ability of the food and drug administration ( fda ) to ensure that the drugs sold in the united states are safe and effective .

legislators , industry , the public , and fda scientists have raised questions about fda's collection and release of safety data , and whether the agency has the authority and resources to ensure adequate research over the marketing life of the pharmaceutical products it regulates .

in 2004 , the regulatory , medical , and industry debate became very public with reports of cardiovascular hazards posed by the pain medicine vioxx ( one of several cox - 2 nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs then on the market ) , and of children facing increased risk of suicidal thoughts and actions when taking certain antidepressants ( such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors paxil and zoloft ) .

not only was congress asking whether the manufacturers knew of these risks while continuing to market the drug , but also whether fda should have known of the risks and done more to protect the public .

at the height of public and congressional attention , fda asked the institute of medicine ( iom ) to "conduct an independent assessment of the current system for evaluating and ensuring drug safety postmarketing and make recommendations to improve risk assessment , surveillance , and the safe use of drugs. .

iom released its report in september 2006 .

fda issued its response in january 2007 and noted relevant activities the agency has begun and others it has planned .

among the planned activities are those in its proposal for a reauthorization of the prescription drug user fee program ( pdufa iv ) .

in the meantime , several members of congress have introduced bills to address drug safety and fda's role in protecting the public's health .

this report provides a side - by - side comparison of: institute of medicine: recommendations in its september 2006 report , the future of drug safety: promoting and protecting the health of the public ; food and drug administration: announced actions and plans to address problems identified in the iom report ; s. 468 / h.r .

788 ( the food and drug administration safety act of 2007 ) , introduced on january 31 , 2007 , by senators grassley , dodd , mikulski , and bingaman , and representatives tierney and ramstad ; s. 484 ( the enhancing drug safety and innovation act of 2007 ) , introduced on february 1 , 2007 , by senators enzi and kennedy ; and h.r .

1165 ( the swift approval , full evaluation ( safe ) drug act ) , introduced on february 16 , 2007 , by representative markey .

the bills and the iom report address many of the same issues , often with similar approaches though at times with major differences .

the iom report addressed only drugs , not biological products ( eg , vaccines ) , in keeping with the charge fda gave it .

fda's response to the iom recommendations , therefore , relates to drugs , but also states that the approach to drug safety is relevant to all medical products .

all the bills would amend the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( regarding the regulation of drugs ) ; s. 484 would also amend the public health service act ( regarding the regulation of biologics ) .

highlighted below are a few of the more significant items regarding drug safety .

s. 468 / h.r .

788 would remove the post - approval drug safety activities from fda's center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) and create a new center for postmarket evaluation and research for drugs and biologics ( the center ) .

the iom report does not suggest that approach to strengthen fda's postmarket activities , nor do the other pending bills .

the bills and the iom recommendations aim to strengthen fda's ability to make sure drug manufacturers ( application sponsors ) appropriately design and conduct postmarket studies and disclose the results to the public .

s. 468 / h.r .

788 lays out requirements that the new center for postmarket evaluation and research for drugs and biologics would administer ; s. 484 would achieve this with a process it calls a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy ( rems ) ; and h.r .

1165 would allow the secretary to require certain studies .

the iom recommended and all the bills would allow the secretary to penalize ( through civil fines , injunctions , or withdrawal of marketing approval or licensure ) sponsors who do not conduct required studies or complete them on time , or who fail to report study results .

the iom report and the bills address the need for fda authority to require pre - and postmarket studies .

s. 468 alone would give fda the authority to require that those studies compare a drug's safety and effectiveness with that of other drugs .

all three bills would require a variety of drug safety activities .

they differ in how to fund them .

s. 468 / h.r .

788 would authorize appropriations to carry out the bill's provisions ; s. 484 would rely on user fees , expanding fda's existing authority to use such fees ; and h.r .

1165 does not address funding .

the iom committee not only recommended that congress provide "substantially increased resources" to fda , but noted that all its other recommendations could not be implemented without those resources .

table 1 addresses the range of fda drug safety activities that the iom recommended , along with fda's response , and activities that the bills would authorize or require .

the table structure follows the 25 iom recommendations within the five categories of organizational culture , science and expertise , regulation , communication , and resources .

