au.s .

free trade agreement ( fta ) with oman was concluded on october 13 , 2005 , after seven months of negotiation , and was signed by u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) bob portman and omani minister of commerce and industry maqbool bin ali sultan on january 19 , 2006 .

the u.s. - oman ( fta ) is the fifth u.s. bilateral free trade agreement with a country in the proposed middle east free trade area ( mefta ) .

mefta would consist of 16 entities in the middle east and four in north africa .

the entire proposed mefta is included in the map in figure 1 , with oman , heavily shaded , in the lower right hand corner .

completion of a mefta by 2013 was proposed by president george w. bush in 2003 , as part of a plan to fight terrorism by supporting middle east economic growth and democracy through trade .

to date , besides oman , the administration has negotiated and congress has implemented free trade agreements with four other mefta political entities: israel and jordan ( before mefta was announced ) , morocco , and bahrain .

a sixth fta is being negotiated with the united arab emirates ( uae ) .

congressional consideration of the u.s. - oman fta is governed by the timeline set forth in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

under this law , which lays out the president's trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , the president must give congress a 90-day prenotification of his intent to enter into the trade agreement .

after that , the president must submit to congress — under no particular time constraints , but on a day when both houses of congress are in session — both the agreement itself and the implementing legislation .

any house or senate committees to which the legislation is referred will have 45 days to report ( or not report ) the bill ; and each house has 15 days after the bill is reported ( or the 45 days expire ) to consider the legislation .

if the house passes its bill to the senate , the senate has an additional 15 days to consider the legislation .

floor debate in either house is limited to 20 hours , divided equally between supporters and opponents .

for final passage , both houses must vote the legislation up or down by a simple majority , and neither the implementing legislation nor the agreement itself may be amended .

figure 1 .

oman's geographic location in the proposed meftasource: map resources .

adapted by crs .

u.s. interest in oman stems from a number of factors .

oman is a small exporter of oil and natural gas that is strategically located at the entrance to the persian gulf , 35 miles directly opposite iran .

it is not a member of the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) .

oman is a moderate islamic country which has sought to maintain good relations with all middle east countries .

it also has a 170 year history of political and economic cooperation with the united states , and has supported the u.s. war on terrorism .

oman is an important gateway to the persian gulf region .

oman has many reasons for wanting to negotiate an fta with the united states .

it is a country whose proven oil reserves could be exhausted within 15 or 20 years ; yet , almost 40% of the country's gdp , two - thirds of its export earnings and three - fourth of its government revenues currently come from oil revenues .

it is therefore trying to liberalize and diversify its trade regime as it seeks to broaden economic opportunities for a fast - growing workforce .

as a result , it is looking to expand its economy beyond oil and gas exports .

it sees the united states as an important ally in the venture to prepare itself for a time when its economic and social challenges intersect .

oman is a small u.s. trade partner , ranking 88 th among all u.s. trade partners .

total u.s. - oman trade at $1 billion in 2005 ( $593 million in u.s. exports and $555 million in u.s. imports ) accounts for 0.04% ( four one - hundredths of one percent ) of all u.s. trade .

as a trading partner it is also 11 th among the 20 mefta entities , which together represent 4% of u.s. trade for 2005 .

the united states , on the other hand , ranks fourth in importance among oman's trading partners , behind the united arab emirates ( uae ) , japan , and the united kingdom for 2004 ( most recent data ) .

in 2005 , the most important u.s. imports from oman ( see table 1 ) were oil and natural gas ( 75% , constituting 1% of all u.s. oil and gas imports from mefta countries ) , and apparel ( 10% ) .

the most important u.s. exports to oman were various types of transport equipment and road vehicles ( totaling 56% ) , and various types of machinery ( 24% ) .

since 2001 , u.s. exports to oman have almost doubled to $593 million , for various reasons , while u.s. imports from oman , at $555 million , have increased by about a third , primarily because of increases in the price of petroleum imports .

as a result , for 2005 , the united states had a small trade surplus with oman .

the fta with oman is similar to other recent ftas with mefta countries ( morocco and bahrain ) , with slight variations .

the u.s. - oman fta has three basic parts: new tariff schedules for each country , broad commitments to open markets and provisions to support these commitments , and protections for labor and the environment .

the usitc argues that the economic effect of the agreement on the u.s. economy is expected to be small but positive , and that the impact on u.s. workers is likely to be minimal because trade with oman is low .

u.s. apparel workers are a group that is potentially adversely affected .

apparel imports from oman declined by 57% in 2005 over 2004 , because the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on clothing and textiles ( act ) expired in january of 2005 , ending the trade quota system among wto partner countries .

the usitc reports that tariff reductions and elimination under the u.s. - oman fta should restore some of the competitiveness of oman's apparel exports among u.s. purchasers — and estimates that the resulting increase in imports would come at the expense of workers elsewhere in the world , not u.s. workers .

before the u.s. - oman fta and implementing legislation were formally submitted to congress , both house and senate committees held preliminary hearings .

the house ways and means committee held full committee hearings on april 5 , 2005 .

the international trade subcommittee of the senate finance committee held hearings on march 6 , 2006 .

then , on may 10 , the house ways and means committee held "mock" markup hearings on the administration's draft implementing legislation and approved the bill without amendment on a party - line vote of 23-11 .

on may 18 , 2006 , the senate finance committee held its "mock" markup , adopting an amendment before passing the bill unanimously .

the amendment reflected recent concerns about sweatshop conditions in jordan ( see section below ) , and implications for production under the u.s. - oman fta .

on june 28 , the senate finance committee approved the draft implementing legislation ( s. 3569 ) for the u.s. - oman fta by a vote of 10 to 3 .

on june 29 , the senate passed the bill by a vote of 60 to 34 .

on june 29 the house ways and means committee also approved the draft implementing legislation ( h.r .

5684 ) by a vote of 23 to 15 .

on july 20 the house passed the bill by a vote of 221 to 205 .

on september 19 the senate reconsidered the implementing legislation and passed the house version of the same bill by a vote of 63 to 31 .

this action was necessary because the constitution requires that all revenue - raising legislation , which encompasses trade bills , since they affect tariffs , originate in the house .

the bill was signed by the president and became p.l .

109-283 on september 26 , 2006 .

a report of alleged sweatshop conditions in plants in jordan producing for export to the united states has been issued by the national labor committee ( nlc ) , a nonprofit organization that promotes worker rights around the world .

the 161-page report has raised concerns within congress that similar conditions might exist or occur in other mefta countries , including oman if the u.s. - oman fta were to go into effect .

the nlc report entitled u.s. - jordan free trade agreement descends into human trafficking and involuntary servitude , released in may of 2006 , documents conditions in 28 separate factories in jordan in foreign trade zones , where clothing is produced by jordanian and foreign guest workers , mostly for export to the united states .

the report estimates that tens of thousands of foreign guest workers who entered employment willingly were subsequently stripped of their passports and trapped in involuntary servitude , sewing clothing in factories for companies including wal - mart , k - mart , gloria vanderbilt , target , kohl's , j.c. penney , victoria's secret , and l. l. bean .

the senate finance committee responded to the concerns on may 18 , 2006 , by unanimously adopting an amendment in its mock markup of the administration's u.s. - oman fta draft implementing legislation .

the amendment , offered by senator kent conrad , would prohibit any products made in oman "with slave labor ( including under sweatshop conditions so egregious as to be tantamount to slave labor ) or with the benefit of human trafficking," from benefitting from the agreement .

committee republicans , including chairman chuck grassley , joined democrats in voting for the conceptual amendment .

the committee then unanimously approved the u.s. - oman draft implementing bill as amended .

any amendments passed by a committee during the mock markup process are advisory in nature , rather than obligatory .

the administration responded that while they would consider the amendment , they had some concerns .

first , they argued , the amendment might fall outside the scope of the provision in the trade act of 2002 , p.l .

107-210 , sec .

2103 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( ii ) , requiring that any new statutory language be "necessary or appropriate" to implement the trade agreement .

second , the administration argued , sec .

307 of the tariff act of 1930 already prohibits the importation of merchandise produced in whole or in part through prison , forced , or indentured labor , including by those who voluntarily entered into employment but were later subject to de facto slave working conditions .

in response to the administration's argument , senator conrad pointed out that sec .

307 of the tariff act of 1930 may not be applicable to apparel produced under slave labor conditions in oman .

this , he argued , is because apparel is no longer made in great quantities in the united states ; and sec .

307 does not apply to goods produced under forced or indentured labor if those goods are not domestically produced in quantities that meet the consumption demands of the united states .

third , the administration argued that the amendment may be unnecessary because fta language requiring oman to enforce its own labor laws , which prohibit forced labor , is strong enough or enforceable enough to discourage or affect its practice .

in addition , the administration pointed out , oman has approved core labor standards prohibiting forced or compulsory labor and has made commitments to strengthening its labor standards still further .

these omani commitments came from the omani minister of labor as part of an exchange of letters between house democrats , the omani minister , and the ustr .

the omani minister made eight commitments in march and ten further commitments regarding forced labor and child labor in may .

in those commitments oman promised to issue royal decrees and ministerial decisions to strengthen the country's labor laws in response to congressional concerns by no later than october 31 , 2006 .

while some republicans argued that oman needs time to craft new laws with technical support from the ilo , some democrats argued for changes in omani laws before the u.s. - oman fta implementing legislation is considered by congress .

on july 8 , 2006 , the sultan of oman issued a royal decree ( 74 / 2006 ) amending provisions of omani labor law to provide some labor rights consistent with ilo core labor standards .

as amended by the decree , omani law would permit the right to form unions , the right to bargain collectively , and to engage in other union activities .

the law would also prohibit employers and others from imposing any compulsory or forced labor with specific penalties for noncompliance .

penalties are provided for those who would interfere with union activity , or decline to provide the necessary facilitation or information .

the royal decree delegates promulgation of regulations to the ministry of manpower ; therefore , specific details regarding its implementation and enforcement are yet to be determined .

meanwhile , a few days after the senate finance committee markup hearing , jordan's trade minister sharif zu'bi indicated that the nlc report had incorrectly identified three sweatshops that are not even in jordan , and that three others had been closed before the report was released in may .

in addition , he noted that the jordanian government had formed nine inspections teams to investigate the entire garment trade in the country , and is working with the international labor organization , u.s. labor committees , the ustr , the state department , and u.s. and jordanian apparel companies to address the challenges and improve their monitoring system .

in the spring of 2006 , the u.s. interagency "committee on foreign investment in the united states" raised no objections to the acquisition and continued operation of contracts by the dubai - owned "dubai ports world" company from a british firm that managed port facilities in several cities including new york , new jersey , baltimore , new orleans , miami , and philadelphia .

after several members of congress expressed opposition to the $9 billion merger on the grounds that the company might not be as vigilant on port security as required , the company agreed to a 45-day review of its operations at those ports .

on march 9 , the house appropriations committee voted 62-2 on a provision in the fy2006 supplemental funding bill for iraq and afghanistan war operations and other costs that would have effectively prevented dp world from operating in the united states .

the following day dp world officials announced that they would divest the newly - acquired u.s. port operations to an american owner .

oman joins four other mefta countries with ftas , and the proposed mefta is now one - quarter of the way complete .

an agreement with oman could be a pathway to create private sector jobs for oman's burgeoning population and a gateway to more openness in the middle east .

if congress had not approved the u.s. - oman fta , any one of a number of things could have happened .

on one hand , oman could have just continued trading with the united states as usual .

on the other hand , oman could have looked elsewhere to countries such as china , russia , or india for support in diversifying beyond the production of oil which could run out in roughly 15-20 years .

in addition , had the u.s. - oman fta not been approved , there might have been broader implications .

for example , oman has been letting the united states use several military facilities .

while many argued that it would have been be in oman's interest to continue to cooperate with the united states military , oman might have been tempted to put further restrictions on the u.s. use of these facilities .

oman might also have shrunk back from its cooperation on counterterrorism which is said to have included sharing / providing tips on intelligence about possible al qaeda suspects operating in the persian gulf or oman itself .

