twenty - four years ago , the broad tax revisions implemented by the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) were based on tax "neutrality" — the idea that economic efficiency and economic welfare are promoted if the distorting impact of taxes on business and other economic decisions is minimized .

to this end , the 1986 act broadened the tax base for both businesses and individuals , scaling back various narrowly - applicable tax preferences and benefits , and reduced the statutory tax rate .

in time , however , the general thrust of business - tax policy began to change , and in recent years policy has been guided more by a concern for the level of investment and capital formation , as well as the perceived impact of taxes on u.s. competitiveness .

thus , measures designed to promote tax - consistency across investments and activities have been supplanted by provisions designed to stimulate investment and assist in the ability of u.s. firms to compete with foreign companies .

cases in point are the temporary "bonus depreciation" provisions enacted in 2002 and 2003 and the broad tax deduction for domestic production included in the omnibus business - tax bill passed in 2004 .

at the same time , there has recently been renewed congressional and public interest in broad reform of the u.s. tax system .

in contrast to 1986 , however , much of the recent interest in reform has centered on a shift in the tax base to consumption rather than a comprehensive measure of income — a change in focus that is based , in part , on the same concerns for capital formation and competitiveness that underlie much of recent business - tax legislation .

twenty - four years after the 1986 act , business taxation is thus potentially at a crossroads .

will the thrust of tax policy continue to shift away from the principles of efficiency and neutrality that guided tax reform two decades in the past ? .

if fundamental tax reform is adopted in the near future , would it include a revamped system of business taxation ? .

if so , what would business taxation look like ? .

regardless of the outcome , it is useful at this point to take stock , to pause and review the current system and its effects .

the charts and discussions on the following pages are intended to assist in that exercise .

the report begins with a discussion of the principal economic effects of business taxation .

its concluding sections review the various theoretical principles on which fundamental reform of business taxation might be based .

businesses can take a variety of forms , ranging from large , publicly held corporations , to more closely held corporations , to partnerships ( large and small ) , to firms that are run by only a single self - employed owner .

with some exceptions , the rules for determining taxable income — for example , how to calculate depreciation and other deductions — are the same , regardless of the type of business .

the particular manner in which that income is taxed , however , does vary , depending on the type of business .

income earned by large , publicly held corporations ( "c" corporations , in tax parlance ) is generally subject to the corporate income tax — one of the principal structural components of the federal tax system , along with the individual income tax , the estate and gift tax , excise taxes , and social security taxes .

in conceptual terms , the present u.s. corporate income tax is sometimes described as a "classical" system that applies as though corporations were entities with an existence separate from their owners , the stockholders .

the tax applies to taxable corporate income , corporate profits ( after deducting interest ) as defined by the tax code .

it applies separately and in addition to the individual income tax's applicability to shareholder's dividends and capital gains .

as discussed in more detail below ( see the section on the economic effects of the tax ) , this means that income subject to the corporate income tax is generally taxed twice — once under the corporate income tax in the hands of corporations , and once under the individual income tax when stockholders receive dividends or realize capital gains .

the double taxation does not occur , however , in the case of corporate income generated by debt - financed investment , since the return to such investment is paid to creditors as interest and is tax - deductible .

double taxation also does not apply in the case of income paid to tax - exempt stockholders — for example , pension funds .

income earned by relatively closely held corporations — termed "s corporations" by the tax code — is not subject to the corporate income tax and so also is not taxed twice .

instead , an s corporation's income is "passed through" to the firm's stockholders and taxed to them under the individual income tax , regardless of whether the income is actually distributed .

to qualify as an s corporation , a firm can have no more than 100 shareholders and must meet certain other requirements .

as with s - corporation profits , partnership taxable income is not subject to an entity - level tax such as the corporate income tax .

instead , each partner is taxed under the individual income tax on his or her share of the partnership's profit .

individual income taxes also apply to business income earned by self - employed persons who operate sole proprietorships .

as with partnerships and s corporations , no separate tax is applied at the entity ( i.e. , business ) level .

according to estimates by the congressional budget office , 62% of tangible business assets are owned by c corporations ; the remainder ( 38% ) is owned by other business entities ( i.e. , partnerships , sole proprietorships , and s corporations ) .

as noted above , rules for determining taxable income are generally the same , regardless of the form of business organization .

the base of federal business income taxes is generally profits , net of interest payments .

profits , in turn , are gross receipts — for example , sales — minus deductible costs .

important categories of deductible costs include interest payments , wages , purchased materials and other inputs , and a depreciation allowance for the decline in value of tangible capital .

importantly , the tax code's definition of these elements frequently differs from how an economist or accountant might define them .

for example , the tax code may fully or partly exempt certain types of income from inclusion in taxable income — a specific example is the partial deduction the tax code permits for income from domestic production activities .

or , the tax code may require the recognition of income at a different point in time than when economic theory indicates it is actually earned or permit a deduction to be claimed at a different time from when the cost is actually incurred .

regardless of the underlying provision , instances where taxable income differs from economic income can provide either a tax benefit or tax penalty and ( as described more fully below ) influence how the economy's capital resources are allocated .

u.s. firms increasingly participate in international markets , and so an overview of the u.s. structure would be incomplete without including its international dimension .

in the international context , the u.s. applies what is sometimes termed a "residence" based tax system , but with important exceptions .

the united states generally applies its corporate income to the worldwide income of corporations chartered in ( i.e. , "resident" in ) the united states .

at the same time , however , u.s. firms can generally indefinitely postpone ( defer ) u.s. tax on foreign - source income as long as the income is earned by foreign - chartered subsidiary corporations and reinvested abroad .

to alleviate double taxation , the united states permits its taxpayers to credit foreign taxes they pay against u.s. taxes they would otherwise owe , subject to the limitation that foreign taxes can only be credited against u.s. foreign - ( and not u.s. - ) source income .

foreign businesses in the united states are generally subject to u.s. business taxes on their u.s. - source income .

if a foreign firm operates in the united states through a u.s. - chartered subsidiary corporation , the subsidiary is generally subject to u.s. tax in its role as a resident u.s. corporation ; like other u.s. - chartered corporations , it is subject to u.s. tax on its worldwide income , regardless of the nationality of its owner ( s ) .

if , on the other hand , the foreign firm operates in the united states through a branch of the foreign - chartered parent corporation , the foreign firm is subject to u.s. tax on its income from u.s. , but not foreign , sources ; the united states taxes foreign persons and corporations on their income from the active conduct of a u.s. trade or business .

 ( the economic effects of international aspects of the federal tax system are discussed below. ) .

another structural component of the system is the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

the tax code provides both a corporate amt and an individual amt ; a business may be subject to either , depending on whether it pays the corporate income tax or is taxed under the individual income tax as a sole proprietorship or passthrough entity .

both amts essentially require a taxpayer to pay either the regular tax or the amt , whichever is higher .

the two liabilities will ordinarily differ for a business because they are computed differently .

the amt is imposed at a lower statutory rate than the regular tax , and the base of the amt is more inclusive than that of the regular tax , permitting fewer omissions and tax benefits .

the purpose of the amt is to ensure that few truly profitable corporations escape paying at least some tax .

the importance of the amt in the structure is difficult to quantify .

recent data on the share of corporate investment subject to the tax are not available .

the numbers that are available show that prior to 1999 , the amt was important: in 1998 , more than one - quarter of corporate assets were held by firms paying the amt , and within the manufacturing sector over one - half of firms were amt firms .

beginning in 1999 , however , new , more generous amt depreciation rules likely reduced the portion of investment affected by the amt .

the level of corporate tax receipts has fluctuated over time .

this review of the data focuses primarily on the corporate income tax ; there are a variety of ways to gauge its size .

first , the general importance of the tax in terms of any economic effects it has can be assessed by looking at the level of the tax compared to the size of the economy — that is , by assessing corporate tax revenue as a percent of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

figure 1 , below , presents such data for fiscal years 1934 to 2009 , thus showing the position of corporate revenues from well before world war ii to the latest year available .

clearly , the chart shows that corporate tax revenues have declined from their peak during world war ii ( 7% in fy1945 ) and from another peak that coincided with the korean war ( 6.1% in fy1952 ) .

the chart also shows that they have declined from what might be termed an intermediate level of between 2% and 4% in the 1960s and 1970s to a level between 1% and 2% in recent years , but with an "uptick" beginning in 2005 before falling dramatically in 2009 .

while corporate taxes have declined as a percentage of gdp , figure 2 , below , shows that corporate income - tax revenue likewise declined as a share of total federal revenue , and in roughly the same pattern .

corporate tax revenue's share of total federal revenue declined from a peak of 40% during world war ii ( fy1943 ) , and a somewhat lower peak of 32% during the korean war ( fy1952 ) , to levels of slightly above and below 10% after the late 1980s .

again , there was a surge beginning in 2005 before falling dramatically in 2009 .

these broad measures of corporate taxes are useful as rough indicators of how the level of corporate taxes in the economy has changed , but lack precision in showing the burden of corporate taxes and the causes of the taxes' fluctuations .

for example , a decline in the share of national income comprising corporate profits is partly responsible for the reductions shown in figures 1 and 2 .

figure 3 corrects for this with a series that holds profits constant .

it shows average effective corporate tax rates ( aetrs ) , which are the ratio of federal corporate income taxes to before - tax corporate profits .

according to the aetrs , the aggregate burden of corporate taxes steadily declined during the 1960s and 1970s , reaching a low of about 20% of corporate profits during the early 1980s before rising to a plateau of around 25% that has generally prevailed from 1986 to the present .

the anomalous year in the last two decades was 2000 , which registered a spike in the aetr to 34% .

since aetrs hold the level of corporate profits constant , a principal determinant of variations in the rates is legislated changes , and several can be linked to the fluctuations in the aetrs .

at least three factors are likely responsible for the decline in rates during the 1960s , 1970s , and early 1980s .

first , during the 1970s and 1980s , several reductions in the statutory corporate tax rate that applies to taxable income were enacted .

second , while taxable corporate profits were artificially inflated during the 1970s by a rising price level , firms were also permitted to claim investment tax credits .

third , the economic recovery tax act of 1981 provided accelerated depreciation deductions , which likely played a prominent role in the sharp drop in tax rates in the early 1980s .

following the reduction , rates increased again in the mid - 1980s .

part of the increase was likely due to timing results from the 1981 act , but the tax reform act of 1986 was also likely responsible for part of the increase .

the act reduced statutory tax rates , but also repealed the investment credit and scaled back depreciation allowances .

aetrs have their own shortcoming as a gauge of the corporate tax burden .

they provide only one - year snapshots of a firm's tax burden , while according to economic theory , taxes impose a burden on capital income by reducing the expected rate of return over the life of new investment .

for example , the tax burden on an investment consists not only of taxes paid in its first year , but also those paid in , say , the fifth year of its life .

in addition , because of discounting , the tax burden on investment depends partly on how taxes are distributed over an investment's life ; a given amount of taxes matters more to a firm the sooner it is paid .

the same is true of deductions , but in reverse ; a given deduction is more valuable the sooner it is claimed .

"marginal" effective tax rates ( metrs ) take these factors into account , measuring the impact of taxes over a representative investment's entire lifetime as well as the timing of payments and deductions .

unlike aetrs , metrs can thus accurately register the impact of provisions such as accelerated depreciation , whose value depends crucially on timing .

metrs also take into account the interaction of inflation and tax rules , statutory tax rates , and investment subsidies such as the investment tax credit .

in general , a marginal effective tax rate is the difference between the pre - tax and after - tax return on prospective investment , divided by the pre - tax return .

figure 4 , below , presents a set of metrs for the period 1953 through 2005 .

the top line in the figure shows metrs for corporate investment .

the second line is rates for non - corporate business and moves in tandem with corporate rates , but at a lower level .

 ( the third line is the metr for the remaining broad category of capital investment: owner - occupied housing. ) .

the series shows a decline in rates from the early 1950s to the mid - 1960s — the result of accelerated depreciation , introduction of an investment tax credit , and reduced statutory tax rates .

rates then rose in the late 1960s and varied during the 1970s , a consequence of repeal and reintroduction of the investment tax credit as well as inflation .

rates declined sharply in 1981 , reflecting the economic recovery tax act's accelerated depreciation provisions .

metrs then remained relatively stable until 2001 to 2003 , when reductions in shareholder - level taxes ( including reduced tax rates on capital gains and dividends ) as well as bonus depreciation caused a reduction in effective rates .

rates picked up again in 2005 , with the expiration of bonus depreciation .

the preceding charts show four different measures of corporate taxes: taxes as a share of gdp , corporate tax revenues as a percentage of federal revenue , average effective corporate tax rates , and marginal effective tax rates .

each series shows the same general pattern in the period after world war ii: a general decline in the level of corporate taxes .

but before accepting this broad pattern as the conclusion of this look at corporate tax data , note the relative position of the three lines in figure 4 , denoting metrs for corporate investment , for non - corporate business , and for owner - occupied housing .

in contrast to the general direction of each set of metrs — they have all declined , showing a decline in capital taxes in general — their relative position has remained the same .

and importantly , it is the relative tax treatment of investment that affects the allocation of investment among different uses , and differences in the treatment of different investments that distort the allocation of capital .

thus , to the conclusion that business taxes have generally declined in the post - world war ii period , there is an additional important result: corporate investment remains relatively heavily taxed compared to non - corporate business and ( especially ) owner - occupied housing .

the report's next section explores the implications of this result by discussing the economic effects of business taxes .

the base of the corporate income tax and of business taxes in general is income from capital investment .

it is thus not surprising that business taxes exert their most direct effects through their impact on the return to new investment .

by reducing the return to capital investment , business taxes — at least in principle — can affect the economy's commitment of resources to capital formation in general , although this effect may be muted .

business taxes can also affect the allocation of investment funds among different sectors , as suggested at the end of the preceding section .

and while businesses are not people , the burden of business taxes is ultimately borne by individuals ; business taxes thus have an impact on the fairness of the tax system .

the first section of this report outlined the current structure of federal business taxation — a separate tax on corporate profits imposed in addition to the individual income tax and net of interest ; and taxation of unincorporated business on a current basis under the individual income tax .

the report's section on business tax data indicated that while the level of business taxes has generally declined since world war ii , important divergences remain in the way different types of investment are taxed .

the section on economic effects indicated that these effects can impair economic efficiency , although they likely do not hinder u.s. competitiveness .

with these pictures in mind , the report now turns to the principal options for reform that have been developed for business tax policy .

while the charts presented earlier in this report show that the level of the corporate tax has generally fallen in the decades since world war ii , the basic structure has remained the same: a "classical" system under which the corporate income tax is superimposed on the individual income tax .

in 1986 , the far - reaching tax reform act implemented reforms within the context of the existing system , broadening its base and reducing rates .

in recent years , however , concern about the impact of the system on capital formation and u.s. performance in international markets has stimulated interest in a more substantial structural change , either by adopting tax integration or moving towards a consumption tax .

