one of the motivating factors for congress to create medicare part d in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) ( p.l .

108-173 ) was seniors' rising out - of - pocket drug costs .

prior to mma , 38% of medicare beneficiaries did not have drug insurance coverage .

people without sufficient drug insurance were paying drug prices that were 15% higher on average than the prices paid by insurance companies .

some medicare beneficiaries who did not have drug insurance coverage coped with these higher prices by filling fewer of their prescriptions and taking medications less frequently than their doctors recommended .

medicare part d provides voluntary insurance coverage of drugs for beneficiaries , albeit at a high price to the federal government .

the federal cost of part d benefits is estimated to be $44.7 billion in 2007 .

medicare part d was designed to take advantage of market competition .

in accordance with market competition principles , the drug plans that administer the drug benefit are private and public ( i.e. , non - government ) corporations who may rely on price negotiating , rebate negotiation , and price - volume discounts as a way to affect prices .

a provision in the mma , termed the "noninterference" provision , prevents the federal government from being a third party in drug price negotiations between the part d drug plans and pharmaceutical manufacturers .

both the incoming speaker of the house and incoming senate majority leader have reportedly expressed their support for repealing this "noninterference" provision , and regard it as a priority for consideration in the 110 th congress .

according to one poll , the overwhelming majority ( 85% ) of americans also seem to support repealing the provision and allowing the government to negotiate prices .

should the "noninterference" provision be repealed , congress may wish to provide guidance on how the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) would negotiate prices .

a debate could occur about the options and mechanisms of a new drug pricing policy for the medicare drug plan .

in order to clarify and inform the debate , this report provides an overview of the policies used in other nations .

this report first provides a brief background of the way pharmaceutical prices are currently determined for medicare .

the report then discusses the types of policies used by the canadian , australian , and european governments to determine the price of drugs: reference pricing , price ceilings , parallel trade , profit sharing , and value - based pricing .

it should be noted that this paper focuses on policies used for brand - name ( non - generic ) pharmaceuticals , as these policies are more pertinent to the current debate than those used for generic pharmaceuticals .

generics are less expensive and have more price competition than brand - name pharmaceuticals , and thus have not been the focus of debates in the u.s .

under current law , prescription drugs for medicare beneficiaries are provided through prescription drug plans ( pdps ) and medicare advantage prescription drug ( ma - pd ) plans .

unlike ma - pds , which cover the costs of the entire set of medicare benefits ( parts a , b , and d ) , the pdps only cover the costs of prescription drugs ( part d ) .

the part d plans have contracts with the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to provide prescription drug coverage to medicare beneficiaries .

individually and with a great deal of flexibility , the plans construct benefit packages ( including the formulary , deductible , co - payments , and utilization management tools ) , arrange a network of pharmacies to dispense the drugs , and negotiate rebates and drug prices with the pharmaceutical manufacturers .

the success of each individual plan's ability to negotiate lower prices has a direct impact on the amount enrollees pay .

enrollees are required to make copayments ( which is the entire price if the drug is not covered ) and pay premiums that are directly affected by the negotiated drug prices ( i.e. , the lower the prices paid by the plan , the lower the amounts the plan must charge ) .

much of beneficiaries' satisfaction with their drug plan may be tied to the amount they pay for drugs .

examining and understanding the policies of canada , australia , and european nations could help to inform the discussion of drug pricing policies for the medicare drug benefit .

these policies are used in other nations not just to price drugs , but also to determine reimbursement rates and manage utilization .

like medicare , these governments' policies affect the prices paid for pharmaceuticals .

consequently , the pharmaceutical pricing policies in these countries have a noticeable impact upon the pharmaceutical sales revenues .

similarly , any change in drug pricing policies for medicare could have a noticeable impact upon total pharmaceutical sales in the u.s. canada , australia , and european nations use reference pricing , price ceilings , parallel trade , profit sharing , or value - based pricing policies to mitigate increases in pharmaceutical expenditures due to price increases .

nations may rely on more than one of these methods , and other methods are typically used to control pharmaceutical utilization .

moreover , these countries also use policies currently used by part d drug plans , medicaid , and other u.s. health payers , such as price negotiating , rebate negotiation , and price - volume discounts .

understanding the drug pricing policies of other countries helps to inform drug pricing discussions in the u.s .

the pricing policies used by other developed countries , specifically canada , australia , and european nations , are challenging to implement .

the "noninterference" provision in the mma and food and drug administration laws prevent these policies from being implemented by the federal government for medicare at the present time .

legal constraints and market share are the two primary determinants to which payers can effectively implement the policies .

with the 110 th congress facing the issue of medicare drug pricing , clarifying the characteristics of each policy may help to elucidate possible pricing options .

