federal officials , policy analysts , and homeland security experts express concern about thecurrent state of chemical facility security .

referring to them as "the single greatest danger of apotential terrorist attack in our country today," some experts fear these facilities are at risk of apotentially catastrophic terrorist attack .

 ( 1 ) the department of homeland security ( dhs ) identifies chemicalfacilities as being one of the highest priority critical infrastructure sectors .

 ( 2 ) currently , chemical facility security efforts include a mixture of local , state , and federal laws,industry trade association requirements , voluntary actions , and federal outreach programs .

the dhshas identified this composite as being insufficient in addressing security for the entire chemicalssector .

additionally , various costs and requirements may act as disincentives to stakeholdersattempting to create uniform , effective security against terrorist attack .

many in the public and private sector call for federal legislation to address chemical facilitysecurity .

 ( 3 ) still,disagreement exists over whether federal legislation is the best approach to securing chemicalfacilities , and , if legislation is deemed necessary , what approaches best meet the security need .

sincethe population potentially affected by a chemical release generally resides near specific facilities,some experts may argue that chemical facility security concerns should be dealt with by state or localauthorities .

other experts claim the potentially catastrophic nature of a terrorist attack and thewidespread distribution of chemical facilities make chemical facility security an issue of nationalconcern .

policymakers may decide that chemical facility security is a matter of national homelandsecurity and is best addressed at the federal , rather than state level .

critical issues surrounding chemical facility security legislation include determining whichchemical facilities should be protected , which involves analyzing and prioritizing chemical facilitysecurity risks , identifying which chemical facilities pose the most risk , and establishing whatactivities could enhance facility security to an acceptable level .

because of the widespread use ofchemicals in u.s. society , determining which chemical facilities to protect is a challenge .

selectionmight be based on relative risk , but it is not clear how this risk might be determined .

mechanismsfor assessing security risk might include weighing the known or theoretical terrorist threat faced bya particular facility , the chemical hazards held at a facility , the quantities of those chemicals , and thelocation of those chemicals relative to the surrounding population .

security regulation of some chemical facilities is established under certain statutes , includingthe maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) ( p.l .

107-295 ) and the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , as amended by the bioterrorism preparedness act ( p.l .

107-188 ) .

several states haveestablished homeland security statutes and three , new jersey , maryland , and new york , have statelaws or regulations specifically addressing chemical facility security .

potential chemical facilitysecurity enhancement might be achieved through a range of policy approaches: providing grants toincrease security at high risk facilities ; mandating site vulnerability assessments ; compellingvulnerability remediation ; establishing federal security standards ; or requiring the consideration oruse of specific technologies .

proposed legislation may aim to complement existing law or tooverride it .

in the 109th congress , legislation has been introduced in both chambers addressing concernsregarding chemical facility security .

in the senate , s. 2145 , the chemical facilityanti - terrorism act of 2005 , and s. 2486 , chemical security and safety act of 2006,have been introduced .

in the house , h.r .

1562 , the chemical facility security act of2005 , h.r .

2237 , the chemical security act of 2005 , h.r .

4999 , acompanion bill to s. 2145 , and h.r .

5695 , the chemical facilityanti - terrorism act of 2005 , have been introduced .

each bill contain provisions requiringvulnerability assessment and the creation of security plans , though details vary significantly betweenthe bills .

one area of previous contention involves inclusion of consideration or use of inherentlysafer technologies .

s. 2486 and h.r .

2237 both explicitly address inherentlysafer technologies , while s. 2145 / h.r .

4999 , h.r .

5695 and h.r.1562 do not .

this report will discuss current chemical facility security efforts , considerations in definingchemical facilities , policy challenges in developing chemical facility security legislation , and selectpolicy approaches .

for information on the risks of terrorism at chemical facilities , previouslyestablished federal safety requirements , general policy issues , and an overview of legislativeinitiatives in prior congresses , see crs report rl31530 chemical facility security , by linda - joschierow .

many organizations are undertaking efforts to secure chemical facilities .

some efforts arevoluntary in nature , involving security best practices , or semi - voluntary , such as requirements formembership in trade associations .

other efforts arise from state or local chemical facility securityregulation .

finally , federal security legislation affecting some chemical facilities was enacted inprevious congresses .

federal agency outreach activities continue .

policymakers may decide to develop legislation with new authorities that would requireadditional chemical facility security .

key policy issues that may arise during the consideration ofsuch legislation include the adequate coverage of the chemical facility universe ; the federal agencyoverseeing any new requirements ; the extent of new security measures required , such as requiringincreases in physical security or reducing chemical hazards through alternative approaches ; treatmentof existing federal and state laws ; and recognition of preexisting industry security efforts .

in light of the various policy issues , four overarching legislative approaches emerge .

theapproaches are maintaining the current approach to chemical facility security ; increasing availableresources under existing authorities ; enhancing existing programs with new authorities specificallyrelated to chemical facility security ; and creating new authorities to address chemical facilitysecurity .

the epa rmp*info database provides information on industrial classification of the reported chemical processes .

crs analyzed the worst - casescenario data reported by each facility to the epa .

crs identified which reported chemical process at each facility potentially affected the greatest numberof persons in a worst - case release .

crs used the naics code reported for this chemical process as the naics code for the facility .

crs combinednaics codes to provide descriptions of infrastructure sectors .

in some cases , crs collapsed four , five , and six digit naics codes for the purposes ofclarity .

naics codes from 1997 were converted into 2002 naics codes when found .

the combination of naics codes presented here is one of manypossible approaches .

the manner by which naics codes are sorted into infrastructure sectors affects which facilities would be impacted by policydecisions about and approaches towards particular infrastructure sectors .

for a list of naics codes used to model infrastructure sectors , see table 2 .

table 2 .

naics codes used to model infrastructure sectors from epa rmp data source: crs analysis of the epa rmp*national database ( with off - site consequence analysis ( oca ) data ) , updated may 2005 .

