researching current federal legislation includes identifying action on pending or passed legislation and locating the relevant documents or text .

analysis , discussion , or media coverage of pending or passed legislation also has a role in the legislative research process .

such research may be accomplished by using governmental , congressional , or commercial services .

regulations are issued by federal departments and agencies under the authority delegated to them by federal law .

final rules are printed in the federal register ( fr ) and later codified by subject in the code of federal regulations ( cfr ) .

print and web - based media sources provide useful background information on the status of federal legislation and regulations through their reporting , political analysis , and editorial perspectives .

the inclusion of a web - based product under this heading does not imply crs endorsement of the product .

cq.com ( plus.cq.com ) http: / / www.cq.com in addition to the legislative analysis and tracking role of this fee - based subscription service , cq.com provides a daily news feature , full - text of cq weekly , budget tracker for articles on appropriations bills and continuing resolutions , and a variety of cq specialty news sources , including cq healthbeat .

rss news feeds are also provided as news occurs .

cq roll call http: / / www.rollcall.com cq roll call , a daily newspaper , has been covering capitol hill news since 1955 .

it is free to congressional staff , both online and in print .

c - span.org http: / / www.c - span.org c - span is a private , nonprofit company , created in 1979 by the cable television industry as a public service .

its mission is to provide public access to the political process .

the hill http: / / www.thehill.com the hill is a newspaper for and about congress .

it is published tuesday , wednesday , and thursday when congress is in session and wednesday only when congress is out of session .

politico http: / / www.politico.com politico.com covers political news with a focus on national politics , congress , capitol hill , the presidential elections , lobbying , and advocacy .

politico pro https: / / www.politicopro.com this premium subscription service goes beyond the standard political news coverage of its sister publication , politico .

according to its website , politico pro was launched in june 2010 to provide "access to intense politico - style coverage of washington's most important policy issues. .

it currently covers 14 issue areas: agriculture , budgets & appropriations brief , campaigns , cybersecurity , defense , education , ehealth , energy , europe brief , financial services , health care , employment and immigration , technology , trade , transportation , and tax .

introduction to legislative research this two - and - a - half - hour seminar , offered six times a year by the law library of congress and crs , is designed for those with no legal research experience .

a law library specialist will discuss the print and electronic sources used when conducting federal legislative research .

participants will be shown where and how to use the various print and electronic resources containing bills , enacted laws , and codified laws .

in addition to covering the official and unofficial print publications , the seminar will demonstrate the relative strengths and substantive content of various internet resources , such as congress.gov , gpo's govinfo.gov , and others .

this program is open to interns who have attended the crs intern orientation .

to register , go to http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 3 , and select the "register" tab .

federal legislative history research: using print and electronic resources this two - and - a - half - hour seminar is offered four times a year .

it examines methods of identifying and locating electronic and print versions of legislative history resources , including committee reports , hearings , debates , and other relevant materials .

research techniques are illustrated using a case study .

the seminar emphasizes both internet and traditional print research techniques .

it is jointly sponsored by the law library of congress and crs .

a law library specialist will discuss various electronic and print publications containing federal laws and how to research the legislative history of those laws .

participants will be shown where and how to locate electronic and print versions of congressional documents , including bills , resolutions , committee reports and prints , and floor debates that are generated in the legislative process .

sources of compiled legislative histories and methods of compiling legislative histories will be covered .

internet sources will be discussed , including congress.gov and other library of congress sites , gpo's govinfo.gov , various congressional sites , and others .

fee - based databases such as lexis or westlaw will not be covered .

this program is open to interns who have attended the crs intern orientation .

to register , go to http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 3 , and select the "register" tab .

federal statutory research: using print and electronic resources this seminar examines methods of identifying and locating print and electronic versions of statutes and conducting research in the united states code .

it describes historical sources of federal statutory law and illustrates research techniques using case studies .

the law library of congress and the congressional research service jointly sponsor this seminar , which emphasizes both internet and traditional print research techniques .

knowledge of the u nited s tates code and legislative procedure is a prerequisite for this program .

a law library specialist will discuss electronic and print chronological and topical publications containing federal statutory law , including electronic and print sources of public laws and the united states code .

the seminar will cover the organizational principles and features facilitating research , the historical development of federal statutory publications , and the significance of enactment of titles of the united states code into positive law .

internet sources will be discussed , including congress.gov and other library of congress sites , various congressional sites , gpo's govinfo.gov , cornell's legal information institute site , and others .

fee - based databases such as lexis or westlaw will not be covered .

this program is open to interns who have attended the crs intern orientation .

to register , go to http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 3 , and select the "register" tab .

introduction to congress courses crs regularly provides classroom instruction to congressional staff on legislative process and procedure .

two such courses are available to house and senate staff: congress: an introduction to resources and procedure .

this is an all - day program designed for those seeking a better understanding of the legislative process and the resources available to monitor it .

the program is not open to interns .

attendance at this program is a prerequisite for the advanced legislative process institute seri es ( see below ) .

registration information is available at http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 4 .legislative concepts .

crs also offers a monthly introductory "legislative concepts" class to house staff and interns in the house learning center .

information is available on housenet at https: / / housenet.house.gov / training under "training. .

advanced legislative process institute this institute builds on the basic procedures and resources provided in "congress: an introduction to resources and procedure. .

in - depth sessions describe processes and procedural strategy that are specific to each chamber .

additional information on this class and others can be found at http: / / www.crs.gov / under the "events" tab .

house advanced legislative process institute series ( halps ) this overview of the "other chamber" includes a description of the senate's rules and norms , and salient committee and floor procedures , focusing on those that differ from the house .

other discussion will cover the senate's orientation toward individuals and minorities ; its attitude toward and use of committees ; its norm of collective scheduling of legislation ; its use of motions to proceed , unanimous consent , and time agreements to call up , consider , and amend measures ; the role of the presiding officer ; holds ; filibusters ; and invoking cloture .

this program is not open to interns .

register at http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 4 .

senate advanced legislative process institute series ( salps ) this overview of the "other chamber" is an introduction to the organization and operation of the house with an emphasis on differences in procedure and their impact on legislation .

please note , registration is separate for each session .

register at http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 4 .

this program is not open to interns .

note: a calendar year listing of crs classes is not available .

the class listings appear on the crs events page a few weeks before the scheduled date and when registration is open .

additional information on researching legislation and regulations is provided in the following crs reports .

crs report r43056 , counting regulations: an overview of rulemaking , types of federal regulations , and pages in the federal register , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32240 , the federal rulemaking process: an overview , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30812 , federal statutes: what they are and where to find them , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-309 , house legislative procedures: published sources of information , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41865 , legislative history research: a guide to resources for congressional staff , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21363 , legislative procedure in congress: basic sources for congressional staff , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20120 , legislative support resources: offices and websites for congressional staff , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-673 , publications of congressional committees: a summary , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-308 , senate legislative procedures: published sources of information , by [author name scrubbed] .

