it is estimated that there are more than 11 million unauthorized aliens currently living in the united states , and the resident unauthorized alien population is estimated to increase by 500,000 people per year .

in addition , each year approximately 1 million aliens are apprehended while trying to illegally enter the united states .

although most of these aliens are entering the united states for economic opportunities or fleeing civil strife and political unrest , some are criminals , and some may be terrorists .

all are violating the immigration laws of the united states .

the existence of a large unauthorized population creates an illicit industry devoted to creating fraudulent identities and documents to aid unauthorized aliens in living and working in the united states .

illegal identity documents may be used by terrorists and other criminals who desire to remain hidden from law enforcement .

in addition , some argue that it would be harder for unauthorized aliens , including criminals and terrorists , to stay in the united states if finding a job were more difficult .

the center for immigration studies found that eight of the 48 al qaeda foreign born terrorists operating in the united states since 1993 worked in the united states illegally .

some have argued that the u.s. government has been unsuccessful in controlling illegal immigration due to a conflict in political will ; the desire to prevent the illegal entry of those who might seek to harm the united states and its populace ( eg , terrorists , criminals ) , and the need to provide workers for labor - intensive industries ( eg , agriculture , food processing , restaurants ) .

there is evidence of this conflict as far back as the mid - 1800s with the arrival of irish immigrants .

immigration enforcement is the regulation of those who violate provisions of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

this includes violations of the civil provisions of the ina ( eg , aliens who enter without inspection or violate the conditions of their admittance ) , as well as u.s. citizens or aliens who violate the criminal provisions of the ina ( eg , marriage fraud or alien smuggling ) .

some of the duties under immigration law have aspects of immigration enforcement but also contain adjudicative functions ( sometimes referred to as services ) and are not universally considered enforcement .

immigration inspectors are the classic example of this "dual" role , as inspectors are responsible for keeping those who seek to harm u.s. interests out while letting bona fide travelers in .

an alien who is denied entry to the united states by an inspector has not violated any provision of the ina , unless the alien has committed some type of fraud to gain entry .

indeed , there have been people ( both aliens and u.s. citizens ) who have been wrongly denied entry by an immigration inspector .

it could also be argued that a department of homeland security ( dhs ) citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) adjudicator is performing an enforcement function by denying an alien's application for a benefit to which he is not entitled .

others would argue that this is an example of a purely adjudicative function , for unless the alien has committed fraud to receive the benefit , he or she has not committed a violation under the ina .

according to dhs , immigration enforcement should be viewed as part of a comprehensive homeland security strategy that unifies and coordinates law enforcement operations across formerly separate agencies ( eg , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , the federal protective service , the u.s. coast guard , and the u.s. customs service ) .

the former commissioner of ins , james zigler , was quoted as saying , "we need to set up a regime where we don't have to spend so much of our time and effort in enforcement activities dealing with people who are not terrorists , who are not threats to our national security , who are economic refugees. .

some argue that since the terrorists responsible for the 9 / 11 attacks were aliens , immigration enforcement has recently had an anti - terrorism focus .

moreover , the center for immigration studies found that at least 22 of the 48 al qaeda foreign - born terrorists found operating in the united states since 1993 had committed significant violations of immigration laws .

thus , it can be argued that more stringent enforcement of the immigration laws may have disrupted some of the terrorists' plans .

the ina includes both criminal and civil components , providing both for criminal charges ( eg , alien smuggling , which is prosecuted in the federal courts ) and for civil violations ( eg , lack of legal status , which may lead to removal through a separate administrative system in the department of justice ) .

being illegally present in the u.s. has always been a civil , not criminal , violation of the ina , and subsequent deportation and associated administrative processes are civil proceedings .

for instance , a lawfully admitted nonimmigrant alien may become deportable if his visitor's visa expires or if his student status changes .

criminal violations of the ina , on the other hand , include felonies and misdemeanors and are prosecuted in federal district courts .

these types of violations include the bringing in and harboring of certain undocumented aliens ( ina §274 ) , the illegal entry of aliens ( ina §275 ) , and the reentry of aliens previously excluded or deported ( ina §276 ) .

dhs has a limited number of interior investigators who are charged with enforcing immigration , customs , and other federal law within the interior of the country , compared to over 600,000 state and local law enforcement officers .

in an effort to carry out the country's anti - terrorism mission and strengthen the interior enforcement of immigration law , dhs has entered into agreements ( memoranda of understanding ) with several localities that include the deputizing of local law enforcement officers to assist the federal government with enforcing certain aspects of immigration law .

the origins of these agreements date back to 1996 .

the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 amended the ina by permitting the attorney general to enter into written agreements with states and localities to allow law enforcement personnel to perform certain immigration functions relating to the investigation , apprehension , or detention of aliens so long as it is consistent with state and local law .

the law required that law enforcement personnel performing such functions have knowledge of relevant federal laws and receive adequate training to perform the functions .

proponents of these agreements argue that the initiative would assist dhs to enforce the immigration law further into the interior of the united states .

also , they assert that the initiative would make it easier to arrest more potential terrorists and foreign born criminals , thus providing an elevated level of security for the nation .

opponents contend , however , that these agreements undermine the relationship between local law enforcement agencies and the communities they serve , noting that there are existing tensions between local law enforcement agencies and many minority communities , and this tension is heightened when local law enforcement engages in immigration enforcement .

for example , potential witnesses and victims of crime may be reluctant to come forward to report crimes in fear of actions that might be taken against them by dhs .

they contend that the initiative could result in the reduction of local law enforcement resources as well as the inconsistent application of immigration law across jurisdictions .

some law enforcement officers have raised concerns about the complexities of immigration law creating liability issues .

previously in this report , workload measures were presented for the different types of immigration enforcement activities .

for example , for removals , workload was measured in the number of removals , for worksite enforcement in nifs , for inspectors , the number of inspections .

nonetheless , none of these measures are comparable with each other .

for example , comparing the number of inspections with the number of removals does not provide any insight into resource allocation , especially since the staff time devoted to each task is different .

it may take three minutes of an inspectors time to process an alien entering the country , where as it may take days or weeks for a special agent to locate and apprehend one illegal alien .

this section examines the actual hours spent on different tasks by special agents and immigration agents from 1992 through 2003 .

as previously discussed , during 2004 , ice and cbp switched their accounting system from ins' performance analysis system ( pas ) to the u.s. customs service's treasury enforcement communications system ( tecs ) , and as a result , data for 2004 onward are not comparable with previous years .

tecs contains fewer data fields than pas , which means that some of the data in pas do not exist in tecs .

in addition , the data for fy2004 are incomplete in both systems , as the different parts of ice did not switch from pas to tecs at the same time .

questions have been raised concerning the impact of dhs's organizational structure on the effective enforcement of immigration laws .

nonetheless , any attempt to determine the consequence of dhs's structure on immigration enforcement , involves disentangling ( 1 ) issues that remain from the former ins ( i.e. , are the problems encountered by ice and cbp the same as those found in the former ins ) ; ( 2 ) issues related to the time needed for a newly created department to function smoothly ; and ( 3 ) issues related to the separation of immigration enforcement functions into separate agencies — especially the distinction between cbp and ice .

although this section focuses on some of the issues facing the new department , it is important to note that there are benefits to combining the disparate agencies in the new department.. for example , ice can pursue money laundering charges related to smuggling and document fraud through the financial investigations division .

this capacity did not exist in ins , and ins would have had to seek outside assistance to pursue additional charges .

many duties are incorporated under the banner of immigration enforcement .

these include removing aliens who should not be in the united states , investigating alien smuggling and trafficking , patrolling between and at ports of entry , combating document and benefit fraud , and enforcing the prohibitions against employers hiring aliens without work authorization .

due to the breadth of immigration enforcement activities , the allocation of resources appears to be significant in determining the ability to enforce the immigration laws .

nonetheless , some contend a policy based solely on enforcement is bound to fail , and only a legalization program , providing a clean slate , can reduce the unauthorized population .

however , others assert that the united states has not tried immigration enforcement , arguing that most of the resources have been devoted to border enforcement , and that the united states has not fully engaged in other types of immigration enforcement , most notably worksite enforcement .

the majority of aliens come to the united states for economic opportunities and for family reunification .

the ability to contain illegal migration caused by those seeking family reunification may also depend on the ability of dhs to clear the backlog of immigration petitions , and process new petitions .

in addition , the per - country ceilings on certain types of family based immigration affect the ability of aliens from countries with high levels of immigration ( eg , the philippines ) to immigrate .

congressional action would be needed to change the per - country ceilings .

some maintain that only reform of the legal immigration system can decrease illegal immigration .

in addition , the amount of illegal migration may also be dependent on the economic health of the sending countries , especially of those countries in the americas .

factors in other countries effect the desire of their populations to immigrate , legally or illegally , to the united states .

for example , between 2000 and 2003 , uruguay experienced a recession increasing the propensity of its citizens to live and work illegally in the united states .

thus , some argue that only a guest worker program , creating opportunities for a large number of immigrants to come to the united states to work , could significantly reduce the unauthorized migration .

however , others argue that better worksite enforcement and enforcement document fraud would make it more difficult for unauthorized aliens to find work , resulting in a decrease in the unauthorized population .

it is possible that a combination of a guest worker program and increased worksite enforcement may be utilized to reduce the unauthorized population .

although within the united states , the enforcement of immigration law is primarily the responsibility of the department of homeland security's bureaus of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) and customs and border protection ( cbp ) , one possible option to aid in the reduction of the unauthorized alien population might be to increase the coordination and information sharing with other federal agencies , such as the social security administration and the department of labor .

another approach may be to increase the role of local law enforcement agencies in the enforcement of immigration laws .

yet many fear that these options will distract the agencies from their primary missions and could hinder the agencies ability to perform other functions if unauthorized aliens will not interact with them .

in some instances , the enforcement of certain immigration laws can be controversial .

although few would argue that aliens should be allowed to enter without being inspected by an immigration officer , and that smugglers and traffickers should not be punished , enforcement against longer - term , noncriminal , unauthorized aliens is often politically difficult due to these aliens' long standing ties to their communities .

often these aliens are integrated in their communities , and the government's attempts to remove them can result in a backlash from the community .

furthermore , there are concerns that increased enforcement against aliens working illegally will disrupt sectors of the economy that depend on foreign labor , and harm the united states economy .

the conflicting pressures to reduce the unauthorized population while safeguarding the u.s. economy and maintaining good will among the populace , as well as resource constraints and management issues in dhs , combine to make immigration enforcement policy a complex issue .

