natural resource management remains a significant issue for the federal government , and the availability of particular natural resources , such as energy resources , can be matters of broad public concern .

natural resource availability represents both an opportunity and constraint for human activities .

local , state , and federal government policies define the intertemporal distribution and use of the nation's natural capital stock of soil , minerals , forests , water , fisheries , etc .

growing demands and pressures for both resources and services from the nation's resources , plus heightened interest in how these resources are used , have increased the complexity of their management and administration .

resource management decisions have economic , social , and environmental implications , which may be local , national , or international .

who decides how natural resources should be managed and how the decisions are made remain topics of debate .

the federal role in natural resource management continues to be controversial .

some stakeholders seek to maintain or enhance the federal role in resource management .

others support more local influence or international decision - making in some cases .

often the resource issues debated in congress are focused on specific management tools and their effects ( eg , changing grazing fees , reforming mining laws , restructuring the endangered species act ) , rather than on broader goals and objectives of resource policies .

however , debate on specific management issues may encompass discussions of broad principles , such as the principles of multiple use and sustainable yield that underpin the management philosophies of some federal resource agencies and whether they remain appropriate for the current demands , constraints , and values of resources .

congress deals with natural resource issues on a number of fronts .

key laws , programs , and issues are handled by several authorizing committees in the house and senate .

many issues involve several committees , such as those involving wetlands protection and restoration .

in addition , natural resource issues often are addressed during consideration of annual appropriations bills for natural resource agencies , programs , and activities .

the 110 th congress is likely to weigh whether federal funds for natural resources issues are adequate and focused on the appropriate resource priorities .

in many cases , natural resource issues do not divide along clear party lines .

instead , they may be split along rural - urban , eastern - western , coastal - interior , or upstream - downstream interests .

this section briefly discusses 31 selected natural resource issues that the 110 th congress may consider through oversight , authorizations , or appropriations .

the 31 issues have been grouped into five categories , as follows: federal and indian lands and resources natural hazards , climate , and earth science ocean and coastal affairs species management and ecosystem protection water resource .

crs report rl33523 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : controversies for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33792 , federal lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) : issues for the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl33484 , national park management , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22056 , native american issues in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33053 , federal stafford act disaster assistance: presidential declarations , eligible activities , and funding , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl33264 , fema ' s flood hazard map modernization initiative , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33602 , global climate change: major scientific and policy issues , by john r. justus and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33459 , fishery , aquaculture , and marine mammal legislation in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33493 , outer continental shelf: debate over oil and gas leasing and revenue sharing , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21890 , the u.n. law of the sea convention and the united states: developments since october 2003 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31975 , calfed bay - delta program: overview of institutional and water use issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22276 , coastal louisiana ecosystem restoration after hurricanes katrina and rita , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33779 , the endangered species act ( esa ) in the 110 th congress: conflicting values and difficult choices , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl33483 , wetlands: an overview of issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30478 , federally supported water supply and wastewater treatment programs , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33565 , western water resource issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33504 , water resources development act ( wrda ) of 2007: corps of engineers project authorization issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

