l egislation to reauthorize trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , formerly called fast track , was introduced as the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( tpa - 2015 ) ( h.r .

1890 / s. 995 ) in the senate and the house on april 16 , 2015 .

the legislation was reported by the senate finance committee on april 22 , 2015 , and by the house ways and means committee on april 23 , 2015 .

the legislation , as reported by the senate finance committee , was joined with legislation extending trade adjustment assistance into a substitute amendment to h.r .

1314 ( an unrelated revenue measure ) , and the legislation passed on may 22 by a vote of 62-37 .

in the house of representatives , the measure was voted on under a procedure known as "division of the question," which requires separate votes on each component , but approval of both to pass .

on june 12 , tpa ( title i ) passed by a vote of 219-211 , but taa ( title ii ) was defeated 126-302 .

on june 18 , the house again voted on tpa , in an amendment identical to the senate version attached to h.r .

2146 , an unrelated house bill .

this amendment did not include taa .

this legislation passed the house by a vote of 218-206 , and , subsequently , by the senate on june 24 .

president obama signed the legislation ( p.l .

114-26 ) on july 2 , 2015 .

tpa is the process congress has made available to the president to enable legislation to approve and implement certain international trade agreements to be considered under expedited legislative procedures for limited periods , provided the president observes certain statutory obligations .

although the president has the authority under the constitution to negotiate international agreements , typically a reciprocal trade agreement requires an implementing bill and , therefore , congressional action to bring it into force .

many members of congress have advocated for renewal of tpa .

on july 30 , 2013 , president obama first publicly requested that congress reauthorize tpa .

he restated his request for tpa during his january 20 , 2015 , state of the union address .

legislation to renew tpa was introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

3830 ) ( s. 1900 ) , but it was not acted upon .

the previous grant of tpa authority expired on july 1 , 2007 .

the details of the legislation are likely to be subject to considerable debate , including the specific treatment of any related taa program reauthorization .

this report presents background and analysis on the development of tpa , a summary of the major provisions under the expired authority , and a discussion of the issues that have arisen in the debate over tpa renewal .

it also explores some of the policy options available to congress .

the 112 th congress exercised tpa authority and procedures in passing implementing bills for u.s. bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) with colombia , panama , and south korea on october 12 , 2011 , concluding action on the last three ftas signed prior to the expiration of tpa in 2007 .

four other trade negotiations in progress that could result in agreements that would likely require tpa to pass implementing legislation include ( 1 ) the multilateral doha development round of the world trade organization ( wto ) ; ( 2 ) the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) ; ( 3 ) the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) ; and ( 4 ) the trade in services agreement ( tisa ) .

for more than 40 years , congress has granted the president tpa / fast track authority , agreeing to consider trade agreement implementing legislation expeditiously and to vote on it without amendment , provided the president meets certain statutory negotiating objectives and consultation requirements , and the implementing bill contains the necessary and limited qualifying provisions .

tpa strikes a delicate balance by clarifying how congress chooses to exercise its constitutional authority over a particular aspect of trade policy , while presumably giving the president additional negotiating leverage by effectively assuring u.s. trade partners that a final agreement will be given timely and unamended consideration by congress .

earlier incarnations of tpa , although controversial , were adopted with substantial bipartisan majorities .

over time , however , trade negotiations have become more complex .

congress also has insisted on tighter oversight and consultation requirements , and the trade debate has become more partisan in nature , making congressional renewal of tpa more controversial .

the expiration of tpa raises the central questions of whether , when , and in what form tpa might be renewed .

tpa is the product of many decades of debate , cooperation , and compromise between congress and the executive branch .

at its foundation lie the respective constitutional powers granted to congress and the president , as well as the pragmatic realization that a certain cooperative flexibility is needed if the united states is to negotiate reciprocal trade agreements credibly .

the evolution of tpa to date shows , among other things , that the congressional - executive partnership on trade policymaking can be strengthened or strained as it adjusts to evolving political and economic conditions , as well as shifting priorities of the two branches .

through tpa / fast track , in its various iterations , congress has sought to achieve four major goals in the context of supporting trade negotiations: ( 1 ) to define trade policy priorities and to have those priorities reflected in trade agreement negotiating objectives ; ( 2 ) to ensure that the executive branch adheres to these objectives by requiring periodic notification and consultation with congress ; ( 3 ) to define the terms , conditions , and procedures under which the president may enter into trade agreements and under which the respective implementing bills may be approved ; and ( 4 ) to reaffirm congress's overall constitutional authority over trade by placing limitations on the trade agreements authority .

these four goals , and some important procedural precedents that fall outside the formal legal tpa process , are examined below .

tpa expired on july 1 , 2007 .

historically , it has been common practice , although not formally required , to have the president request that congress provide renewed tpa ( see appendix a ) .

some members of congress have criticized president obama for delaying such a request .

the president did ask for tpa renewal in a speech delivered on july 30 , 2013 , and he reiterated that request at his 2015 state of the union address .

the decision to initiate legislative action on tpa may also be influenced by congress's desire to revamp parts of the 2002 law , which some view as outdated and which may not reflect all key elements of the emerging debate .

some of the broader policy issues and technical changes that may be contemplated are summarized below .

as noted by two long - time observers of the congressional trade policy process , "the real power of fast track ( tpa ) is the underlying political compact between congress and the president rather than its statutory guarantees , which are technically quite fragile. .

there is an implied extension of "political compact" to relationships within congress as well .

congress repeatedly seeks to develop the needed consensus on trade policy , with varying degrees of success , but generally with an understanding that a minimal degree of bipartisan understanding is needed to pass trade legislation .

tpa has been a key element of this process .

in consideration of the current tpa authorization legislation , congress has a number of options with respect to its possible renewal .

four that span the spectrum are renew and revise tpa authority .

under this option , congress could grant the president new authority with revisions to its structure , and without restricting it to specific agreement negotiations .

the tpa - 2015 legislation follows this option .

extend a targeted tpa .

congress could extend tpa to complete a specific agreement , such as the tpp .

representative levin sought to introduce a modified grant of tpa covering only the tpp negotiations as a substitute amendment during the house ways and means committee markup of tpa - 2015 .

grant permanent tpa authority .

congress could grant the president a form of permanent fast track / tpa in a two - tier procedure .

for example , one expert suggested that ( 1 ) congress could enact into law permanent fast track procedures ; and ( 2 ) before specific negotiations could begin , both houses of congress would have to pass a resolution approving the negotiations and objectives designed for the specific set of negotiations .

no tpa renewal .

the lack of tpa could delay action on future reciprocal trade agreements , but trade policy can move ahead in its absence , including consideration of trade and investment framework agreements ( tifas ) , unilateral preference arrangements ( eg , the african growth and opportunity act — agoa ) , and trade enforcement measures , among others .

the united states has also conducted trade negotiations prior to having tpa authority in place .

in addition , some members do not support tpa because they view the expedited procedures as giving up too much congressional authority .

in the 114 th congress , legislation to renew tpa — the bipartisan congressional trade priorities act of 2015 — was signed by the president on june 29 , 2015 .

the legislation would reauthorize tpa for four years with the possibility of a three - year extension .

the legislation largely reflects the basic structure of previous tpa / fast - track authorizing legislation .

however , it makes some changes , such as expanding executive branch requirements to consult with congress and private sector advisers .

as with previous tpa / fast - track statutes , the two bills also included sets of "overall trade negotiating objectives" and "principal trade negotiating objectives. .

included in the latter category were topics that were included in previous tpa statutes , albeit revised in some cases , including trade in goods , trade in services , foreign investment , intellectual property , transparency , regulatory practices , dispute settlement and enforcement , trade in agriculture , labor , environment , border taxes , trade remedy laws , and textile negotiations .

the bills include new objectives reflecting new trade policy issues that are the subject of current negotiations , including digital trade in goods and services and cross - border data flows , state - owned and state - controlled enterprises , and localization barriers to trade .

the bills included new provisions on currency and human rights as "principal trade negotiating objectives. .

currency was previously included in the "promotion of certain priorities" category in the 2002 act .

the two bills also included a category of trade negotiating objectives called "capacity building and other priorities. .

congressional trade agreements authority requested by and granted to presidents since 1934 congressional timeline under tpa a short guide to the expedited legislative procedures for passage of trade implementing bills under tpa i .

before the formal tpa expedited procedures come into play , the house ways and means and senate finance committees typically hold "mock markups" on informal drafts of the implementing legislation , voting to approve or disapprove .

the vote and any amendments to the draft legislation , however , are not binding on the administration .

these meetings provide an important opportunity for congress to register specific concerns and / or viewpoints with the administration before it sends final implementing legislation to congress , which initiates the expedited procedures .

ii .

the president sends a final legal draft text of the trade agreement and a draft implementing bill ( with supporting materials ) to congress on a day that it is in session .

the draft bill may , or may not , reflect some or all of amendments adopted by committees in the mock markup .

iii .

identical bills are subject to mandatory introduction in each house of congress on the day received .

the bills are referred to the house ways and means and senate finance committees jointly , with others if jurisdiction warrants .

iv .

each committee has 45 in session days to report the bill or it is automatically discharged and the bill is placed on the appropriate calendar .

an implementing bill subject to tpa procedures is likely to be a revenue bill , in which case the constitution requires that the senate ultimately act on the house bill .

under these conditions , the senate finance committee has until the later of the 45 th day of session after the senate bill is introduced or the 15 th day of session after the senate receives the house bill .

v. in each house , after the implementing bill is reported or discharged , any member may offer a non - debatable motion to consider it .

debate is limited to 20 hours evenly divided between those for and against .

the measure cannot be amended , and a motion or unanimous - consent request to suspend this restriction is not in order .

if the chamber has not completed floor action by the 15 th day after the bill is reported or discharged , any member may bring it to a vote .

vi .

a bill passes by simple majority under the statute .

whichever house acts second ( typically the senate assuming the bill is a revenue bill ) considers and debates its own bill , but takes its final vote on the bill received from the other house ( typically the house of representatives ) .

this procedure ensures that both houses will ultimately act on the same measure , thereby clearing it to be presented to the president ( without the need for conference ) .

after the implementing bill is signed , under its terms , the agreement enters into force for the united states when the president implements it by proclamation .

this typically occurs after the ustr has assured the president that the partner country ( ies ) has made the legislative and regulatory changes necessary to meet all obligations under the trade agreement , and the president exchanges notes with the trading partner government providing for the agreement's entry into force on or after a specific date .

