this report provides background information and issues for congress on the navy's littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program .

a total of 35 lcss have been procured through fy2019 .

the navy wants fy2019 to be the final year of lcs procurement , and it has not requested the procurement of any additional lcss in its fy2020 budget submission .

the navy wants to shift procurement of small surface combatants in fy2020 from the lcs to a new frigate called the ffg ( x ) .

the navy's proposed fy2020 budget requests funding for the procurement of the first ffg ( x ) .

the ffg ( x ) program is covered in detail in crs report r44972 , navy frigate ( ffg[x] ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

a current issue for congress regarding the lcs program is whether to procure any additional lcss in fy2020 , and if so , how many .

another issue for congress concerns future workloads and employment levels at the two lcs shipyards if one or both of these yards are not involved in building ffg ( x ) s. congress's decisions on the lcs program will affect navy capabilities and funding requirements , and the shipbuilding industrial base .

for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the lcs program and other navy shipbuilding programs may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

 table 2 summarizes congressional action on the navy's fy2020 procurement funding request for the lcs program .

appendix a. manning and deployment of lcss this appendix provides additional background information on the manning and deployment of lcss .

the navy originally planned to maintain three crews for each two lcss , and to keep one of those two lcss forward deployed — an approach navy officials referred to as the 3-2-1 plan .

under this plan , lcss were to be deployed at forward station ( such as singapore ) for 16 months at a time , and crews were to rotate on and off deployed ships at 4- to 6-month intervals .

the 3-2-1 plan was intended to permit the navy to maintain 50% of the lcs force in deployed status at any given time — a greater percentage than would be possible under the traditional approach of maintaining one crew for each lcs and deploying lcss for seven months at a time .

the navy planned to forward - station three lcss in singapore and additional lcss at another western pacific location , such as sasebo , japan , and at bahrain .

in september 2016 , the navy announced a new plan for crewing and operating the first 28 lcss .

key elements of the new plan include the following: the first four lcss ( lcss 1 through 4 ) will each by operated by a single crew and be dedicated to testing and evaluating lcs mission packages ( though they could be deployed as fleet assets if needed on a limited basis ) ; the other 24 lcss ( lcss 5 through 28 ) will be divided into six divisions ( i.e. , groups ) of four ships each ; three of the divisions ( i.e. , 12 of the 24 ships ) , all of them built to the lcs - 1 design , will be homeported at mayport , fl ; the other three divisions ( i.e. , the remaining 12 ships ) , all of them built to the lcs - 2 design , will be homeported at san diego , ca ; among the three divisions on each coast , one division will focus on mcm , one will focus on asw , and one will focus on suw ; in each of the six divisions , one ship will be a designated training ship , and will focus on training and certifying the crews of the other three ships in the division ; the other three ships in each division will each be operated by dual crews ( i.e. , blue and gold crews ) , like the navy's ballistic missile submarines ; the crews for the 24 ships in the six divisions will be permanently fused with their associated mission package crews — the distinction between core crew and mission package crew will be eliminated ; the 24 ships in the six divisions will experience changes in their mission packages ( and thus in their mission orientations ) infrequently , if at all ; and at program maturity ( i.e. , by about fy2023 ) , 13 of the 24 ships in the six divisions ( i.e. , more than 50% ) are to be forward stationed at any given point for periods of 24 months , with 3 at singapore , 3 at another western pacific location , such as sasebo , japan , and 7 at bahrain .

the navy states that this crewing and operating plan is intended to reduce disruptions to the deployment cycles of the 24 lcss in the six divisions that under the 3-2-1 plan would have been caused by the need to test and evaluate lcs mission packages ; improve training and proficiency of lcs crews ; enhance each lcs crew's sense of ownership of ( and thus responsibility for taking good care of ) the ship on which it operates ; and achieve a percentage of lcss in deployed status , and numbers of forward - stationed lcss , similar to or greater than what the navy aimed to achieve under the 3-2-1 plan .

the navy further states that as the fleet continues to accumulate experience in operating and maintaining lcss , elements of this new plan might be modified .

appendix b. defense - acquisition policy lessons in reviewing the lcs program , one possible question concerns what defense - acquisition policy lessons , if any , the program may offer to policymakers , particularly in terms of the rapid acquisition strategy that the navy pursued for the lcs program , which aimed at reducing acquisition cycle time ( i.e. , the amount of time between starting the program and getting the first ship into service ) .

one possible perspective is that the lcs program demonstrated that reducing acquisition cycle time can be done .

supporters of this perspective might argue that under a traditional navy ship acquisition approach , the navy might have spent five or six years developing a design for a new frigate or corvette , and perhaps another five years building the lead ship , for a total acquisition cycle time of perhaps 10 to 11 years .

for a program announced in november 2001 , this would have resulted in the first ship entering service in between late 2011 and late 2012 .

in contrast , supporters of this perspective might argue , lcs - 1 entered service on november 8 , 2008 , about seven years after the program was announced , and lcs - 2 entered service on january 16 , 2010 , a little more than eight years after the program announced .

supporters of this perspective might argue that this reduction in acquisition cycle time was accomplished even though the lcs incorporates major innovations compared to previous larger navy surface combatants in terms of reduced crew size , "plug - and fight" mission package modularity , high - speed propulsion , and ( in the case of lcs - 2 ) hull form and hull materials .

another possible perspective is that the lcs program demonstrated the risks or consequences of attempting to reduce acquisition cycle time .

supporters of this perspective might argue that the program's rapid acquisition strategy resulted in design - construction concurrency ( i.e. , building the lead ships before their designs were fully developed ) , a practice long known to increase risks in defense acquisition programs .

supporters of this perspective might argue that the cost growth , design issues , and construction - quality issues experienced by the first lcss were due in substantial part to design - construction concurrency , and that these problems embarrassed the navy and reduced the navy's credibility in defending other acquisition programs .

they might argue that the challenges the navy faces today in terms of developing an lcs concept of operations ( conops ) , lcs manning and training policies , and lcs maintenance and logistics plans were increased by the rapid acquisition strategy , because these matters were partly deferred to later years ( i.e. , to today ) while the navy moved to put lcss into production .

supporters of this perspective might argue that the costs of the rapid acquisition strategy are not offset by very much in terms of a true reduction in acquisition cycle time , because the first lcs to be equipped with a mission package that had reached ioc ( initial operational capability ) did not occur until late fy2014 — almost 13 years after the lcs program was announced .

supporters of this perspective could argue that the navy could have avoided many of the program's early problems and current challenges — and could have had a fully equipped first ship enter service in 2011 or 2012 — if it had instead pursued a traditional acquisition approach for a new frigate or corvette .

they could argue that the lcs program validated , for defense acquisition , the guideline from the world of business management that if an effort aims at obtaining something fast , cheap , and good , it will succeed in getting no more than two of these things , or , more simply , that the lcs program validated the general saying that haste makes waste .

a third possible perspective is that the lcs program offers few if any defense - acquisition policy lessons because the lcs differs so much from other navy ships and the navy ( and dod generally ) consequently is unlikely to attempt a program like the lcs in the future .

supporters of this perspective might argue that the risks of design - construction concurrency have long been known , and that the experience of the lcs program did not provide a new lesson in this regard so much as a reminder of an old one .

they might argue that the cost growth and construction delays experienced by lcs - 1 were caused not simply by the program's rapid acquisition strategy , but by a variety of factors , including an incorrectly made reduction gear from a supplier firm that forced the shipbuilder to build the lead ship in a significantly revised and suboptimal construction sequence .

