countervailing duty laws attempt to provide relief to domestic industries that have been , or are threatened with , material injury as a result of imported goods sold in the u.s. market that have been found to be subsidized by a foreign government or public entity .

the relief provided is an additional import duty placed on the subsidized imports that is equal to the estimated amount of subsidization .

in order for an industry to obtain relief , two things must be determined: ( 1 ) the international trade commission must find that the domestic industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury due to the imports , and ( 2 ) the international trade administration ( ita ) of the department of commerce must find that the targeted imports have been subsidized .

prior to a 2007 cvd investigation on coated free sheet ( cfs ) paper from china , the ita determined that it would not apply cvd laws to nonmarket economy ( nme ) countries , including china , because the agency believed that there was no adequate way to measure market distortions caused by subsidies in an economy that is not based on market principles .

however , in the context of the 2007 investigation , the ita determined that it may be possible to identify subsidies in china because many industries in the china operate according to market principles .

the ita had previously reaffirmed that china was an nme country .

the 2007 subsidy decision was a china - specific determination , and thus is not applicable to other nme countries .

for purposes of the trade remedy laws , the ita is also the agency responsible for designating countries as nonmarket economies , defined in u.s. law as "any foreign country that the administering authority [the ita] determines does not operate on market principles of cost or pricing structures , so that sales of merchandise in such country do not reflect the fair value of the merchandise. .

nme designations are based on the extent to which ( 1 ) the country's currency is convertible ; ( 2 ) its wage rates result from free bargaining between labor and management ; ( 3 ) joint ventures or other foreign investment are permitted ; ( 4 ) the government owns or controls the means of production ; and ( 5 ) the government controls the allocation of resources and price and output decisions .

the ita may also consider other factors that it considers appropriate .

ita - designated nme countries as of this writing are armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , china , georgia , kyrgyz republic , moldova , tajikistan , uzbekistan , and vietnam .

the ita first made the determination not to apply cvd action to nme countries in 1983-1984 in connection with countervailing investigations of two cases of alleged subsidization , one dealing with carbon steel wire rod imported from czechoslovakia and poland , and the other with imports of potassium chloride ( potash ) from the german democratic republic ( east germany ) and the soviet union .

all of these countries were designated by the ita as nme countries at the time of the investigation .

china , designated an nme country in 1983 , is the united states' second largest trading partner , the largest source of u.s. imports , and its third largest export market .

the continuing u.s. trade deficit with china ( $227 billion in 2009 ) and the alleged adverse impact of chinese imports on competing u.s. industries and workers has led some in congress to support increased use of u.s. trade remedy laws against chinese products .

one area of concern has been china's alleged use of "illegal" subsidy programs to bolster its industries and spur export growth .

many u.s. domestic producers alleged for years that they were adversely impacted by china's subsidizing its industries , but the 1984 ita ruling meant that there was essentially no recourse to deal with the issue of subsidies .

china is the chief target of u.s. antidumping action , however , with over 80 ad duty orders in place as of august 12 , 2010 .

in addition , ad duty amounts tend to be higher for chinese imports , due in part to the methodology employed by the ita when calculating ad duties for nme countries .

a related concern involves assertions by many u.s. policymakers , business people , and labor representatives that china's currency is significantly undervalued vis - à - vis the u.s. dollar , which , they allege , makes chinese exports much cheaper than they would be if chinese exchange rates were determined by market forces .

in turn , they maintain that the undervalued currency has contributed to the u.s. trade deficit with china , and has injured u.s. production and employment in several manufacturing sectors ( such as apparel and furniture ) because u.s. companies must compete with "artificially" lower cost goods from china .

the issue of alleged chinese "currency manipulation" or "misalignment" is another factor that led to renewed congressional interest in applying countervailing action to imports from china , and in turn , to finding currency manipulation countervailable .

for a discussion of recent legislation on currency misalignment issues , see crs report rs21625 , china's currency: an analysis of the economic issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

at the time the 1983-1984 investigations were initiated , the united states had in force two countervailing duty laws .

both provided for the imposition of a countervailing duty equal to the amount of subsidization on dutiable ( but not duty - free ) products that had been subsidized in their country of origin .

both laws also required a determination of the existence and amount of subsidization to be countervailed , but one of the laws also required a finding that the subsidized imports have caused or threatened to cause injury to a u.s. domestic industry .

the earlier of the two laws ( section 303 of the tariff act of 1930 , repealed in january 1995 ) was a modified version of a countervailing law initially enacted by the tariff act of 1897 .

this law was applicable only to products of countries other than those "under the agreement. .

countries "under the agreement" referred to ( 1 ) any country to which the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) subsidies and countervailing code applied , or ( 2 ) had assumed code - equivalent obligations with respect to the united states , or ( 3 ) the president determined the existence of an agreement with the united states containing certain relevant provisions specifically spelled out in the statute .

section 303 — repealed effective january 1 , 1995 , by section 261 ( a ) of the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) ( p.l .

103-465 ) — provided for the levying of a countervailing duty ( cvd ) equal to the net amount of public or private subsidization ( defined as " any bounty or grant , however the same be paid or bestowed" ) without any need for injury determination .

countervailing legislation with much broader country applicability ( i.e. , to countries "under the agreement" ) consisted of comprehensive provisions ( including detailed procedural provisions ) added by the trade agreements act of 1979 ( p.l .

96-39 ) as subtitle a of title vii to the tariff act of 1930 .

that u.s. law implemented the provisions of the international subsidies and countervailing code agreed to in multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the gatt meeting in geneva in april 1979 .

under this legislation , most of which is still in force in a somewhat amended language , the assessment of a countervailing duty required — in addition to a determination that a "country under the agreement" or a private entity in such country was providing "directly or indirectly , a subsidy with respect to the manufacture , production , or exportation" of merchandise imported into the united states — a determination that such imports have caused , or threatened with , injury to an industry in the united states , or that the establishment of an industry in the united states is thereby materially retarded .

the uraa , in addition to repealing section 303 and omitting subsidies from a private source as being countervailable , also amended the countervailing duty law of the 1979 act by incorporating into it provisions comparable to those of section 303 , which do not require injury determination in countervailing investigations of subsidized imports from countries other than "subsidies agreement countries. .

the latter have been defined in the same way — with appropriate updating technical changes — as the countries under the agreement under the trade agreements act of 1979 .

this version is still in effect .

arguably in response to the concerns of domestic manufacturers of import - competing products and many in congress , the bush administration took steps , beginning in late 2006 , to deal with china's alleged subsidies of exports .

first , the ita initiated and completed a cvd investigation on a product from china .

second , consultations were initiated in the wto on china's subsidy regime .

despite the ita's affirmative determination that it is able to identify the existence of subsidies in china , some in congressindicated that they intended to move forward with legislation to "ensure we are combating all unfair trade — whether it is dumping or subsidies — that puts american workers , farmers and businesses at a disadvantage. .

congress may want to consider some of the following issues as it continues to address application of trade remedies to china .

first , the ita's decision that it can identify subsidies in china has no effect on china's standing as a nonmarket economy country or on the nme designations of other countries .

it also does not affect ita's determination that it is unable to find subsidies in nme countries other than china .

therefore , congress may want to consider legislation ensuring that the cvd laws and actions specifically apply to other nme countries as well as china .

vietnam , another u.s. trading partner of increasing significance , is also an nme country .

however , the amount of trade with the other remaining nme countries ( armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , georgia , kyrgyz republic , moldova , tajikistan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan ) is not particularly significant at present , and to date , there are no outstanding ad orders or other significant trade disputes with these countries .

second , there are currently no specific factors to consider or methodologies provided in the trade remedy laws for administrative authorities to use when identifying subsidies in nonmarket economies .

in contrast , the antidumping statute does provide a methodology for determining normal value in nme countries — including the authority to calculate expenses using inputs and factors of production in a market economy country "considered appropriate to the administering authority. .

third,it is important to note that making cvd procedures available to u.s. industries is not without its trade - offs .

ad duties tend to be higher than countervailing duties in general , and ad duties on imports from nonmarket economy countries tend to be even higher , in part due to the use of the third - country data methodology to calculate the amount of dumping .

if china retained its nme status and subsidies were found on targeted merchandise for which ad duties were already in place , some of the companion ad duties might have to be revised downward in order to avoid "double counting"―or the possible inclusion of export subsidy amounts in certain ad duty calculations ) .

in a june 2005 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that this consideration "introduces a level of uncertainty about the magnitude of the total level of protection that would be applied to chinese products," and "may result in combined rates that are lower than might be expected. .

therefore , a determination by ita that it can target subsidies in china , or legislation amending the statute , could result in the unintended consequence of an overall reduction in the amount of protection provided .

however , since the two remedies address substantially different forms of price manipulation , it is also possible that some u.s. industries that had not been able in the past to obtain relief through the ad statute may be able to do so through cvd procedures .

