on january 31 , 2008 , the house committee on foreign affairs announced that a markup hearing would be held on february 7 , 2008 which would consider a house bill entitled the global hiv / aids , tuberculosis and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 , for which no text or bill number was immediately available .

on january 25 , 2008 , the white house announced that president bush and mrs. bush would travel to five african countries from february 15-21 , 2008 , in part to enable the president "to review firsthand the significant progress since his last visit in 2003 in efforts to [...] fight hiv / aids , malaria , and other treatable diseases , as a result of the united states robust programs in these areas. .

president bush had first stated his intention to visit africa in 2008 during a november 2007 speech marking world aids day , 2007 .

in the speech , he also called on the congress to support his may 2007 call to double u.s. international funding for aids , to $30 billion over five years , starting in 2009. international aids issues are further covered in crs report rl33485 , u.s. international hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria spending: fy2004-fy2008 , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34192 , pepfar: policy issues from fy2004 through fy2008 , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33396 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria: progress report and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl31712 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria: background , by [author name scrubbed] .

aids experts attribute africa's aids epidemic to a variety of economic and social factors , but place primary blame on the region's poverty , which has deprived africa of effective systems of health information , health education , and health care .

as a result , africans suffer from high rates of untreated sexually - transmitted infections other than aids , increasing their susceptibility to hiv .

african health systems often have limited capabilities for aids prevention work , and hiv counseling and testing are difficult for many africans to obtain .

until very recently , aids treatment was generally available only to elites .

poverty forces large numbers of african men to migrate long distances in search of work , and while away from home they may have multiple sex partners , increasing their risk of infection .

some of these partners may be women who engage in commercial or "transactional" sex because of poverty , which makes them highly vulnerable to infection .

migrant workers may carry the infection back to their wives when they return home .

long - distance truck and public transport drivers are also seen as key agents in the spread of hiv .

women and girls are disproportionately affected by aids in africa .

according to unaids officials and publications , among other sources , contraction of hiv by girls from older men is a significant factor contributing to higher rates of infection among young women than in young men .

while older men are more likely than young men to be hiv - positive , girls in impoverished contexts often view relationships with older men as vital opportunities for achieving financial , material , and social security .

according to surveys , in many african countries , large numbers of young women lack comprehensive knowledge of hiv transmission .

many believe that female infection rates would be lower if women's rights were more widely respected in africa , and if women exercised more political and socio - economic power .

human rights watch ( hrw ) and other organizations have reported that domestic violence targeting women in some african countries has made these women more vulnerable to hiv infection , in part by depriving them of the power to negotiate condom use .

for this reason , some policy advocates see a need for greater support for fidelity campaigns primarily aimed at african men .

women also lack or have weak property rights in many african countries , making their homes or property vulnerable to seizure by relatives when women suffer the loss of their spouses due to aids .

aids is having severe negative social and economic consequences in africa , and these effects are expected to continue for many years , as suggested by a january 2000 central intelligence agency national intelligence estimate on the infectious disease threats: at least some of the hardest - hit countries , initially in africa and later in other regions , will face a demographic catastrophe as hiv / aids and associated diseases reduce human life expectancy dramatically and kill up to a quarter of their populations over the period of this estimate .

this will further impoverish the poor , and often the middle class , and produce a huge and impoverished orphan cohort unable to cope and vulnerable to exploitation and radicalization ( cia , the global infectious disease threat and its implications for the united states , http: / / www.cia.gov / ) .

the estimate predicted that aids would generate increased political instability and slow democratic development .

the world bank ( intensifying action against hiv / aids in africa , september 1999 ) has reached similar conclusions with respect to africa's economic future: the illness and impending death of up to 25% of all adults in some countries will have an enormous impact on national productivity and earnings .

labor productivity is likely to drop , the benefits of education will be lost , and resources that would have been used for investments will be used for health care , orphan care , and funerals .

savings rates will decline , and the loss of human capital will affect production and the quality of life for years to come .

in the most severely affected countries , sharp drops in life expectancy are occurring , reversing major gains achieved in recent decades .

according to unaids , average life expectancy in africa is now 47 years due to aids , whereas it would have been 62 years in its absence .

a march 2004 u.s. census bureau report predicted absolute population declines by 2010 in south africa , botswana , and three other african countries due to aids .

donor governments , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) working in africa , and african governments have responded to the aids epidemic primarily by attempting to reduce the number of new hiv infections through prevention programs , and to some degree , by trying to ameliorate the damage done by aids to families , societies , and economies .

a third response , treatment of aids sufferers with antiretroviral drugs ( arvs ) that can result in long - term survival , is increasing rapidly in some african contexts , as treatment and drug distribution efforts expand , but arvs remain inaccessible to the vast majority of those in need of them in africa ( see below , "aids treatment issues" ) .

anti - aids programs and projects typically provide information on how hiv is spread and on how it can be avoided through the media , posters , lectures , and skits .

some success has been claimed for these efforts in persuading youth to delay the age of "sexual debut" and to remain faithful to a single partner .

the bush administration advocates an expansion of prevention programs focusing on abstinence until marriage and marital faithfulness as effective means of slowing the spread of hiv , although some critics maintain that this may be unrealistic in social environments characterized by poverty and lack of education .

some also question whether such approaches can benefit poor married women in africa , who have little power to refuse the sexual demands of their husbands , whether infected or not — or , in some cases , to control their extra - marital activities .

they are also often unable to refuse spousal decisions to take more than one wife , given that polygamous marriage is common and deeply embedded in many african societies .

in january 2006 , first lady laura bush defended abstinence approaches , saying that she had "always been a little bit irritated by criticism of abstinence , because abstinence is absolutely , 100 percent effective in fighting a sexually transmittable disease. .

she added that "in many countries where girls feel obligated to comply with the wishes of men , girls need to know that abstinence is a choice. .

donor - sponsored voluntary counseling and testing ( vct ) programs , where available , enable african men and women to learn their hiv status .

in botswana , hiv tests are now offered as a routine part of medical visits , and many experts are urging that this be done continent - wide .

aids awareness programs are found in many african schools and , increasingly , in the workplace , where employers are recognizing their interest in reducing infection rates among their employees .

many projects seek to make condoms readily available and to provide instruction in condom use .

several projects have had success in reducing mother - to - child transmission by administering the anti - hiv drug azt or nevirapine , before and during birth , and during infant nursing .

nevirapine , however , has been the subject of controversy .

in december 2004 , the associated press reported that important reporting flaws , including non - disclosure of bad drug reactions , had been found in a study of nevirapine conducted in uganda under u.s. national institutes of health ( nih ) sponsorship .

the allegations sparked criticism in africa , including from the south africa's ruling africa national congress , which in december 2004 charged that top u.s. officials had "entered into a conspiracy with a pharmaceutical company to tell lies and promote the sales of nevirapine in africa..." in response , nih asserted in a statement that "single - dose nevirapine is a safe and effective drug for preventing mother to infant transmission of hiv. .

it termed as "absolutely false" any implication of thousands of adverse reactions in the uganda study .

aids activists and others worried that the controversy would discourage use of the drug , often the only available means of preventing mother to child transmission ( mtct ) of hiv .

a later national academies' institute of medicine assessment found that the uganda study was valid and that nevirapine should continue to be used for mtct .

church groups and humanitarian organizations have helped africa deal with the consequences of aids by setting up care and education programs for orphans .

public - private partnerships have also become an important vehicle for responding to the african aids pandemic .

the bill and melinda gates foundation has been a major supporter of aids vaccine research and diverse aids programs pursued in cooperation with african governments and donors .

the rockefeller foundation , working with unaids and others , has sponsored programs to improve aids care in africa , and both bristol - myers squibb and merck and company , together with the gates foundation and the harvard aids institute , have undertaken programs with the botswana government aimed at improving the country's health infrastructure and providing aids treatment to all who need it .

in uganda , pfizer and the pfizer foundation fund uganda's aids support organization and the infectious diseases institute .

it has trained 250 aids specialists annually , many slated to work in rural areas .

in january 2006 , the swiss drug firm roche said it plans to help african firms produce generic versions of its world health organization ( who ) - endorsed arv , saquinavir , under its technology transfer initiative .

the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria , created in january 2002 , commits about 60% of its grant funds to africa , and about 60% of its grants worldwide go toward fighting aids .

unaids maintains that significant aids funding gaps remain .

according to one study , $14.9 billion was needed in 2006 to fight hiv / aids in low - and middle - income countries globally in 2006 , whereas $8.9 billion was likely to be provided .

the funding gap is projected to rise in future years , according to a june 2005 unaids report .

u.s. concern over aids in africa began to mount during the 1980s , as the severity of the epidemic became apparent .

in 1987 , congress earmarked fy1988 funds for fighting aids worldwide , and house appropriators noted that in africa , aids had the potential for "undermining all development efforts" to date ( h.rept .

100-283 ) .

in subsequent years , congress supported aids spending at or above levels requested by the executive branch , either through earmarks or report language .

nevertheless , a widely discussed july 2000 washington post article called into question the adequacy and timeliness of the early u.s. response to the hiv / aids threat in africa ( barton gellman , "the global response to aids in africa: world shunned signs of coming plague," washington post , july 5 , 2000 ) .

as the severity of the epidemic continued to deepen , many of those concerned for africa's future , both inside and outside government , came to feel that more should be done .

in july 1999 , the clinton administration proposed $100 million in additional spending for a global life ( leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ) aids initiative , with a heavy focus on africa .

funds approved during the fy2000 appropriations process supported most of this initiative , and funded the engagement of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the departments of labor ( dol ) , and the department of defense ( dod ) , in addition to usaid , in the global fight against hiv / aids .

on june 27 , 2000 , the peace corps announced that all volunteers serving in africa would be trained as aids educators .

usaid asserted in 2001 that its support of multilateral efforts and direct sponsorship of regional and bilateral programs had made it the global leader in the international response to aids since 1986 , when it initiated aids prevention programs in developing countries ( usaid , leading the way: usaid responds to hiv / aids , september 2001 ) .

usaid had sponsored aids education programs ; trained aids educators , counselors , and clinicians ; supported condom distribution ; and sponsored aids research .

usaid claimed several successes in africa .

these included helping to reduce hiv prevalence among young ugandans ; preventing an outbreak of the epidemic in senegal ; reducing the frequency of sexually transmitted infections in several african countries ; sharply increasing condom availability in kenya and elsewhere ; assisting children orphaned by aids ; and sponsoring the development of useful new technologies , including the female condom .

combating the aids pandemic in africa has been an important bush administration foreign assistance program goal .

in may 2001 , president bush made the "founding pledge" of $200 million to the global fund , and in june 2002 , he announced a $500 million international mother and child hiv prevention initiative to support efforts to prevent mother - to - child aids transmission .

eight african countries were named as beneficiaries .

in his january 2003 state of the union address , president bush announced the launching of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , pledging $15 billion for fiscal years 2004 through 2008 , including $10 billion in "new money," that is , spending in addition to then current levels .

in july 2003 , president bush made aids a special focus during a five - day trip to africa .

on july 8 , in senegal , the president told africans , "we will join with you in turning the tide against aids in africa. .

on july 10 , speaking in botswana , the president said that , "this is the deadliest enemy africa has ever faced , and you will not face this epidemic alone. .

in september 2003 , then secretary of state colin powell told a u.n. general assembly special session on aids that the epidemic was "more devastating than any terrorist attack" and that the united states would "remain at the forefront" of efforts to combat the epidemic .

pepfar was authorized by p.l .

108 - 25 , the united states leadership against global hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 , signed into law by president bush on may 27 , 2003 .

its implementation has resulted in major spending increases for hiv / aids prevention , care , and treatment in 15 "focus countries," 12 in africa ( botswana , cote d'ivoire , ethiopia , kenya , mozambique , namibia , nigeria , rwanda , south africa , tanzania , uganda , and zambia ) .

pepfar funds are provided through the global hiv / aids initiative ( ghai ) , headquartered at the state department .

the ghai is headed by a u.s .

global aids coordinator , who coordinates ghai programs in focus countries and other international aids programs implemented by usaid and other agencies .

permanent incumbents in the global aids coordinator position are nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate .

the first global aids coordinator was randall tobias , the former administrator of usaid and the director of u.s. foreign assistance .

ambassador mark dybul is now the u.s .

global aids coordinator .

in february 2004 , the state department issued a report http: / / www.state.gov / s / gac / rl / or / c11652.htm which provided details on how pepfar would be implemented , and proposed to use initial pepfar funds to support several "public - private partnership" treatment programs .

pepfar aims to prevent 7 million new infections globally , provide arv drugs for 2 million infected people , and provide care for 10 million infected people , including orphans .

the administration has submitted to congress two subsequent annual pepfar reports that describe the status of pepfar program policy and program administration , as well as a number of other related reports .

the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) at the state department administers the bulk of u.s. aids assistance to africa .

pepfar was enacted , in part , to simplify the international aids budget , enhance transparency , and stress the president's interest in fighting aids and his backing for what the state department reports is "the largest commitment ever by a single nation for an international health initiative. .

prior to pepfar , the principal channels for hiv / aids assistance to africa were usaid and the global aids program ( gap ) of the centers for disease control ( cdc ) in the health and human services department .

most usaid spending on aids in africa is through the child survival and health programs fund .

limited amounts are provided through other accounts , such as multi - functional economic support fund , peace corps , and migration and refugee assistance .

the department of defense ( dod ) has undertaken an hiv / aids prevention program , primarily with african armed forces and administered by the naval health research center in san diego .

it also focuses on education and creation of policy responses .

as in other recent years , the administration did not request funding for the program in fy2007 .

in fy2006 , congress continued to support it by appropriating $5.5 million ( of which $3.2 million went to africa ) .

foreign military financing ( fmf ) funds are also used to support this initiative .

a department of labor ( dol ) program in the past supported aids education in the workplace in several african countries , but was not funded in fy2006 .

funds for these dol efforts were not requested in fy2007 .

additional u.s. funds reach africa indirectly through the aids programs of the united nations ( u.n. ) , the world bank , and the global fund .

the scale of the response to the pandemic in africa by the united states and other donors remains a subject of intense debate .

the u.n. special envoy for hiv / aids in africa , stephen lewis , has been a persistent critic , telling a september 2003 conference on aids in africa that he was "enraged by the behavior of the rich powers" with respect to the epidemic .

many activist groups have made similar critiques .

the singer bono said he had a "good old row" with president bush in a september 2003 meeting on the level of u.s. funding for fighting the international aids epidemic .

nonetheless , as noted above , others have argued that africa's ability to absorb increased aids funding is limited and that health infrastructure will have to be expanded before new funds can be spent effectively .

many aids activists and others have praised the president's initiatives , notably the large levels of funding with which they have been supported .

during the initial stages of its implementation , however , some critics maintained that pepfar was starting too slowly .

some have also characterized the program as too strongly unilateral and would like the united states to act in closer cooperation with other countries and donors , especially the global fund .

some have questioned whether pepfar will do enough to directly strengthen african health care institutions and capabilities for coping with aids over the long term , or whether the funds will go primarily to u.s. - based organizations .

some also urged increased appropriations , as some have continued to do .

u.n. secretary general kofi annan , during an interview at the july 2004 international aids conference in bangkok , urged u.s. contributions of $1 billion annually for the global fund .

then - u.s .

global aids coordinator randall tobias responded by stating that "it's not going to happen. .

annan asked the united states to show the same leadership in the aids struggle that it had shown in the war on terrorism .

then - u.s. state department spokesman richard boucher rejected the implied criticism , saying that the bush administration had taken the aids crisis very seriously and that the $15 billion pledged to fight the epidemic over five years was an "enormous and significant amount. .

more recently , some healthcare advocates have criticized what they see as a programmatic over - emphasis on efforts to promote the use of abstinence in the prevention of hiv , as opposed to the distribution and promotion of condoms for this purpose .

critics have charged that funding for pepfar abstinence programs , notably in africa , has increasingly replaced other hiv prevention measures and that the united states is today sending fewer condoms abroad than in 1990 ( center for health and gender equity , prevention funding under [pepfar] : law , policy and interpretation , december 2005 ) .

some have cited as evidence for this contention , an april 2006 government accountability office ( gao ) report entitled global health: spending requirement presents challenges for allocating prevention funding under the president ' s emergency plan for aids relief .

the gao found that guidance requiring that 33% of pepfar hiv prevention funds be spent on abstinence and faithfulness - focused programs had , in some cases , led to decreases in funding for certain other types of hiv prevention efforts .

it also suggested that the guidance contained ambiguities that had created uncertainties among some country field teams about how to implement pepfar programs .

in march 2005 , the department of state released engendering bold leadership: the president ' s emergency plan for aids relief , the first annual report to congress on the initiative .

in an introductory letter to the report , randall tobias called pepfar "coordinated , accountable , and powerful. .

the report stated that 152,000 african patients were receiving aids treatment due to pepfar and that 119 million had been reached with mass media campaigns promoting abstinence and faithfulness , while 71 million had been reached with messages promoting other prevention measures , including the use of condoms .

the president's second annual report to congress stated that while 115.23 million condoms had been shipped to focus countries in 2001 , 198.4 million had been shipped in 2005 — a 72% increase .

the financial times reported in april 2004 that the united states was withholding support from a program intended to treat 140,000 aids patients in kenya with antiretrovirals because it would rely on a generic three - drug fixed dose combination ( fdc ) pill .

many favor approval of fdcs , including copies of drugs made by different companies , on grounds that they are simpler to prescribe and need to be taken just once or twice a day .

u.s. officials had expressed concerns that further study was needed to assure that their widespread or improper distribution did not contribute to the emergence of resistant hiv strains .

the issue was submitted to a panel of experts instructed to report by mid - may 2004 .

several members of congress later wrote to president bush asking that the united states join an international consensus that generics are safe and essential for aids treatment .

in may 2004 , then - health and human services secretary tommy thompson announced that the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) was instituting an expedited process that could lead to the approval of the use of fdcs in pepfar - funded programs .

many hailed the news as a step forward in making cheaper and more reliable antiretroviral therapy available in africa , but critics said it placed an unnecessary hurdle in the way of distributing such pills .

they maintained that the united states should have relied on the approval process of the world health organization , which had already cleared such pills .

by june 2005 , the fda had reportedly cleared seven generic antiretrovirals manufactured in south africa and india .

however , the boston globe reported on june 20 that four african countries , nigeria , uganda , ethiopia , and tanzania , were refusing to accept generic fda - approved drugs for use in u.s. - funded treatment programs .

instead , the countries sought approval of the drugs by who .

under the president's fy2008 budget request , the 12 focus countries in africa would receive $3.421 billion under the ghai account .

table 5 reports available information on recent u.s. spending levels on aids programs in africa .

the global aids and tuberculosis relief act of 2000 ( p.l .

106 - 264 ) , enacted in august 2000 , authorized funding for fy2001 and fy2002 for a comprehensive , coordinated , worldwide hiv / aids effort under usaid .

in the 107 th congress , several bills were introduced with international or africa - related aids - related provisions .

a major international aids authorization bill , h.r .

2069 , passed both chambers during the 107 th congress but did not go to conference .

in may 2003 , congress approved and president bush signed into law h.r .

1298 / p.l .

108 - 25 , the u.s .

leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 .

it authorized th establishment of pepfar and the allocation of $3 billion per year for the program from fy2004 through fy2008 ( a total of $15 billion ) , and created the office of the global aids coordinator at the state department .

appropriations measures have supported a variety of programs helping africa fight the pandemic .

p.l .

109 - 95 ( formerly h.r .

1409 , lee ) , the assistance for orphans and other vulnerable children in developing countries act of 2005 , was signed into law in november 2005 .

p.l .

109 - 102 ( formerly h.r .

3057 , kolbe ) , the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 and p.l .

109 - 149 ( formerly h.r .

3010 , regula ) , the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2006 , provided the bulk of u.s. international aids funding in fy2006 .

bills introduced in the 109 th congress , with provisions related to the african aids pandemic , included the following: h.r .

155 ( millender - mcdonald ) , mother to child plus appropriations act for fiscal year 2005 ; h.r .

164 ( millender - mcdonald ) , international pediatric hiv / aids network act of 2005 ; h.r .

2601 ( smith ) , foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2006 and 2007 ; s. 600 ( lugar ) , foreign affairs authorization act , fiscal years 2006 and 2007 ; s. 850 ( frist ) , global health corps act of 2005 ; and s. 2125 ( obama ) , democratic republic of the congo relief , security , and democracy promotion act of 2005 .

apart from appropriations legislation that would fund global hiv / aids assistance programs , legislation introduced in the 110 th congress that focus on aids in africa include: s. 805 ( durbin ) and h.r .

3812 ( lee ) , both entitled african health capacity investment act of 2007 , would have authorized the president to provide assistance , including through international or nongovernmental organizations , for programs to improve human health care capacity in sub - saharan africa .

they would direct the president to develop and transmit to congress a strategy for coordinating , implementing , and monitoring assistance programs for human health care capacity in sub - saharan africa .

h.r .

1713 ( lee ) and s. 2415 ( clinton ) , both entitled protection against transmission of hiv for women and youth act of 2007 .

the bills would have directed the president to: ( 1 ) formulate and submit to the appropriate congressional committees , and make available to the public , a comprehensive and culturally appropriate global hiv prevention strategy that addresses the hiv vulnerability of married and unmarried women and girls and seeks to reduce the factors that lead to gender disparities in hiv infection rates ; ( 2 ) ensure that the united states coordinates its overall hiv / aids policy and programs with foreign governments , international organizations , other donor countries , and indigenous organizations ; and ( 3 ) provide clear guidance to u.s. field missions .

s.con.res .

31 ( feingold ) , entitled a concurrent resolution expressing support for advancing vital united states interests through increased engagement in health programs that alleviate disease and reduce premature death in developing nations , especially through programs that combat high levels of infectious disease improve children's and women's health , decrease malnutrition , reduce unintended pregnancies , fight the spread of hiv / aids , encourage healthy behaviors , and strengthen health care capacity .

during the first session of the 110 th congress , the senate foreign relations committee held the following two hearings on hiv / aids: perspectives on the next phase of the global fight against aids , tuberculosis , and malaria , december 13 , 2007 ; and the next phase of the global fight against hiv / aids , october 24 , 2007 .

during the first session of the 110 th congress , the subcommittee on africa and global health of the house committee on foreign affairs held the following hearing on hiv / aids: the president's emergency plan for aids relief: is it fulfilling the nutrition and food security needs of people living with hiv / aids ? , october 9 , 2007 .

placeholder here as wel .

