emergency rule by a military - backed caretaker government , currently headed by fakhruddin ahmed , is likely to continue through 2007 and into 2008 .

under a unique set of rules , the government in bangladesh is to hand over power to a caretaker government in the months immediately preceding national elections .

the bangladesh national party did this in 2006 in the lead up to the scheduled january 2007 election .

the current political situation came about after emergency rule was declared by president iajuddin ahmed following protests and strikes by opposition parties in the lead up to the january 2007 elections .

this led to the installation of the present military - backed caretaker government .

the awami league ( al ) , which was in opposition to the previous bangladesh national party ( bnp ) government , protested irregularities in the voter list in the lead up to the election that was scheduled for january 2007 .

these irregularities were independently confirmed by the national democratic institute ( ndi ) : the [ndi] delegation is deeply concerned that the new voters' list runs to over 93 million names , a size that is substantially inconsistent with the 2001 census data .

a voters' list containing two - thirds of the population strains credibility ... on the basis of the 2001 census , the voting age population was approximately 80 million people .

the current military - backed caretaker government has stated that it wishes to hold elections in 2008 after implementing electoral reforms to include a new voter list and improved voter identification .

observers believe that the military has been reluctant to play a more direct role for fear of jeopardizing its lucrative international peacekeeping work .

some observers are already concerned that elections may be further delayed .

according to brad adams , asia director for human rights watch , the army is running the country and does not intend to relinquish power in the near future .

it has been reported that as many as 200,000 people , including leading politicians , have been jailed under the emergency .

disillusionment among bangladeshis with the two traditional ruling political parties , the awami league led by sheikh hasina and the bangladesh national party led by khaleda zia , meant that emergency rule has been broadly welcomed by the populace .

zia was prime minister from 1991 to 1996 and from 2001 to 2006 , while hasina was prime minister from 1996 to 2001 .

there are reportedly signs that discontent may emerge should elections be indefinitely delayed .

bangladesh's economy is projected to grow by approximately 6% through 2008 despite the political turmoil .

deputy assistant secretary of state for south and central asia john gastright stated in testimony before the house subcommittee on the middle east and south asia on august 1 , 2007 , that bangladesh was "... fast becoming a democracy in name only , where money , cronyism and intimidation increasingly dictated the outcome of elections. .

in discussing the shift to the new military - backed caretaker government , he stated that u.s. was initially "troubled that this dramatic shift in government might signal a hidden agenda to indefinitely delay a return to democracy and conceal a secret military coup. .

he added that the caretaker government was responsive to calls for outlining a roadmap to elections and the restoration of democracy .

the united states has long - standing supportive relations with bangladesh and has viewed bangladesh as a moderate voice in the islamic world .

major u.s. interests in bangladesh include political stability and democratization ; continuation of economic reform and market - opening policies ; social and economic development ; environmental issues ; counterterrorism ; and improvement of the human rights situation .

many in the united states would particularly like to bolster bangladesh's democracy , which is destabilized by political violence .

in early 2003 , dhaka was the site of modestly - sized street demonstrations in opposition to the u.s. - led invasion of iraq .

bangladesh is a recipient of significant international aid .

it has received more than $30 billion from foreign donors since its independence in 1971 .

the state department has requested a total of $88,790,000 in assistance for bangladesh in the fy2008 budget request .

u.s. assistance to bangladesh supports health and economic development programs , the improvement of working conditions , including the elimination of child labor .

p.l .

480 funds provide food assistance for the poorest families and for disaster relief .

international military education and training programs strengthen the international peacekeeping force of bangladesh , which is a leading contributor of u.n. peacekeeping personnel .

the united states is bangladesh's largest export destination .

bangladesh's main import partners are india , china , kuwait , singapore , japan , and hong kong .

the united states exports wheat , fertilizer , cotton , communications equipment , and medical supplies , among other goods to bangladesh .

ready made garments and jute carpet backing are two of bangladesh's key exports to the u.s .

the united states has generally had a negative balance of trade with bangladesh since 1986 .

formerly known as east pakistan , and before that as the east bengal region of british india , bangladesh gained its independence from pakistan following a civil war in december 1971 .

the country's topography consists mainly of low lying alluvial plain , which is drained by some 700 rivers joining to form five major river systems that flow into the bay of bengal .

the densely populated country is subject to the annual ravages of cyclones and flooding .

there is a very real possibility that global warming may lead to rising sea levels that would likely flood much of bangladesh's low - lying costal areas .

following two decades of authoritarian rule , bangladesh held its first democratic elections in 1991 .

since then , dhaka's politics have been characterized by a bitter struggle between the bangladesh national party ( bnp ) and the awami league ( al ) , and particularly between the two leaders of the respective parties , prime minister khaleda zia ( 1991-1996 , 2001-present ) and former prime minister sheikh hasina wajed ( 1996-2001 ) .

zia is the widow of former president and military strongman ziaur rahman , who was assassinated in 1981 .

sheikh hasina is the daughter of bangladeshi independence leader and first prime minister sheikh mujibur rahman , who was assassinated in 1975 .

both the al and the bnp , when out of power , have devoted their energies to parliamentary boycotts , demonstrations , and strikes in an effort to unseat the ruling party .

the strikes often succeed in immobilizing the government and disrupting economic activity .

the president's powers are largely ceremonial , though they are expanded during the tenure of a caretaker government .

the bnp and its alliance partners were elected in october 2001 .

observers declared the poll generally free and fair , though more than 100 people were killed in pre - election violence .

the al , however , claimed that the elections were rigged and boycotted parliament for several months in protest .

since june 2002 , the al regularly has boycotted most parliamentary sessions or walked out of sessions in protest .

the bnp has published a white paper on the misuse of power , mismanagement and corruption allegedly committed during the period of al rule .

there has been some concern about the former bnp ruling coalition's inclusion of the fundamentalist jamaat - e - islami party , which supports turning secular and moderate bangladesh into an islamic republic .

there has been much political violence in bangladesh in recent years .

in january 2005 the state department issued a statement that "strongly condemned" the bomb attack that killed four , including former awami league finance minister a.m.s .

kibria , and injured 70 at a political rally of the awami league on january 27 , 2005 .

the incident was described by the state department as "the latest in a series of often deadly attacks on prominent leaders of the political opposition and civil society. .

on august 21 , 2004 , grenades were hurled in an apparent political assassination attempt on opposition leader sheikh hasina at a political rally in dhaka and killed 22 .

these two attacks , and widespread bombings on august 17 , 2005 marked a rising tide of political violence in bangladesh .

the formerly ruling awami league alleged that the jamaat - e - islami and islamiya okiyya jote parties protected the radicals responsible for the violence from prosecution by the government .

bangladesh is one of the poorest and most densely populated countries in the world .

the annual per capita income is about $2,300 in purchasing power parity .

the agricultural sector employs approximately 63% of the workforce and accounts for 19.9% of gdp while industry employs 11% and contributes 20.6% of gdp .

services account for 26% of the labor force and 59.5% of gdp .

the major crop is rice , in which bangladesh is nearly self - sufficient .

industry is centered mainly on cotton textiles , jute manufacturing , and food processing .

ready - made garments and knitwear are important exports for bangladesh .

foreign exchange earnings from remittances by bangladeshis working abroad is another key source of wealth for bangladesh .

though bangladesh is one of the world's poorest countries , its economy has made some progress in recent years .

the bangladeshi economy had , like that of its south asian neighbors , suffered from years of stagnation under public sector dominance and bureaucratic inefficiency .

in 1991 , however , zia's bnp government embarked on an economic reform program aimed at promoting budget discipline and export - led growth .

significant progress was made in reducing the budget deficit , increasing foreign reserves , and attracting new foreign investment .

sheik hasina's al government ( 1996-2001 ) continued to pursue economic reforms , making some headway in improving the investment climate .

however , bureaucratic delays and labor union resistance have hindered implementation of many reforms , including major privatization efforts .

moreover , crippling strikes led by both major political parties when out of power have resulted in a loss of foreign investor confidence .

the bangladeshi economy has been described as "mostly unfree,"as a result of high levels of trade protectionism and regulation , and an extensive black market economy .

bangladesh has been a pioneer in the field of micro enterprise lending programs .

former prime minister zia called for "faster and deeper economic integration" for the member states of the south asian association of regional cooperation ( saarc ) .

saarc considered a free trade agreement for member states at a meeting held in dhaka .

the united states was recently given observer status at saarc .

saarc granted such status to china and japan in 2005 .

frequent and disastrous floods take a heavy toll on lives , homes , crops , and livestock in bangladesh .

in 1998 , bangladesh suffered its worst flooding of the 20 th century .

lasting three months and covering two - thirds of the country , the floods left more than 1,000 dead and 25 million homeless or marooned .

the increase of flood devastation in recent years is related to growing population pressure and deforestation in upstream areas of bangladesh and neighboring india and nepal .

there are reports that bangladesh has recently improved its disaster management .

another key environmental issue for bangladesh has been the sharing with india of ganges ( called padma in bangladesh ) river waters .

in the early 1990s , bangladesh claimed that diversion of the river water to india had increased salinity and desertification of downstream soils and contributed to increased flooding in bangladesh .

in 1996 , bangladesh and india signed a 30-year agreement that settled the issue by giving bangladesh a share of the river waters for the first time since 1988 , when a previous agreement expired .

nonetheless , major water management issues — including hydroelectric power , deforestation , and water storage — remain to be addressed on a region - wide basis .

a serious environmental problem that has arisen in recent years is the dangerous levels of naturally occurring arsenic found in drinking water being supplied to millions of bangladeshis through a vast system of tubewells that tap the arsenic - contaminated ground water .

according to the department of state's country reports on human rights practices , the bangladesh "government's human rights record remained poor , and the government continued to commit numerous serious abuses. .

... extrajudicial killings , arbitrary arrest and detention , and politically motivated violence were among the most egregious violations .

security forces acted with impunity , and committed acts of physical and psychological torture .

in addition violence against journalists continued , as did infringement on religious freedoms .

government corruption remained a significant problem .

violence against women and children also was a major problem , as was trafficking in persons .

human rights watch found in 2006 that the bnp government had "aligned itself with extremist groups that foment violence against the minority ahmadiyya community. .

ahmadiyyas are a self identified islamic community that differs with mainstream islam on whether the prophet mohammad is the final prophet .

bnp government coalition partners ji and the ioj do not recognize ahmadiayys as muslims "and have been involved in fomenting religious violence against them and other religious minorities. .

the government has also been accused of failing to prosecute attacks against journalists by supporters of the bnp .

bangladesh's elite anti - crime and anti - terrorist rab is thought to be responsible for killing at least 350 people in custody and for the torture of hundreds of others .

the government's failure to punish rab members for unlawful killings and torture is viewed as indicative of consent for rab actions .

the rab was created in 2004 and is known to torture by boring holes in suspects with electric drills as well as using electric shock and beatings .

the rab has attributed deaths associated with its operations as the result of crossfire .

the case of bangladesh weekly blitz editor salah uddin shoaib choudhury highlights how the rise of islamist tendencies have undermined bangladesh's image as a tolerant muslim state .

the bnp government brought charges against choudhury stating that by praising the jews and the christians , by attempting to travel to israel and by predicting the so - called rise of islamist militancy in the country and expressing such thoughts in writing inside the country and abroad , you have tried to damage the image and relations of bangladesh with the outside world .

for which , charges ... are brought against you .

after 17 months in prison choudhury was released , though his offices were bombed and the government continues to press the charges against him .

choudhury could be hanged if convicted .

the media has reported that the efforts of u.s .

representatives mark kirk played a role in choudhury's release .

kirk was joined by 18 cosponsors when he introduced legislation calling for the charges against choudhury to be dropped .

relations between new delhi and dhaka have been strained in recent years as indian officials have accused bangladesh of harboring both agents of pakistan's intelligence service and separatist militants fighting the new delhi government in india's northeastern states , such as the all tripura tiger force .

dhaka has denied the accusations as "totally baseless and irresponsible. .

acrimony over migration issues led to periodic and lethal exchanges of gunfire between the border security forces of bangladesh and india .

bangladesh reportedly refused a request by india to have transit rights across bangladesh to link with its northeastern states .

with the exception of a small corridor , bangladesh separates india from its northeastern states .

border incidents , including exchanges of small arms fire between indian border security force and bangladesh rifles soldiers , continue to be an irritant in india - bangladesh relations .

india is building a fence along the 4,000 kilometer border with bangladesh to stem the flow of illegal immigrants .

india has also demanded that bangladesh suppress separatist militants that cross the border .

india has alleged that there are some 172 insurgent bases in bangladesh .

bangladesh has denied their existence .

bangladesh is strategically situated between south and southeast asia and is located in proximity to both india and china .

bangladesh's natural gas deposits , estimated at between 32 trillion and 80 trillion cubic feet , increase bangladesh's strategic importance to india and china , which may seek to secure additional energy resources for future economic growth .

arguments in bangladesh against developing the gas reserves for export have focused on the need to secure a 50-year supply of domestic energy requirements before entering the export market .

it has been estimated that bangladesh's energy needs to 2050 would require 63 trillion cubic feet of gas .

bangladesh and china signed a defense co - operation agreement in december 2002 .

