all of the navy's aircraft carriers , but none of its other surface ships , are nuclear - powered .

some members of congress , particularly on the house armed services committee , have expressed interest in expanding the use of nuclear power to a wider array of navy surface ships , starting with the cg ( x ) , a planned new cruiser that the navy had wanted to start procuring around fy2017 .

section 1012 of the fy2008 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4986 / p.l .

110-181 of january 28 , 2008 ) made it u.s. policy to construct the major combatant ships of the navy , including ships like the cg ( x ) , with integrated nuclear power systems , unless the secretary of defense submits a notification to congress that the inclusion of an integrated nuclear power system in a given class of ship is not in the national interest .

the navy studied nuclear power as a design option for the cg ( x ) , but did not announce whether it would prefer to build the cg ( x ) as a nuclear - powered ship .

the navy's fy2011 budget proposed canceling the cg ( x ) program and instead building an improved version of the conventionally powered arleigh burke ( ddg - 51 ) class aegis destroyer .

the cancellation of the cg ( x ) program would appear to leave no near - term shipbuilding program opportunities for expanding the application of nuclear power to navy surface ships other than aircraft carriers .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 , stated: the committee believes that the next generation [cg ( x ) ] cruiser must meet the challenge of emerging ballistic missile technology and that an integrated nuclear power system is required to achieve maximum capability of the vessel .

 ( page 72 ) the report also stated: the committee remains committed to the direction of section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( public law 110 – 181 ) , which requires the use of an integrated nuclear propulsion system for the cgn ( x ) [cruiser] .

 ( page 75 ) section 246 of h.r .

2647 would require the department of defense ( dod ) to submit to the congressional defense committees a study on the use of thorium - liquid fueled nuclear reactors for navy surface ships .

the text of section 246 is as follows: sec .

246 .

study on thorium - liquid fueled reactors for naval forces .

 ( a ) study required - the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shall jointly carry out a study on the use of thorium - liquid fueled nuclear reactors for naval power needs pursuant to section 1012 , of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ; 122 stat .

303 ) .

 ( b ) contents of study - in carrying out the study required under subsection ( a ) , the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shall , with respect to naval power requirements for the navy strike and amphibious force — ( 1 ) compare and contrast thorium - liquid fueled reactor concept to the 2005 quick look , 2006 navy alternative propulsion study , and the navy cg ( x ) analysis of alternatives study ; ( 2 ) identify the benefits to naval operations which thorium - liquid fueled nuclear reactors or uranium reactors would provide to major surface combatants compared to conventionally fueled ships , including such benefits with respect to — ( a ) fuel cycle , from mining to waste disposal ; ( b ) security of fuel supply ; ( c ) power needs for advanced weapons and sensors ; ( d ) safety of operation , waste handling and disposal , and proliferation issues compared to uranium reactors ; ( e ) no requirement to refuel and reduced logistics ; ( f ) ship upgrades and retrofitting ; ( g ) reduced manning ; ( h ) global range at flank speed , greater forward presence , and extended combat operations ; ( i ) power for advanced sensors and weapons , including electromagnetic guns and lasers ; ( j ) survivability due to increased performance and reduced signatures ; ( k ) high power density propulsion ; ( l ) operational tempo ; ( m ) operational effectiveness ; and ( n ) estimated cost - effectiveness ; and ( 3 ) conduct a rom cost - effectiveness comparison of nuclear reactors in use by the navy as of the date of the enactment of this act , thorium - liquid fueled reactors , and conventional fueled major surface combatants , which shall include a comparison of — ( a ) security , safety , and infrastructure costs of fuel supplies ; ( b ) nuclear proliferation issues ; ( c ) reactor safety ; ( d ) nuclear fuel safety , waste handling , and storage ; ( e ) power requirements and distribution for sensors , weapons , and propulsion ; and ( f ) capabilities to fully execute the navy maritime strategic concept .

 ( c ) report - not later than february 1 , 2011 , the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the results of the study required under subsection ( a ) .

section 1012 of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( s. 1390 ) as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

111-35 of july 2 , 2009 ) would repeal section 1012 of the fy2008 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4986 / p.l .

110-181 of january 28 , 2008 ) .

the committee's report stated: the committee recommends a provision [section 1012] that would repeal section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) .

section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) , as amended by section 1015 of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) , would require that all new classes of surface combatants and all new amphibious assault ships larger than 15,000 deadweight ton light ship displacement have integrated nuclear power systems , unless the secretary of defense determines that the inclusion of an integrated nuclear power system in such vessel is not in the national interest .

the committee believes that the navy is already having too much difficulty in achieving the goal of a 313-ship fleet without adding a substantial increment to the acquisition price of a significant portion of the fleet .

moreover , current acquisition law and the weapon system acquisition reform act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-23 ) emphasize the need to start acquisition programs on a sure footing as a central mechanism by which the department of defense ( dod ) can get control of cost growth and schedule slippage on major defense acquisition programs .

therefore , congress should be loathe to dictate a particular outcome of a requirements process before the department has conducted the normal requirements review .

the committee expects that the navy will continue to evaluate the integrated nuclear power alternative for any new class of major surface combatants , but would prefer that any navy requirements analysis not be skewed toward a particular outcome .

 ( page 170 ) .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 , stated: repeal of policy relating to the major combatant vessels of the unites states navy the senate amendment contained a provision ( sec .

1012 ) that would repeal section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( public law 110 – 181 ) .

section 1012 , as amended , would require that all new classes of surface combatants and all new amphibious assault ships larger than 15,000 deadweight ton light ship displacement have integrated nuclear power systems , unless the secretary of defense determines that the inclusion of an integrated nuclear power system in such vessel is not in the national interest .

the house bill contained no similar provision .

the senate recedes .

 ( page 822 ) the report also stated: study on thorium - liquid fueled reactors for naval forces the house bill contained a provision ( sec .

246 ) that would have directed the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff to carry out jointly a study on the use of thorium - liquid fueled nuclear reactors for naval propulsion .

the senate amendment contained no similar provision .

the house recedes .

the conferees note that while there may be credible research initiatives to explore the use of molten salt reactors for commercial power generation , the use of molten salt reactors on naval vessels is not currently technically feasible and a requirement to perform a study on the use of molten salt reactors is premature .

this is due to technology challenges with material construction ( molten salt reactors are inherently corrosive to metals ) , storage of the liquid fuel , and radiation shielding for the crew from a non - solid fuel reactor .

the conferees recommend that the navy continue to monitor the progress of technology development in commercial application of molten salt reactors , including licensing , for potential future application .

 ( page 708 ) .

the house - reported version of h.r .

5658 contained a provision ( section 1013 ) that would amend section 1012 of the fy2008 defense authorization act ( see discussion below ) to include amphibious ships and amphibious command ships of a certain minimum size as among the types of ships to be built in the future with nuclear power unless the secretary of defense notifies congress that nuclear power for a given class of ship would not be in the national interest .

section 1013 stated: sec .

1013 .

policy relating to major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy .

section 1012 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) is amended by adding at the end the following: ' ( d ) amphibious assault ships , including dock landing ships ( lsd ) , amphibious transport - dock ships ( lpd ) , helicopter assault ships ( lha / lhd ) , and amphibious command ships ( lcc ) , if such vessels exceed 15,000 dead weight ton light ship displacement. .

in its report ( h.rept .

110-652 of may 16 , 2008 ) on h.r .

5658 , the house armed services committee stated: this section would amend section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) by requiring that in addition to future ship classes of aircraft carriers , major surface combatants , and submarines , that assault echelon amphibious ships also must be constructed with integrated nuclear power systems if the ship's light weight displacement is greater than 15 thousand tons .

the committee believes the future naval force should not be reliant on the availability of fossil fuel for fleet operations .

removing the need for access to fossil fuel sources significantly multiplies the effectiveness of the entire battle force and eliminates the dependence on foreign nation support of deployed naval forces .

 ( pages 428-429 ) .

the report of the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

110-335 of may 12 , 2008 ) on the fy2009 defense authorization bill ( s. 3001 ) stated , with regard to the cg ( x ) cruiser , that: the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) required that the navy include nuclear power in its analysis of alternatives ( aoa ) for the cg ( x ) propulsion system .

section 1012 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) further requires that cg ( x ) be nuclear powered , unless the secretary of defense submits a notification that inclusion of an integrated nuclear power system is not in the national interest .

the statement of managers accompanying that act directed the secretary of the navy to submit a report with the budget request for fiscal year 2009 providing information regarding cg ( x ) design , cost , schedule , industrial base considerations , and risk assessment ; that would reflect the results of the cg ( x ) aoa and provide evidence that the navy is on schedule for procuring the first ship of the class in 2011 .

the secretary of the navy has delayed submission of the cg ( x ) report because the cg ( x ) aoa , which was scheduled to be complete by third quarter fiscal year 2007 , remains under review by the navy .

fundamental considerations regarding the cruiser's requirements , characteristics , technology readiness levels , and affordability continue to be studied , making it likely that milestone a , which was targeted for september 2007 , will slip into 2009 .

by all measures , there is no reasonable path for the next - generation cruiser to meet the current schedule for milestone b and award of a ship construction contract in 2011 .

pending completion of the aoa , determination of radar requirements , ship characteristics , propulsion system , and an executable program schedule , and in view of the delay to program major milestones , the activities planned for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 cannot be executed per the schedule reflected in the fiscal year 2009 budget request .

therefore , the committee recommends a decrease [in the navy's request for fy2009 research and development funding] of $87.2 million in pe 64300n and a decrease of $33.6 million in pe 64501n .

these recommended decreases would maintain the cruiser development activities at the same level as was funded in fiscal year 2008 .

 ( page 195 ) .

in lieu of a conference report , there was a compromise version of s. 3001 that was accompanied by a joint explanatory statement .

section 4 of s. 3001 states that the joint explanatory statement "shall have the same effect with respect to the implementation of this act as if it were a joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference. .

s. 3001 was signed into law as p.l .

110-417 on october 14 , 2008 .

section 1015 of s. 3001 / p.l .

110-417 amended section 1012 of the fy2008 defense authorization act ( see discussion below ) to include amphibious ships and amphibious command ships of a certain minimum size as among the types of ships to be built in the future with nuclear power unless the secretary of defense notifies congress that nuclear power for a given class of ship would not be in the national interest .

section 1015 states: sec .

1015 .

policy relating to major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy .

section 1012 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) is amended by adding at the end the following: " ( d ) amphibious assault ships , including dock landing ships ( lsd ) , amphibious trans port — dock ships ( lpd ) , helicopter assault ships ( lha / lhd ) , and amphibious command ships ( lcc ) , if such vessels exceed 15,000 dead weight ton light ship displacement. .

the house - reported version of the fy2008 defense authorization bill ( originally h.r .

1585 , a bill that was succeeded by h.r .

4986 following a presidential veto of h.r .

1585 ) contained a provision ( section 1012 ) that would make it u.s. policy to build submarines , aircraft carriers , cruisers , and other large surface combatants with nuclear power unless the secretary of defense notifies congress that nuclear power for a given class of ship would not be in the national interest .

the provision stated: sec .

1012 .

policy relating to major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy .

 ( a ) integrated nuclear power systems - it is the policy of the united states to construct the major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy , including all new classes of such vessels , with integrated nuclear power systems .

 ( b ) requirement to request nuclear vessels - if a request is submitted to congress in the budget for a fiscal year for construction of a new class of major combatant vessel for the strike forces of the united states , the request shall be for such a vessel with an integrated nuclear power system , unless the secretary of defense submits with the request a notification to congress that the inclusion of an integrated nuclear power system in such vessel is not in the national interest .

 ( c ) definitions - in this section: ( 1 ) major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy - the term `major combatant vessels of the strike forces of the united states navy' means the following: ( a ) submarines .

 ( b ) aircraft carriers .

 ( c ) cruisers , battleships , or other large surface combatants whose primary mission includes protection of carrier strike groups , expeditionary strike groups , and vessels comprising a sea base .

 ( 2 ) integrated nuclear power system - the term `integrated nuclear power system' means a ship engineering system that uses a naval nuclear reactor as its energy source and generates sufficient electric energy to provide power to the ship's electrical loads , including its combat systems and propulsion motors .

 ( 3 ) budget - the term `budget' means the budget that is submitted to congress by the president under section 1105 ( a ) of title 31 , united states code .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

110-146 of may 11 , 2007 ) on h.r .

1585 , stated the following in regard to section 1012: this section would require that all new ship classes of submarines , cruisers , and aircraft carriers be built with nuclear power systems unless the secretary of defense notifies the committee that it is not in the national interest to do so .

the committee believes that the mobility , endurance , and electric power generation capability of nuclear powered warships is essential to the next generation of navy cruisers .

the navy's report to congress on alternative propulsion methods for surface combatants and amphibious warfare ships , required by section 130 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) , indicated that the total lifecycle cost for medium - sized nuclear surface combatants is equivalent to conventionally powered ships .

the committee notes that this study only compared acquisition and maintenance costs and did not analyze the increased speed and endurance capability of nuclear powered vessels .

the committee believes that the primary escort vessels for the navy's fleet of aircraft carriers should have the same speed and endurance capability as the aircraft carrier .

the committee also notes that surface combatants with nuclear propulsion systems would be more capable during independent operations because there would be no need for underway fuel replenishment .

 ( page 387 ) .

the senate - reported version of the fy2008 defense authorization bill ( s. 1547 ) did not contain a provision analogous to section 1012 of the house - reported version of h.r .

1585 .

the report of the senate armed services committee on s. 1547 ( s.rept .

110-77 of june 5 , 2007 ) did not comment directly on the issue of nuclear power for navy ships other than submarines and aircraft carriers .

section 1012 of the conference report ( h.rept .

110-477 of december 6 , 2007 ) on h.r .

1585 is the same as section 1012 of the house - reported version of h.r .

1585 ( see discussion above ) .

in discussing section 1012 , the conference report stated: the navy's next opportunity to apply this guidance will be the next generation cruiser , or "cg ( x ) " .

under the current future - years defense program ( fydp ) , the navy plans to award the construction contract for cg ( x ) in fiscal year 2011 .

under this provision , the next cruiser would be identified as "cgn ( x ) " to designate the ship as nuclear powered .

under the navy's normal shipbuilding schedule for the two programs that already have nuclear power systems ( aircraft carriers and submarines ) , the navy seeks authorization and appropriations for long lead time nuclear components for ships 2 years prior to full authorization and appropriation for construction .

the conferees recognize that the milestone decision for the navy's cg ( x ) is only months away .

after that milestone decision , the navy and its contractors will begin a significant design effort , and , in that process , will be making significant tradeoff decisions and discarding major options ( such as propulsion alternatives ) .

this is the normal process for the navy and the department of defense ( dod ) to make choices that will lead to producing a contract design that will be the basis for awarding the construction contract for the lead ship in 2011 .

in order for the navy to live by the spirit of this guidance , the conferees agree that: ( 1 ) the navy would be required to proceed through the contract design phase of the program with a comprehensive effort to design a cgn ( x ) independent of the outcome of decisions that the navy or the dod will make at the next milestone decision point regarding any preferred propulsion system for the next generation cruiser ; ( 2 ) if the navy intends to maintain the schedule in the current fydp and award a vessel in fiscal year 2011 , the navy would need to request advance procurement for nuclear components in the fiscal year 2009 budget request ; and ( 3 ) the navy must consider options for: ( a ) maintaining the segment of the industrial base that currently produces the conventionally powered destroyer and amphibious forces of the navy ; ( b ) certifying yards which comprise that segment of the industrial base to build nuclear - powered vessels ; or ( c ) seeking other alternatives for building non - nuclear ships in the future if the navy is only building nuclear - powered surface combatant ships for some period of time as it builds cgn ( x ) vessels ; and ( d ) identifying sources of funds to pay for the additional near - term costs of the integrated nuclear power system , either from offsets within the navy's budget , from elsewhere within the department's resources , or from gaining additional funds for dod overall .

the conferees recognize that these considerations will require significant additional near - term investment by the navy .

some in the navy have asserted that , despite such added investment , the navy would not be ready to award a shipbuilding contract for a cgn ( x ) in fiscal year 2011 as in the current fydp .

section 128 of the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( public law 109-364 ) required that the navy include nuclear power in its analysis of alternatives ( aoa ) for the cg ( x ) propulsion system .

the conferees are aware that the cg ( x ) aoa is nearing completion , in which case the navy should have some indications of what it will require to design and construct a cgn ( x ) class .

accordingly , the conferees direct the secretary of the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees with the budget request for fiscal year 2009 providing the following information: ( 1 ) the set of next generation cruiser characteristics , such as displacement and manning , which would be affected by the requirement for including an integrated nuclear power system ; ( 2 ) the navy's estimate for additional costs to develop , design , and construct a cgn ( x ) to fill the requirement for the next generation cruiser , and the optimal phasing of those costs in order to deliver cgn ( x ) most affordably ; ( 3 ) the navy's assessment of any effects on the delivery schedule for the first ship of the next generation cruiser class that would be associated with shifting the design to incorporate an integrated nuclear propulsion system , options for reducing or eliminating those schedule effects , and alternatives for meeting next generation cruiser requirements during any intervening period if the cruiser's full operational capability were delayed ; ( 4 ) the navy's estimate for the cost associated with certifying those shipyards that currently produce conventionally powered surface combatants , to be capable of constructing and integrating a nuclear - powered combatant ; ( 5 ) any other potential effects on the navy's 30-year shipbuilding plan as a result of implementing these factors ; ( 6 ) such other considerations that would need to be addressed in parallel with design and construction of a cgn ( x ) class , including any unique test and training facilities , facilities and infrastructure requirements for potential cgn ( x ) homeports , and environmental assessments that may require long - term coordination and planning ; and ( 7 ) an assessment of the highest risk areas associated with meeting this requirement , and the navy's alternatives for mitigating such risk .

 ( pages 984-986 ) h.r .

1585 was vetoed by the president on december 28 , 2007 .

in response , congress passed a modified bill , h.r .

4986 , that took into account the president's objections to h.r .

1585 .

the modifications incorporated into h.r .

4986 did not affect the provisions discussed here , and for these and other unmodified parts of the bill , h.rept .

110-477 in effect serves as the conference report for h.r .

4986 .

h.r .

4986 was signed into law as p.l .

110-181 on january 28 , 2008 .

section 1012 of the conference report is similar in some respects to the so - called title viii legislation of the 1970s that required future navy ships of certain kinds to be nuclear - powered .

section 130 of the conference report ( h.rept .

109-360 of december 18 , 2005 ) on the fy2006 defense authorization act ( h.r .

1815 / p.l .

109-163 of january 6 , 2006 ) required the navy to submit a report by november 1 , 2006 , on alternative propulsion methods for surface combatants and amphibious warfare ships .

the navy submitted the report to congress in january 2007 .

section 130 states: sec .

130 .

report on alternative propulsion methods for surface combatants and amphibious warfare ships .

 ( a ) analysis of alternatives. — the secretary of the navy shall conduct an analysis of alternative propulsion methods for surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships of the navy .

 ( b ) report. — the secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the analysis of alternative propulsion systems carried out under subsection ( a ) .

the report shall be submitted not later than november 1 , 2006 .

 ( c ) matters to be included. — the report under subsection ( b ) shall include the following: ( 1 ) the key assumptions used in carrying out the analysis under subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) the methodology and techniques used in conducting the analysis .

 ( 3 ) a description of current and future technology relating to propulsion that has been incorporated in recently - designed surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships or that is expected to be available for those types of vessels within the next 10-to - 20 years .

 ( 4 ) a description of each propulsion alternative for surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships that was considered under the study and an analysis and evaluation of each such alternative from an operational and cost - effectiveness standpoint .

 ( 5 ) a comparison of the life - cycle costs of each propulsion alternative .

 ( 6 ) for each nuclear propulsion alternative , an analysis of when that nuclear propulsion alternative becomes cost effective as the price of a barrel of crude oil increases for each type of ship .

 ( 7 ) the conclusions and recommendations of the study , including those conclusions and recommendations that could impact the design of future ships or lead to modifications of existing ships .

 ( 8 ) the secretary's intended actions , if any , for implementation of the conclusions and recommendations of the study .

 ( d ) life - cycle costs. — for purposes of this section , the term "life - cycle costs" includes those elements of cost that would be considered for a life - cycle cost analysis for a major defense acquisition program .

