the prospect of oil development in the biologically rich ecosystem of the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr , or the refuge ) , on alaska's north slope , has been a focus of the american energy debate ever since oil was discovered on nearby state lands .

at the heart of the debate is a part of the refuge that has potentially significant oil and natural gas resources and also serves as habitat for numerous species , such as polar bears , caribou , waterfowl , and others .

the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , within the department of the interior ( doi ) , manages the refuge and has periodically updated plans to guide its management .

on december 22 , 2017 , president trump signed into law p.l .

115-97 , which establishes an oil and gas program in the refuge's coastal plain , to be administered by doi's bureau of land management ( blm ) .

the anwr provisions were included in tax reform legislation enacted under the budget reconciliation process .

the law requires at least two lease sales ( of no fewer than 400,000 acres each ) for the coastal plain within 10 years and contains provisions for the distribution of revenues and royalties .

surface development is limited to 2,000 acres , which need not be concentrated in a single area .

the congressional budget office estimated the state and federal revenue from the first two lease sales at approximately $2.2 billion over 10 years ( with 50% of revenues — $1.1 billion — going to the state of alaska and 50% to the federal government ) .

however , once the areas for lease are determined , and depending on the market conditions at the time of the lease sales , the bids the government receives may be higher or lower .

drilling in anwr , as elsewhere in the arctic , is a difficult and expensive prospect .

a key factor in what companies may bid for leases is the price of oil , which as of january 2018 is relatively low .

after acquiring a lease , companies will have to analyze seismic data and drill exploratory wells to determine where oil may be located and estimate amounts in relation to possible revenues , in order to decide if they want to develop any discoveries and produce oil .

in addition to the work on hydrocarbon discoveries , moving oil found in anwr to market will require infrastructure , most likely new pipelines , to transport the oil to shipping terminals and eventually to refineries .

the oil and gas program mandated by p.l .

115-97 is similar but not identical to anwr oil and gas leasing programs proposed in two other bills in the 115 th congress , h.r .

49 and s. 49 .

these bills contain various provisions related to the program that were not included in p.l .

115-97 , possibly owing in part to limitations imposed by the budget reconciliation process on the matters that can be considered in reconciliation legislation .

in addition to conducting oversight of the oil and gas program's implementation , congress could choose to address some of these other issues — such as issues related to environmental compliance , judicial review , and special management areas within the coastal plain — in future legislation , or it could decide that the provisions of p.l .

115-97 provide sufficient guidance for the program .

by contrast , two other bills in the 115 th congress , h.r .

1889 and s. 820 , would establish the coastal plain as wilderness , meaning there would be no commercial development , except to meet the minimum requirements for managing the area as wilderness .

such a designation would be consistent with recommendations in the obama administration's revised comprehensive conservation plan and final environmental impact statement ( rccp ) for anwr , finalized in january 2015 .

this report discusses the refuge's legislative history ( including native claims and congressional actions from the 109 th to the 115 th congresses ) , energy resources ( including relevant market forces and potential oil and gas resources ) , native interests and subsistence uses , and biological resources , as well as issues for congress related to development under p.l .

115-97 .

anwr , established by the alaska national interest lands conservation act of 1980 ( anilca ; p.l .

96-487 , 43 u.s.c .

§§1601 et seq .

 ) , consists of 19 million acres in northeast alaska .

it is administered by fws within doi .

development proponents view its 1.57-million - acre coastal plain — also known as the 1002 area — as a promising onshore oil prospect .

according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the mean estimate of technically recoverable oil from multiple prospects on the federally owned land in the refuge is 7.7 billion barrels ( billion bbl ) ; there is a low probability that more than 11.8 billion bbl could be recovered on the federal lands over the life of the prospective fields .

 ( in comparison , the united states currently uses about 7.1 billion bbl per year ; see " oil resource potential ." ) .

the amount that can be recovered depends , in part , on the economics of the oil market .

when oil prices are high , more oil will be economic to produce ; when oil prices are low , less oil will be economic to produce .

since january 2014 , oil prices have dropped by almost 40% , going from an average of $94.60 / bbl to $60.37 / bbl in the beginning of january 2018 .

for all of 2017 , nominal prices ranged from a high of $60.46 / bbl to a low of $42.48 / bbl .

in 2005 , in the most recent analysis available on anwr , when oil was priced at $67.65 / bbl in 2017 dollars , the mean estimate of economically recoverable oil on the federal lands in the 1002 area was 7.1 billion bbl , and there was a small chance that the federal lands could have had more than 10.7 billion bbl of economically recoverable oil .

 ( see box , "old geological data , old prices , and new interest," on use of older data. ) .

in comparison , the single giant field at prudhoe bay , alaska , discovered in 1967 on the state - owned portion of the coastal plain located west of anwr ( shown in figure 1 ) , is now estimated to have held almost 14 billion bbl of economically recoverable oil .

the available information and analysis indicates that any anwr oil would be scattered among multiple smaller fields rather than concentrated in a single large field , which would make development more expensive and potentially expand the area in which any environmental effects might occur .

congress's decision in p.l .

115-97 to open the federal lands on anwr's coastal plain to energy development also opens the coastal plain's native lands , based on current law .

 ( see " alaska native claims settlement act " and " chandler lake agreement of 1983 ." ) .

in addition , development in the coastal plain may make nearby state lands along the coast ( already legally open to development ) more economically attractive to industry for exploration and development .

together , the federal , state , and native ownerships likely have multiple individual fields with oil potential .

although only fields on the federal lands would produce federal revenue from bonus bids , royalties , and rents , the 2005 usgs figures show that when state and native lands also are considered , the mean estimate of economically recoverable oil rises from 7.1 billion bbl to 9.7 billion bbl .

in addition , there is a small chance that the three ownership areas might contain more than 14.6 billion bbl of economically recoverable oil ( as opposed to the high - end estimate of 10.7 billion bbl for federal lands alone ) , if oil is priced at $67.65 / bbl in 2017 dollars .

 ( see box , "old geological data , old prices , and new interest," for a discussion of the use of old data and old prices , and see section on " oil resource potential " for further discussion of prices. ) .

the refuge , especially the nearly undisturbed coastal plain , is home to a wide variety of plants and animals .

the presence of caribou , polar bears , grizzly bears , wolves , migratory birds , and other species in this wild area has led some to call the area "america's serengeti. .

 ( see " the biological resources ." ) .

several species found in the area ( including polar bears , caribou , migratory birds , and whales ) are offered certain limited protections through international treaties or agreements .

in the past there have been proposals that the refuge and two neighboring parks in canada join to form an international park , with prohibitions on oil exploration and development .

the analysis below discusses the legislative history of the refuge ; the economic and geological factors that have triggered interest in development ; the native interests in the area ; biological and environmental quality factors ; and ongoing issues for congress .

the balance between oil and natural gas development and the preservation of biological resources of northern alaska has been controversial for decades , even before alaska became a state .

in 1943 , the federal government withdrew all lands on the north slope ( the land north of the crest of the brooks mountain range and between canada and the chukchi sea ) by public land order ( plo ) 82 to prevent certain types of development .

in november 1957 , interior secretary fred seaton filed a document protecting some of those lands ( plus some additional lands south of the crest of the brooks range ) for the benefit of wildlife and migratory birds .

alaska was admitted to the union in 1959 .

in 1960 , plo 2214 reserved the 1957 segregated area as the arctic national wildlife range .

the plo withdrew the lands from "all forms of appropriation ... including mining but not the mineral leasing laws," thus leaving oil and natural gas development as a possibility .

despite these withdrawals , not all of the refuge is owned by the federal government .

the history of anwr ( and its energy development restrictions ) is intertwined with congressional efforts to settle land claims of native alaskans .

as part of those efforts , some anwr property was transferred to native corporations .

the next section provides a short history of those transfers to help explain the restrictions on development prior to enactment of p.l .

115-97 .

the developed parts of alaska's north slope suggest promise for energy prospects in the adjoining anwr .

petroleum - bearing strata extend eastward from structures in the national petroleum reserve - alaska through the prudhoe bay field , and they may continue into and through anwr's 1002 area .

 ( see figure 3 and figure 5 . ) .

both changing prices and changing costs affect oil and natural gas prospects .

new technologies may help alleviate some environmental concerns .

however , production issues in some north slope fields have raised doubts about anwr's potential for oil and natural gas resource development .

any anwr resources would be expensive to produce and would require construction of new infrastructure , such as pipelines and processing units , due to location and environmental conditions .

the native community , both between and within its villages and organizations , is divided on the question of energy development in the refuge , but some patterns can be discerned .

generally , the alaska natives along the north slope ( inuit ) have supported anwr development , whereas the natives of interior alaska ( gwich'in ) have opposed it , though neither group is unanimous .

some parts of the native community are heavily dependent for their subsistence uses on the caribou herd that calves in the 1002 area , and because of the lengthy migration of the caribou herds , this dependency is an important factor for them even if they live at a considerable distances from the coastal plain .

seeing energy development as a threat to the safety or success of calving season , these groups have opposed drilling the refuge .

among these opponents are most members of the gwich'in tribe , whose members are found both south and east of the refuge in alaska and canada .

among the native groups supporting anwr development are the arctic slope regional corporation ( asrc ) and doyon limited ( both native regional corporations ) and the native village of kaktovik ( a native organization in kaktovik , the only town within the coastal plain of anwr ) .

the chief arguments cited by these groups are the increases in both north slope employment and revenues from increased business activity .

according to asrc , chevron texaco and bp currently hold leases to all of the asrc / kic acreage within the anwr coastal plain .

many native supporters argue that development and production practices can be carried out so as to avoid damage to the caribou that calve in the area .

the 1002 report , issued in 1987 , rated the refuge's biological resources highly — "the arctic refuge is the only conservation system unit that protects , in an undisturbed condition , a complete spectrum of the arctic ecosystems in north america. .

it also stated that "[t]he 1002 area is the most biologically productive part of the arctic refuge for wildlife and is the center of wildlife activity. .

the biological value of the 1002 area rests on intense productivity in the short arctic summer ; many species arrive or awake from dormancy to take advantage of this biological richness and leave or become dormant during the remainder of the year .

caribou have long been the center of the debate over the biological impacts of refuge development .

among the other species most frequently mentioned are polar bears ( which were listed under the endangered species act [esa] as threatened in 2008 ) , musk oxen , and the 135 species of migratory birds that breed or feed there .

in addition , the effects of energy development on marine mammals ( many of which are protected under the esa and all of which are protected under the marine mammal protection act ) could become an issue if expanded infrastructure development onshore made nearby offshore development more economically attractive .

the basic and most contentious anwr question for congress has been whether to permit energy development in the coastal plain .

p.l .

115-97 addressed the question by establishing an oil and gas program for this area ( see " actions in the 115th congress " ) .

earlier legislative proposals had ranged from those to designate the coastal plain as wilderness or a national monument to those to allow partial or full development .

in the context of oversight of the implementation of the anwr provisions in p.l .

115-97 , or in the context of debate over other bills that would address anwr , congress may continue to be interested in key aspects of the anwr debate that have been raised previously .

these could include issues related to limits on the footprint of development , other environmental protections , compliance with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , judicial review of legal challenges , and treatment of special areas within the coastal plain , among other matters .

p.l .

115-97 addressed some of these issues and not others , possibly owing in part to limitations imposed by the budget reconciliation process on the matters that can be considered in reconciliation legislation .

congress could choose to address some of these issues in future legislation and oversight or could decide that the provisions of p.l .

115-97 already provide sufficient guidance for the program .

enactment of p.l .

115-97 in december 2017 culminated a decades - long debate over whether to allow oil and gas development in anwr in northeastern alaska .

the law established an oil and gas program for the refuge's coastal plain , with at least two oil and gas lease sales required in the next 10 years .

development proponents contend that the sales will generate economic activity , contribute to u.s. energy security , and result in royalty revenues for both the federal government and the state of alaska , while opponents express concern that development will detrimentally impact the unique biological resources of the refuge .

p.l .

115-97 requires the first anwr lease sale within four years of the law's enactment .

activities preparatory to the lease sale include identifying lands to be leased , conducting sale - specific environmental reviews , issuing notices of sales , and other "prelease" activities .

activities could also include new geological and geophysical ( g&g ) surveys to determine the extent and location of hydrocarbon resources .

congress could potentially take additional action related to anwr oil and gas leasing , including through further legislation or through oversight of doi's implementation of the provisions of p.l .

115-97 .

a number of development issues addressed in earlier anwr bills were not addressed in p.l .

115-97 , possibly owing in part to limitations imposed by the budget reconciliation process .

congress could choose to address some of these issues in future legislation amending the oil and gas program or could decide that the provisions of p.l .

115-97 already provide sufficient guidance for the program .

alternatively , congress could decide to end the program , for example by designating the refuge's coastal plain as wilderness , as is proposed in some 115 th congress bills .

the congressional budget office estimated the state and federal revenue from the first two lease sales in anwr at approximately $2.2 billion over 10 years .

actual bids will depend on many factors , including market conditions at the time of the lease sales .

development and transportation of oil in the refuge , as elsewhere in the arctic , is a difficult and expensive prospect , and a key factor in industry bids will be the price of oil .

