"developing countries," a heterogeneous group of low - and medium - income economies , are making an increasingly strong impact on u.s. foreign trade and investment and world trade .

this impact is both economic and political and is likely to increase .

developing countries have been shaping u.s. trade patterns , trade policy priorities and policies .

they are re - shaping the international trading system , asserting greater influence at bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations , and challenging the united states and other developed countries to reappraise long - held policies .

at the same time , developing countries' advancement on the international trade stage has forced them to confront the challenges of international competition and the responsibilities that come with membership in the international trade community: developed countries are demanding that developing countries jettison economic policies that protect domestic markets for local producers and workers .

the growing role of some developing countries in u.s. and world trade raises sensitive policy issues for members of congress as they consider legislation to implement trade agreements , to monitor administration enforcement of agreements and of trade laws , and to develop policies .

many of the u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) in place or that are under negotiation are with developing countries .

furthermore , the united states has been engaged with the other 149 members of the world trade organization ( wto ) in the doha development agenda ( dda ) round of negotiations .

the vast majority of the wto members are developing countries who are using the strength of their large numbers to influence the agenda and the pace of the negotiations .

the dda negotiations are now indefinitely stalled because of , among other reasons , conflicts between developed and developing countries on agricultural trade .

congressional interests and the congressional legislative agenda are filled with issues pertaining to trade with developing countries .

the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program and other trade preference programs are subject to periodic reviews and renewals .

some members of congress have suggested that the congress needs to re - examine the rationale for these programs and their eligibility criteria in light of the rapid economic advancements that some developing countries have made .

in addition , the congress has recently considered and passed legislation implementing ftas with developing countries and will probably consider a number of others in the near future .

congressional debate and final action over these measures will likely be influenced by the perception of the role that developing countries play in u.s. trade .

the purpose of this report is to assist the congress in assessing and developing u.s. foreign trade and economic policies by examining the role that developing countries are playing in trading with the united states .

the report will be updated as determined by events .

the category "developing countries" includes economies representing many levels of economic development .

however , they share one important quality: they are generally technology receivers rather than technology innovators , and so their economies still have room to "catch up" with industrialized countries through the increased application of technology - based production .

some of the developing countries have been more successful in "catching up" than others , leading to wide gaps in economic welfare among them .

for the purposes of this report , developing countries include all countries except australia , new zealand , europe , japan , canada , and the united states .

the term also excludes the former soviet republics and the former communist states in central and eastern europe .

u.s. trade policy toward developing countries is evolving .

for many years , the policy largely consisted of trade preference programs extended conditionally and unilaterally to various groups of developing countries .

while those programs are still in place , u.s. trade policy is clearly shifting with successive presidential administrations .

the bush administration especially has negotiated bilateral and regional reciprocal trade agreements with a decided emphasis on trade with developing countries .

observers have also pointed out that u.s. trade policy toward developing countries is ambiguous — on the one hand encouraging trade liberalization through trade preference programs and free trade agreements , while on the other hand applying high import tariffs on products in which developing countries are more likely to have a comparative advantage: labor - intensive goods and semi - finished goods that contain raw materials .

the emergence of developing countries as an important factor in u.s. trade has generated a range of policy issues that , while not unique to developing countries , arise more often in u.s. trade with them .

the issues described below do not constitute an exhaustive list but , nevertheless , represent the most prevalent issues that have emerged in u.s. bilateral and multilateral negotiations with developing countries .

some of the issues are developing country challenges to the united states ; that is , changes to u.s. laws and practices .

others are u.s. challenges to developing countries .

the issues generally cut across u.s. trade relations with most developing countries at all levels of economic development .

developing countries have become an increasingly significant factor in u.s. trade over the last two or more decades , and this influence is reflected in the issues on the trade agenda of the 110 th congress: the possible renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) ( or fast track trade authority ) ; implementing legislation for ftas ; reauthorization of trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) for workers and firms ; review and possible re - authorization of gsp and other trade preference programs ; oversight of the doha development agenda ( dda ) round negotiations in the wto ; and other issues .

the growth of developing countries' foreign trade presents the united states with opportunities and challenges .

the imports from many developing economies provide u.s. consumers with an ever widening range of choices of products at lower prices , raising real incomes and contributing to a higher u.s. standard of living .

a number of the developing countries have also become robust markets for u.s. exports .

at the same time , u.s. workers are competing with a growing pool of lower - wage labor from india , china , and other developing countries .

some u.s. - based firms are induced to use labor - saving technology , to move production offshore , or to shut down their operations completely .

even workers in the services sector , such as computer programmers , are feeling the pressures of competition from some developing countries .

many economists argue , however , that in the long run that trade affects the composition of jobs but not employment levels .

trade with developing countries also raises a set of virtually unique issues regarding labor rights , environment protection , and intellectual property rights , among others , that have become fixtures on the u.s. trade agenda .

at the same time , developing countries are challenging u.s. trade policies on trade remedies , high tariffs on wearing apparel and other import - sensitive products , pricing of medicines , and the temporary entry of foreign workers , among other issues .

if current trade trends hold , developing countries can be expected to account for increasing shares of u.s. exports and imports and of world trade .

as a result , these opportunities and challenges will likely continue , if not expand .

the analysis of u.s. trade trends also exposes a significant divide among groups of developing countries .

some countries , such as those in east asia , mexico , and chile , have made great strides , and are expanding their role in u.s. and world trade .

others including most of africa , many countries in south asia , and some in latin america , lag behind or are losing shares of u.s. and world trade .

these differences suggest that an effective u.s. trade policy needs to differentiate among the various groups of developing countries .

these differences could play a role in how the united states proceeds on trade preferences , regional and bilateral trade agreements , and multilateral negotiations in the wto .

