over the past 15 years , the u.s. current account has moved from a small surplus to a deficit that in 2005 was nearly $800 billion .

the final tally for 2006 has not been completed , but preliminary data suggests the deficit will grow to near $900 billion .

the current account deficit has increased also as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , climbing from near zero to a record 6.2% in 2005 .

because a current account deficit is a reflection of a concurrent net inflow of borrowed funds from the rest of the world , the accumulation of debt from a long succession of large annual deficits has caused the united states to move from being a small net creditor to the rest of the world to being a large net debtor .

the net accumulation of liabilities through 2005 is $2.7 trillion , which is equivalent to about 22% of u.s. gdp .

there is , however , an apparent paradox in u.s. international transactions in this period .

despite the huge increase in u.s. external debt , the investment income component of the current account has remained in surplus .

the size of this surplus has varied , hitting a low of $4 billion in 1998 and a high of $37 billion in 2003 , but over the past 25 years , the surplus has remained between $15 billion and $30 billion .

since 2003 , the surplus has fallen , reaching $28 billion in 2004 and $11 billion in 2005 .

the significance of this enduring surplus of investment income is that the united states , although a large net debtor , has been borrowing free of any economically meaningful debt service cost .

the investment income balance is a tally of u.s. earnings on its foreign investments net of foreigners' earnings on their investments in the united states .

it is reported as a component of the current account balance — the nation's most comprehensive measure of international transactions .

a surplus in the investment income balance ( the u.s. earns more than it pays ) means that the united states , despite being a large net debtor on an accounting basis ( value of foreign liabilities exceeds value of foreign assets ) , is on an economic basis a net creditor .

an economically significant debt would generate net capital income payments to the rest of the world , that is , a debt burden in the form of real resources being transferred to the rest of the world .

because the united states is generating net capital income receipts suggests that it is an economic net creditor to the rest of the world and is bearing no debt service cost on its large external debt .

this would also suggest that the large trade deficits generating that debt could be much less onerous than typically portrayed .

why is there this paradox ? .

does it suggest there is no reason for concern about u.s. international imbalances because its accumulated debt is economically costless ? .

several explanations have recently been put forward .

it is probably true that the valuation of u.s. external assets and liabilities is subject to measurement error .

however , the magnitude of error , even if several hundred billion dollars , is unlikely to be large enough to greatly alter the basic shape of u.s. international transactions: large current account deficits and a deteriorating external net asset position .

the tremendous size of prospective current account deficits will mean that if the united states is not now a net external debtor it soon will be .

even ignoring the likely bias associated with the reporting of retained earnings to compute the investment income balance , the likely pace of debt accumulation by the united states in conjunction with a likely future of higher world interest rates , suggests that the current investment income surplus will soon turn to deficit .

this would put the united states in the position of having to then incur net economic debt service costs on its large borrowings from abroad .

preliminary data indicates that the investment income balance may post a small deficit for 2006 .

this cost could grow large quickly , however .

therefore , the u.s. trade deficit and its consequences will continue to be legitimate matters of concern for economic policy makers .

