critical infrastructure is so vital to the united states that its incapacity would harm the nation's physical security , economic security , or public health .

the federal government has a key role in helping protect the nation's critical infrastructure from all types of hazards through programs of mitigation , preparedness , response , and recovery .

accordingly , congress has a strong interest in the vulnerability of critical infrastructure to natural hazards , accidents , or terrorism .

since september 11 , 2001 , legislators , government agencies , and industry increasingly have been focused on the sources of infrastructure vulnerability and potential measures to address those vulnerabilities through operational changes and capital investment .

when infrastructure is physically concentrated in a limited geographic area it may be particularly vulnerable to geographic hazards such as natural disasters , epidemics , and certain kinds of terrorist attacks .

whereas a typical geographic disruption is often expected to affect infrastructure in proportion to the size of an affected region , a disruption of concentrated infrastructure could have greatly disproportionate — and national — effects .

a catastrophic ice storm in metropolitan chicago , for example , would undoubtedly create local emergencies , but could also temporarily disrupt rail transportation and associated commerce throughout the country because chicago is a major railway hub .

extended closure of the port of long beach , the largest port in the nation , would greatly harm california's economy , but could also disrupt vital supply chains for a number of national industries .

the social and economic impacts of geographic disasters are often difficult to quantify , but their costs can quickly run into the billions and can spread far beyond the area of the event itself .

in 2005 , hurricanes katrina and rita demonstrated this kind of geographic impact by disrupting a substantial part of the national u.s. energy and chemical sectors , both heavily concentrated in the gulf of mexico .

in 2008 , hurricanes gustav and ike have caused similar disruptions , renewing concerns about geographic vulnerability .

as the nation's responses to recent natural disasters continue , and as its homeland security activities evolve , congress has been examining federal policies related to the geographic concentration and vulnerability of critical infrastructure .

for example , in the 109 th congress , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) facilitated the construction of new liquefied natural gas import terminals in diverse ports by granting the federal energy regulatory commission exclusive siting approval authority ( section 311 ) .

provisions in the pipeline safety improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-468 ) require periodic studies to identify geographic areas in the united states where unplanned loss of oil pipeline facilities may cause oil shortages or price disruptions ( sec .

8 ( a ) ) .

the 110 th congress is overseeing implementation of these measures and considering additional policies which may affect critical infrastructure concentration .

prominent among these are legislative proposals such as h.r .

6566 , h.r .

6709 , s. 3202 , and s. 3126 , which would lift federal moratoriums on , or otherwise encourage , offshore oil and natural gas development outside the western gulf of mexico .

this report provides an overview of geographic concentration and related vulnerability among critical infrastructures in the united states .

the report illustrates the nature of such geographic concentration and how it may expose infrastructures to catastrophic failure due to geographic hazards .

it identifies several long - term forces which have contributed to infrastructure concentration .

these forces include resource location , agglomeration economies , scale economies , community preferences , and capital efficiency .

it reviews several ways in which the federal government has also influenced critical infrastructure , such as prescriptive siting , economic incentives , environmental regulation , and economic regulation .

the report concludes with options to address geographic vulnerability in the context of current federal infrastructure policy .

although market forces have been the primary influence on critical infrastructure development , especially in the private sector , congress and federal agencies historically have , from time to time , adopted policies intended to affect the capacity and location of critical infrastructure in the national interest .

although these policies often have been motivated by the desire to promote specific social objectives ( eg , economic development , environmental protection , infrastructure reliability ) they have sometimes also encouraged or discouraged the geographic concentration of critical infrastructures .

examples of these policies follow .

since helping to reduce the overall vulnerability of critical infrastructure is an objective of the federal government , it is useful to outline what options , if any , may be considered to reduce vulnerabilities and potential national consequences arising specifically from the geographic concentration of such infrastructure .

some analysts may argue that little government intervention in infrastructure concentration is necessary because the private sector will appropriately adjust its infrastructure practices out of its own financial interest .

catastrophic insurance premiums , for example , or internal corporate risk management programs , may influence corporate practices in a way that reduces vulnerabilities and associated risk to future profits by reducing the geographic vulnerability of private infrastructure .

as the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and key assets states , customarily , private sector firms prudently engage in risk management planning and invest in security as a necessary function of business operations and customer confidence.... consequently , private sector owners and operators should reassess and adjust their planning , assurance , and investment programs to better accommodate the increased risk.... holders of such a view would assert that the socially optimal geographic distribution of critical infrastructure , balancing economic efficiency with geographic risk , is best left to the market forces outlined earlier in this report .

other analysts have argued that the private sector does not properly account for the full social costs of critical infrastructure failure , or that individual companies cannot independently and significantly influence geographic concentration in a critical sector .

holders of this view would see a definite and active role for the federal government in alleviating geographic vulnerability of critical infrastructure in addition to the market - driven measures taken by the private sector on its own .

if congress concludes that federal intervention is appropriate , it has several broad policy options for doing so .

geographic concentrations of critical infrastructure exist across a number infrastructure sectors .

although such concentrations often provide substantial economic and social benefits , they may also be distinctly vulnerable to catastrophic geographic disruption .

any public policy addressing critical infrastructure concentration must try to balance these benefits and potential costs .

both government and industry have taken steps to try to protect critical infrastructure from natural disasters , epidemics , and terrorist attacks .

nonetheless , questions remain as to whether these steps appropriately address such geographic vulnerabilities .

if congress concludes that more federal intervention is needed to alleviate vulnerabilities due to geographic concentration , it may employ a number of policy options to encourage geographic dispersion ( including eliminating policies that encourage concentration ) , ensure survivability , or ensure that effective infrastructure recovery capabilities are in place to mitigate impacts of concentrated infrastructure disruption .

because geographic hazards exist today , and geographic dispersion would likely take decades to achieve , addressing geographic vulnerabilities may call for a combination of options .

in addition to these issues , congress may assess how geographic infrastructure vulnerability and survivability fit together in the nation's overall infrastructure policies .

as congress evaluates diverse proposals with the potential to affect critical infrastructure development — directly or indirectly — congress may consider whether such proposals are likely to relieve or exacerbate geographic vulnerability .

the economic or social benefits of adding capacity ( e.g .

refinery , airport , shipping ) to an existing concentration of critical infrastructure , or developing additional infrastructure in a new location , may be outweighed by the increased geographic risk implicit in such an expansion .

fiscal implications , especially related to the economic efficiency of public critical infrastructure and the efficient use of federal funds for infrastructure projects , may also be an important consideration .

reviewing how such infrastructure priorities fit together could be an oversight challenge for congress .

