on october 9 , 2006 , north korea ( formally the democratic people's republic of korea ) announced it conducted a nuclear test .

after several days of evaluation , u.s. authorities confirmed that the underground explosion was nuclear , but that the test produced a low yield of less than one kiloton .

the test followed a pattern of north korean provocations and escalations , including the launch of several short - , medium - , and long - range missiles in july 2006 .

since the united states threatened financial sanctions on banks that do business with north korea in september 2005 , pyongyang had boycotted the six - party talks ( with south korea , japan , china, and russia ) , the multilateral forum dedicated to eliminating north korea's nuclear weapons program .

since the end of the agreed framework in 2002 , experts estimate that north korea may have added about six to eight more weapons' worth of plutonium to a fissile material stockpile .

president bush and other u.s. officials immediately condemned the test and called for a swift response from the united nations security council ( unsc ) .

at the u.n. , the united states pushed for punitive sanctions and drafted a resolution that was eventually unanimously adopted .

in a hastily - arranged trip to the region , secretary of state rice reiterated the u.s. security commitment to south korea and japan and urged china and south korea to implement key measures of the u.n. resolution .

north korean officials reportedly told russian officials the test of the explosive device would have a range of yield between 5 and 15 kilotons ; another report suggests that north korea told chinese officials they planned to carry out a 4-kiloton test .

seismic information available from the korea institute of geoscience and mineral resources in south korea indicates that an explosion equivalent to an earthquake measuring a 3.58 magnitude occurred at 10:35 a.m. on october 9 in the vicinity of musudan - ri , north hamgyong province .

most experts have correlated the size of the seismic disturbance with a sub - kiloton explosion , raising doubts about the effectiveness of the north korean nuclear weapons design .

on october 16 , 2006 , the u.s. director of national intelligence issued a statement confirming that a nuclear test was conducted , with a yield under 1 kiloton , in the vicinity of p'unggye .

several experts have suggested that the nuclear test might have fallen short of the anticipated yield because of imprecise manufacturing .

according to one account , u.s. intelligence estimates that the blast was in the range of 200 tons of tnt , or 0.2 kt .

by comparison , a simple plutonium implosion device normally would produce a larger blast , perhaps 5 to 20 kilotons .

the first nuclear tests conducted by other states have ranged from 9 kt ( pakistan ) to 60 kt , but tests by the united states , china , britain and russia were in the 20kt - range .

on december 8 , 2006 , president bush officially determined that north korea had detonated a nuclear explosive device , as required by section 102 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the arms export control act ( p.l .

90-629 ) .

this report complements several other existing crs reports .

for more information on north korea's nuclear weapons program history , development , and current status , see crs report rl33590 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons development and diplomacy , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report rs21391 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons: latest developments , by [author name scrubbed] .

for further details on sanctions , see crs report rl31696 , north korea: economic sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] ; on missiles , see crs report rs21473 , north korean ballistic missile threat to the united states , by [author name scrubbed] ; on counterfeiting issues , see crs report rl33324 , north korean counterfeiting of u.s. currency , by [author name scrubbed] .

further reports are also available on the north korean economy , u.s. and international assistance to north korea , general u.s. - korean relations , and chronologies of events related to north korea .

in the 109 th congress , congress became more involved in , and at times critical of , u.s. policy toward north korea .

in late september and early october 2006 , congress enacted two pieces of legislation on north korea .

the john warner national defense authorization act for fy2007 ( h.r .

5122 / p.l .

109-364 ) , requires the president to appoint a policy coordinator for north korea within 60 days of enactment and report to the president and congress within 90 days on recommendations .

it also requires the executive branch to report to congress every 180 days in fiscal years 2007 and 2008 on the status of north korea's nuclear and missile programs .

the north korea nonproliferation act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-353 ) adds north korea to the iran - syria nonproliferation act ( p.l .

106-178 ; p.l .

109-112 ) , authorizing sanctions on third party "persons" for weapons - of - mass - destruction - related transfers to and from north korea .

in particular , this could affect north korea's missile trade .

determining the motivations of a government as opaque and secretive as north korea is exceedingly difficult , but analysts have put forth a range of possibilities to explain why the pyongyang regime decided to test a nuclear weapon now .

as with many foreign policy decisions , the calculation was probably a combination of factors .

the short - term implications of north korea's nuclear test are clear: whether a technical success or failure , north korea's willingness to carry out a test in the face of significant opposition indicates that it is willing to endure the potential consequences .

the psychological impact of crossing this particular diplomatic "red - line" is significant , with ramifications for medium and long - term regional and global stability .

some implications are discussed below .

the most fundamental u.s. goals of the confrontation with north korea are to prevent the further proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to prevent an attack — either nuclear or conventional — on the united states or on its allies in the region .

both actions would dramatically diminish u.s. security .

the bush administration appears to be divided on how to best achieve these goals , with one group favoring negotiation to shape north korea's behavior and another group advocating measures that will weaken the regime and ultimately lead to its collapse .

pursuing u.s. objectives through the six - party talks is complicated by the fact that other states have calculated their own national interests with regard to north korea differently .

japan's goals converge most closely with u.s. objectives: to bolster its own security from the threat of a north korean missile attack and to resolve the issues surrounding the abduction of several japanese citizens by north korea in the 1970s and 1980s .

for china and south korea , the political instability and economic consequences of a collapse of north korea may represent the worst outcome .

pursuit of u.s. goals is dependent on some degree of cooperation from beijing and seoul .

the nuclear test by pyongyang has compelled china and south korea to agree to harsher measures , but it is unlikely to alter their ultimate objective of preventing the collapse of north korea .

the options outlined below are not intended to be exhaustive , but to provide a spectrum of alternatives .

the approach taken by the united states may combine elements of several of the possible strategies .

crs report rl33567 , korea - u.s. relations: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33590 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons development and diplomacy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21391 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons: latest developments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31900 , weapons of mass destruction: trade between north korea and pakistan , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21582 , north korean crisis: possible military options , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31696 , north korea: economic sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33324 , north korean counterfeiting of u.s. currency , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21834 , u.s. assistance to north korea: fact sheet , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31785 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32493 , north korea: economic leverage and policy analysis , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21473 , north korean ballistic missile threat to the united states , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32167 , drug trafficking and north korea: issues for u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33389 , north korea: a chronology of events in 2005 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32743 , north korea: a chronology of events , october 2002-december 2004 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

