the andean counterdrug initiative was designed to provide assistance to seven countries inthe broadly defined andean region: bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , andvenezuela .

 ( 3 ) the regionis important to the u.s. drug policy because it includes three major drug producing countries ( colombia , bolivia , and peru ) where virtually all the world's cocaine and significant quantities ofhigh quality heroin destined for the united states are produced .

u.s. objectives for the aci programare to eliminate the cultivation and production of cocaine and opium , build law enforcementinfrastructure , arrest and prosecute traffickers , and seize their assets .

the region also includes two major oil producing countries ( venezuela and ecuador ) ,members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , which supply significantquantities of oil to the united states .

for the five traditional andean countries ( colombia,venezuela , ecuador , peru , and bolivia ) , the andes mountain range that runs through south americaposes geographical obstacles to intra - state and inter - state integration , but the countries are linkedtogether in the andean community economic integration pact .

u.s. support for plan colombia began in 2000 , when congress passed legislation providing$1.3 billion in interdiction and development assistance ( p.l .

106-246 ) for colombia and six regionalneighbors .

funding for aci from fy2000 through fy2005 totaled nearly $4.3 billion .

aci ismanaged by the state department's bureau of international narcotics control and law enforcementaffairs ( incle ) .

some aci funds are transferred to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) for alternative development programs .

aci funds are divided between programs that support eradication and interdiction efforts,as well as those focused on alternative crop development and democratic institution building .

onthe interdiction side , programs train and support national police and military forces , providecommunications and intelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host countryaerial eradication aircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities .

on thealternative development side , funds support development programs in coca growing areas , includinginfrastructure development , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops .

it alsoincludes assisting internally displaced persons , promoting the rule of law , and expanding judicialcapabilities .

aci also funds the air bridge denial program that is currently operational in colombia , andtemporarily suspended in peru , after an accidental shooting down of a civilian aircraft carrying u.s.missionaries in 2001 .

after the incident , in which two americans died , the program in bothcountries was suspended until enhanced safeguards were developed .

the program in colombiaresumed in august 2003 .

the program supports an aircraft fleet , pilot training , and logistical andintelligence support .

the program tracks aircraft suspected of being involved in drug trafficking,and forces them to land for inspection .

if the aircraft is repeatedly unresponsive , it may be shotdown , at the direction of the commander of the colombian air force .

the resumption of a programin peru is still pending the development of safety enhancements .

additional funding for the andean region is provided through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training ( imet ) program , bothmanaged by the state department .

the defense department has a counternarcotics account forworldwide programs involving interdiction , training , equipment , and intelligence sharing .

in thewestern hemisphere , these programs are managed by the u.s. army southern command .

since first approving expanded assistance to colombia for counternarcotics programs in2000 , congress has included a number of conditions on u.s. assistance in both authorization andappropriations legislation .

the most recently enacted funding legislation is the fy2006 foreignoperations appropriations act ( h.r .

3057 , p.l .

109-102 ) , which included a numberof longstanding provisions relating to the andean counterdrug initiative .

the fy2005 nationaldefense authorization act ( h.r .

4200 , p.l.108-375 ) also included provisions relatingto colombia .

the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1815 , p.l.109-163 ) authorized funding for department of defense drug interdiction activities .

figure 1 .

andean counterdrug initiative countrie .

