the electric utility industry is a major source of air pollution , particularly sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and mercury ( hg ) , as well as suspected greenhouse gases , particularlycarbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

on october 27 , 2005 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) releaseda long - awaited analysis comparing the costs and benefits of alternative approaches to controlling thispollution .

called multi - pollutant proposals , the alternative schemes focus on using market - orientedmechanisms to achieve health and environmental goals in simpler , more cost - effective ways .

epa'snew analysis compares four versions of the administration - based "clear skies" proposal to billsintroduced by senator jeffords ( s. 150 ) and senator carper ( s. 843 of the108th congress ) , which would impose more stringent requirements .

the administration has been reluctant to conduct such a study , citing the cost and difficultyof doing so , but it relented after the senate environment and public works committee , on a tie vote,failed to report the clear skies bill ( s. 131 ) in march 2005 .

one reason the bill failedto advance , according to its opponents , was the concern that an analysis comparing its provisions tothose of senator jeffords' and senator carper's bills had not been conducted .

the issue was raisedagain in april 2005 , during confirmation hearings for stephen johnson , who was sworn in as epaadministrator may 2 .

as one of his first official acts , he promised to conduct a cost - benefit analysisof clear skies and the other senate bills , the results of which have now been released .

in reexamining epa's analysis , several points stand out in thinking aboutmulti - pollutant legislation: epa has been very successful in incorporating the caps of clearskies in now promulgated rules .

as a result , after adjusting for those rules , epa'sanalysis finds little cost and a small benefit associated with passage of clear skieslegislation .

the jeffords and carper bills , however , set more stringent standards thanthe promulgated rules .

for both bills , the analysis shows benefits far outweighingadditional costs .

carbon dioxide costs depend on the amount and schedule ofany proposed reductions .

the modest reduction requirement and relaxedimplementation schedule of s. 843 results in nominal carbon dioxidereduction costs .

as reduction requirements increase and implementation schedulestighten , costs rise .

mercury control costs are dependent on the timeliness of thedata .

the epa analysis does not reflect current data on costs of hgcontrols .

epa's benefit analysis is limited and incomplete , which worksto the disadvantage of alternatives to clear skies that include more stringentstandards .

although it represents a step toward understanding the impacts of thelegislative options , epa's analysis is not as useful as one could hope .

thecombination of assumptions used in the analysis works in favor of the various clearskies alternatives by overstating the hg control costs of the alternatives , and - - through its assumption of constraints on labor availability - - heavily penalizingshort - term pollution reduction schedules .

in addition , the analysis does notadequately analyze the effect that natural gas price volatility may have onimplementation strategies and costs .

the analysis suffers from being based on 2003assumptions , both in terms of natural gas markets and hg control costs .

the resultis an analysis that some will argue is no longer sufficiently up - to - date to contributesubstantively to congressional debate .

