international trade in goods and services along with flows of financial capital affect virtually every person living in the united states .

whether one buys imported clothes , gasoline , computers , or cars ; works in an industry that competes with imports ; or sells products abroad , the influence of international trade on economic activity is pervasive .

although the united states is one of the three largest exporters in the world ( china and germany are the other two ) , u.s. sales abroad are overshadowed by the huge demand by american consumers and industry for imported products .

since 1976 , the united states has incurred continual merchandise trade deficits with annual amounts increasing steadily until the plateau of years 2005 through 2008 .

then in 2009 the u.s. trade deficit on goods declined roughly 39% , as u.s. imports fell much faster than exports during the recession .

as the economy recovered the trade deficit began increasing again , by 28% in 2010 and 15% in 2011 ( table 1 ) .

for congress , the trade deficit and other aspects of international trade enter into public policy considerations through many portals .

at the macroeconomic level , trade deficits are a concern because they affect u.s. economic growth , interest rates , labor , and the debt load of the economy .

as the trade deficit rises relative to the total economy , the risk increases that the dollar will weaken , prices will rise , financial markets will be disrupted , and the economic well - being of the population will be reduced .

a large trade deficit , however , naturally follows a booming economy as robust domestic demand generates purchases of both domestic and imported goods .

at the strategic level , trade ties often lead to a deepening of bilateral relations with other nations that can develop into formal free trade agreements ( ftas ) or political and security arrangements .

trade also can be used as a tool to accomplish strategic objectives — particularly through providing preferential trading arrangements or by imposing trade sanctions .

at the microeconomic level , imports of specific products can generate trade friction and pressures from constituent interests for the government to shield u.s. producers from foreign competition , provide adjustment assistance , open foreign markets , or assist u.s. industries to become more competitive .

at the household level , rising trade deficits and free trade agreements are often associated with employment , particularly concerns over a loss of jobs , a highly relevant issue for the american public .

this report provides an overview of the current status , trends , and forecasts for u.s. import and export flows as well as certain trade balances .

the purpose of this report is to provide current data and brief explanations for the various types of trade flows , along with a brief discussion of trends that help inform the discussion of the various policy issues mentioned above .

however , an analysis of trade policy as an economic or strategic tool is beyond the scope of this report but can be found in various other crs reports .

further detail on trade in specific commodities , with particular countries or regions , or for different time periods can be obtained from the department of commerce , from the u.s. international trade commission , or by contacting the authors of this report .

for january - july 2012 merchandise exports increased 6% over the same period in 2011 , imports increased 5% , and the u.s. trade deficit with the world increased , or became more negative , by 2% .

these changes are lower than those from the same seven - month period in 2011 , when exports increased by 18% , imports increased by 17% , and the trade deficit increased by 16% .

for the year 2011 , u.s. merchandise exports to the world rose 16% , u.s. merchandise imports also rose 16% , and the u.s. trade deficit rose 15% , from $645 billion in 2010 to $738 billion in 2011 .

because imports are greater than exports , exports must increase at a greater percentage than imports to maintain the current trade balance .

in 2011 , as the u.s. economy continued to recover from the financial crisis , u.s. merchandise exports and imports finally surpassed their previous 2008 peaks .

another sign of the continued recovery was the 18% increase in the fuel deficit .

though down from 26% growth in 2010 , it sharply contrasts the 48% decline in the fuel deficit in 2009 .

the u.s. top export commodity in 2011 changed from the historic top export of civilian aircraft , engines , and equipment , which increased 11.4% from 2010 , to refined petroleum products , up 70% .

the top import commodity remained crude oil and mineral fuels , up 29% in 2011 , compared to an increase of 35% in 2010 .

the second leading u.s. import commodity was motor vehicles , up 7% .

total trade with china — the second - largest u.s. trade partner — continued to increase: u.s. exports to china rose 13% , u.s. imports from china rose 9% , and the u.s. trade deficit with china grew by 8% .

in 2009 , as the global financial crisis worsened and the united states and other developed countries dropped into recession , the declining u.s. trade deficit contributed positively to the growth in the u.s. economy .

the u.s. recession would have been worse without the shrinking u.s. trade deficit .

however , the faltering global economic conditions that caused the declining u.s. demand for imports , and hence the fall in the trade deficit , also caused a decline in demand for u.s. domestic goods and services .

while u.s. imports declined in 2009 , they rose in 2010 and 2011 , forcing companies competing with imports to continue to face diminished demand as the domestic economy remained sluggish .

these conditions create increased pressures on political forces to protect domestic industry from imports , not only in the united states , but around the world .

as the world is recovering from the great recession countries are vying to capture the increase in global trade by keeping the value of their currencies low , particularly china .

the global financial crisis made 2009 a very difficult and negative year for the united states and other developed countries' trade by any measurement metric .

this sharp decline greatly contrasts the general trend over recent decades of large increases in u.s. and world trade .

even in real terms — movements net of price changes — trade in both goods and services fell dramatically in 2009 ( figure 1 ) .

however , u.s. goods trade saw the most fluctuations .

in 2009 , u.s. merchandise exports to the world declined by 18% , while u.s. imports from the world declined 26% relative to 2008 values .

both flows reversed in 2010 , with u.s. exports increasing by 21% and u.s. imports increasing by 23% .

in 2009 , the u.s. deficit in merchandise trade dropped by more than one - third , relative to 2008 , to $506 billion , as the u.s. recession caused imports to decline faster than exports .

as the u.s. economy began to recover in 2010 , the u.s. merchandise deficit grew more negative by 28% .

the deficit continued to grow in 2011 by 15% .

overall u.s. trade deficits reflect a shortage of savings in the domestic economy and a reliance on capital imports to finance that shortfall .

a savings shortfall is the analogue of excessive spending that is financed by borrowing .

households borrow for consumption ; businesses borrow to invest ; and the government borrows to cover its budget deficit .

at the international transaction level , the savings shortfall is manifest when foreign capital flows into the united states to pay for its excess of imports ( trade deficit ) .

whether this foreign borrowing is beneficial for the u.s. economy depends on how the imports of capital are used .

if they are used to finance investments that generate a future return at a sufficiently high rate ( they raise future output and productivity ) , then they may increase the well - being of current and future generations .

however , if the imports are used only for current consumption , the net effect of the borrowing will be to shift the burden of repayment to future generations without a corresponding benefit to them .

u.s. trade balances are macroeconomic variables that may or may not indicate underlying problems with the competitiveness of particular industries .

the reason is that overall trade flows are determined , within the framework of institutional barriers to trade and the activities of individual industries , primarily by macroeconomic factors such as rates of growth , savings and investment behavior ( including government budget deficits / surpluses ) , international capital flows , and exchange rates .

changes in the trade balance ( defined as exports minus imports ) are a component in deriving the nation's gdp .

in the u.s. economy , where consumer spending and business investment are the largest components of the annual change in economic growth , changes in the trade balance generally reflect changes in these other , much larger , components of the economy .

according to gdp accounting , the trade balance can be represented as contributing positively or negatively to the overall rate of growth in the economy , depending on activity in the other components in the accounts .

for instance , in the late 1980s and early 1990s , when spending by consumers and businesses waned , growth in exports provided a boost to the overall rate of growth in the economy .

again in 2008 , when consumer spending and business investment were weak , exports provided a comparatively large contribution to the rate of gdp growth .

in 2008 , exports accounted for about 9% of the rate of growth in national gdp , compared with the 5.9% contribution recorded in 1990 .

in 2009 , as u.s. gdp declined by 3.5% , exports provided some impetus for growth , primarily due to a 30% drop in imports .

the effects of exports , imports , and trade balance exert complex forces on the domestic economy .

for instance , a large trade deficit naturally follows a booming economy , as increases in domestic demand lead to more purchases of imported goods .

many economists fear that the rising u.s. trade and current account deficits could lead to a large drop in the value of the u.s. dollar .

the current account deficit has placed downward pressure on the dollar , although the "safe haven" effect comes into play to have the opposite effect .

a weaker dollar boosts exports by making them cheaper , narrowing the u.s. trade deficit .

compared to a federal reserve index of major currencies weighted by importance to u.s. trade , the dollar has lost nearly one - third of its value since 2002 , but has been rising in 2012 ( see figure 5 ) .

the dollar had fallen against the euro , yen , british pound , australian dollar , and canadian dollar .

in fact , the u.s. dollar fell to parity with the canadian dollar in september 2007 for the first time in 30 years , but between july and november 2008 , the u.s. dollar strengthened against other currencies as the global financial crisis increased "safe haven demand" for the dollar .

since november 2009 , the dollar lost some value , partly due to the federal reserve's lowering of interest rates .

however , as the eurozone debt crisis developed in 2010 , global investors again sought the safety of u.s. treasury securities and bid up the price of dollars .

although a weakened dollar helps to reduce u.s. trade imbalances , it also may reduce the dollar's attractiveness to foreign investors .

if foreign investors stop offsetting the deficit by buying dollar - denominated assets , the value of the dollar could drop — possibly precipitously .

in that case , u.s. interest rates would have to rise to attract more foreign investment ; financial markets could be disrupted ; and inflationary pressures could increase .

as shown in figure 6 , in terms of individual currencies , since january 2008 , the dollar has been weakening with respect to the japanese yen and chinese renminbi but strengthening with respect to the euro and south korean won .

currently , foreign investment in dollar assets along with purchases of securities by investors seeking a safe haven as well as from central banks of countries such as china have bolstered the value of the dollar .

china's central bank has intervened in currency markets to keep its exchange rate relatively stable .

a recent development in foreign country holdings of dollars and other reserve currencies is that some governments are turning toward creating sovereign wealth funds ( swfs ) .

these are funds owned by governments that are invested in stocks , bonds , property , and other financial instruments denominated in dollars , euros , or other hard currency .

for china , japan , south korea , russia , and the oil - exporting nations of the persian gulf , the source of capital for these funds is coming from governmental holdings of foreign exchange .

for china and japan , for example , foreign exchange reserves have traditionally been invested by their respective central banks primarily in low - yielding but low - risk government bonds ( i.e. , u.s. treasury securities ) .

the purpose of sovereign wealth funds is to diversify investments and to earn a higher rate of return .

for example , in september 2007 , china created a sovereign wealth fund — the china investment corporation ( cic ) — with initial capital of $200 billion .

depending on how these funds are managed and what leverage they acquire , they could affect u.s. interest rates ( foreign purchases of u.s. treasury securities tend to reduce u.s. interest rates ) , corporate activities ( if funds buy significant voting shares of companies ) , and foreign access to technology and raw materials .

the u.s. trade deficit provides some of the foreign exchange that goes to finance these sovereign wealth funds .

how long can the united states keep running trade deficits ? .

u.s. deficits in trade can continue for as long as foreign investors are willing to buy and hold u.s. assets , particularly government securities and other financial assets .

their willingness depends on a complicated array of factors including the perception of the united states as a safe haven for capital , relative rates of return on investments , interest rates on u.s. financial assets , actions by foreign central banks , and the savings and investment decisions of businesses , governments , and households .

the policy levers that influence these factors affecting the trade deficit are held by the federal reserve ( interest rates ) as well as both congress and the administration ( government budget deficits and trade policy ) , and their counterpart institutions abroad .

in the 112 th congress , legislation directed at the trade deficit has been taking several strategies .

some bills address trade barriers by particular countries , particularly china .

others are aimed at preventing manipulation of exchange rates or at imposing import duties to compensate for the arguably undervalued chinese currency , as tracked in greater detail by other crs reports .

the merchandise ( goods ) trade balance is the most widely known and frequently used indicator of u.s. international economic activity .

also important is the concept of total merchandise trade , total exports plus total imports .

in 2011 , total merchandise trade reached $3,688 billion , a 16% increase over the 2010 value .

this follows a 22% increase in 2010 ( to $3,191 billion ) and a 23% decrease in 2009 ( to $2,616 billion ) .

merchandise exports in 2011 totaled $1,480 billion , while imports reached $2,208 billion ( census basis ) .

the u.s. merchandise trade deficit fell massively from $816 billion in 2008 to $504 billion in 2009 but then increased to $635 billion in 2010 and $727 billion in 2011 ( figure 7 ) .

u.s. merchandise exports decreased in 2001 and 2002 in response to the global slowdown , but then generally increased each year until 2009 ( table 4 ) .

as shown in figure 8 , the growth of imports has also been steady , although they too fell by 6.4% in 2001 before recovering in 2002 .

in 2003 , import growth was nearly double export growth , although in 2004 , export growth almost caught up with that of imports , and in 2005 , the rate of increase for both dropped slightly .

growth in exports and imports slowed in 2007 with exports rising by 12.3% and imports by 5.7% .

likewise in 2008 , exports grew faster than imports ( 12.4% versus 7.3% ) , but the trade deficit still increased .

this is because u.s. imports are greater than u.s. exports , so exports must grow significantly faster than imports just for the deficit to remain constant .

then in 2009 , with the full force of the financial crisis , exports decreased more slowly than imports ( - 17.9% versus - 25.9% ) , before each took a sharp upward turn in 2010 as recovery began .

in 2010 exports rose by 21% , followed by a slowing to 16% growth in 2011 .

u.s. imports grew 23% in 2010 followed by 15% in 2011 .

the current account provides a broader measure of u.s. trade because it includes services , investment income , and unilateral transfers in addition to merchandise trade ( table 5 ) .

the balance on services includes travel , transportation , fees and royalties , insurance payments , and other government and private services .

the balance on investment income includes income received on u.s. assets abroad minus income paid on foreign assets in the united states .

unilateral transfers are international transfers of funds for which there is no quid pro quo .

these include private gifts , remittances , pension payments , and government grants ( foreign aid ) .

data on the current account are announced several months later than those on trade in goods and services .

because the merchandise trade balance comprises the greater part of the current account , the two tend to track each other ( figure 9 ) .

unlike the merchandise trade balance , however , the services account has registered surpluses .

since americans are such large investors in foreign economies , the united states traditionally also has a surplus in its investment income , $184 billion in 2010 and $227 billion in 2011 , but the deficit in unilateral transfers ( primarily dollars sent abroad by foreign workers and recent immigrants ) totaled $131 billion in 2010 and $133 billion in 2011 .

unilateral transfers have now reached more than triple the level of the late 1980s .

table 5 summarizes the components of the u.s. current account .

in 2011 , the u.s. deficit on current account rose to $466 billion from $442 billion in 2010 .

it was down considerably , however , from $801 billion in 2006 .

the 2011 deficit on current account , at 3.1% of gdp , closely followed the 2010 deficit on current account of 3.0% of gdp .

these figures are well below the 5% level of caution used by the international monetary fund .

since the dollar is used as an international reserve currency , the united states can run trade deficits without the same downward pressure on the value of the dollar as other nations .

historically , the current account deficit fell from a then record - high $161 billion in 1987 to $79 billion in 1990 , and switched to a $4 billion surplus in 1991 ( primarily because of payments to fund the gulf war by japan and other nations ) .

however , since a slight decline in 1995 , the current account deficit increased significantly through 2006 except for a slight dip in 2001 ( figure 9 ) .

the u.s. current account deficit decreased from 2007 through 2009 , which largely reflected the decline in the trade deficit during the financial crisis , though due to an increase in investment income receipts from abroad the current account deficit began declining earlier than the merchandise trade deficit .

the current account deficit then increased in 2010 and remained mainly flat in 2011 .

from 2012 to 2017 the current account deficit is forecasted to increase , mostly due to an increase in outgoing investment income payments , while the merchandise trade deficit is forecasted to remain relatively stable .

according to ihs global insight , inc. , a leading u.s. economic forecasting firm , in 2012 the u.s. merchandise ( goods ) trade deficit is projected to reach about $742 billion on a balance of payments basis .

it is then forecasted to decline ( become less negative ) in 2013 to $687 billion and then increase again in 2014 to $724 billion ( see table 6 and figure 9 ) .

the current account deficit is forecasted to reach $514 billion for 2012 , and like the merchandise deficit , it is forecasted to decline ( become less negative ) to $446 billion in 2013 and then increase to $503 billion in 2014 .

the overall u.s. merchandise trade balance consists of deficits or surpluses with each trading partner .

many economists view the overall figure as more significant than bilateral trade balances , since rising deficits with some nations are often offset by declining deficits or growing surpluses with others .

nonetheless , abnormally large or rapidly increasing trade deficits with particular countries are often viewed as indicators that underlying problems may exist with market access , the competitiveness of particular industries , currency misalignment , or macroeconomic adjustment .

figure 10 and table 7 and table 8 show u.s. trade balances with selected nations .

most of the u.s. trade deficit can be accounted for by trade with china , mexico , japan , germany , ireland , and canada .

trade with the oil exporting countries , particularly venezuela , nigeria , and saudi arabia , also contributes to the u.s. trade deficit .

u.s. trade surpluses occur in trade with hong kong , the netherlands , australia , and the united arab emirates .

the u.s. trade deficit with china has soared over the past decade: from $32 billion in 1995 to $100 billion in 2000 and $295 billion in 2011 .

the negative net balance in trade with china has grown to account for about 40% of the total u.s. trade deficit .

the u.s. trade deficit with china exceeded that with japan for the first time in the year 2000 and now is almost five times as large .

china claims that its trade is less imbalanced than u.s. data indicate .

chinese and u.s. trade data differ primarily because of the treatment of hong kong as an entrepot .

although hong kong reverted back to china in 1997 , it is a separate customs area from mainland china , and beijing counts hong kong as the destination for its exports sent there , even though the goods may be transshipped to other markets .

for example , china would count a laptop computer that is assembled in shanghai but shipped through hong kong before being exported to the united states as a sale to hong kong .

by contrast , the united states and many of china's other trading partners count chinese exports that are transshipped through hong kong as products from china , not hong kong , including goods that contain hong kong components or involve final packaging in hong kong .

the united states also counts hong kong as the destination of u.s. products sent there , even those that are then reexported to china .

however , chinese statistics include many of such reexported goods as u.s. exports to china .

so by u.s. figures , u.s. exports to china tend to be understated , while by chinese figures , chinese exports to the united states tend to be understated .

the net result in 2011 , for example , is that the trade surplus with the united states that china reported , $206 billion , was about two - thirds the u.s. deficit with china of $295 billion reported by the united states .

table 8 lists the u.s. top deficit trading partners in merchandise trade , on a census basis , with u.s. export and u.s. import data for additional insight .

in 2000 , china not only overtook japan as the top u.s. deficit trading partner , but its continuing growth in annual u.s. trade deficits since 2000 has been notable .

in 2011 the u.s. trade deficit with china increased by 8% , with japan 5% , and fell ( became less negative ) with mexico by 3% .

these countries were the top u.s. deficit trading partners .

they were followed by germany , canada , saudi arabia , and ireland .

total merchandise trade , exports plus imports , presents a clearer picture of countries' overall importance in u.s. trade relations than any other flow .

as seen in table 9 canada continues to be the united states' largest total merchandise trading partner .

canada was followed by china , mexico , japan , germany , the united kingdom , south korea , brazil , and france .

canada was historically the largest supplier of u.s. imports , until 2007 when china's exports to the united states first surpassed those from canada .

canada is by far the top purchaser of u.s. exports with mexico second .

in 2007 china surpassed japan to become the third - largest u.s. export market .

 table 10 lists the current account and its components — trade balances on goods , services , income , net unilateral transfers — for selected u.s. trading partners .

while trade in services , flows of income from investments , and remittances home by foreign workers are considerably smaller than merchandise flows , as the u.s. economy has become more globalized and service - oriented , these components of the current account have become more important .

in many cases , the bilateral current account balances are quite different from bilateral balances on merchandise trade only .

for example , the u.s. surplus in services and investment income with canada turns a $38 billion deficit on goods into a $27 billion surplus on current account .

flows of investment income vary largely by country .

in 2011 , the united states had a large investment income surplus with the european union and canada , but large investment income deficits with china and japan .

since japan has invested considerable amounts in securities , equities , and factories in the united states , the united states ran a deficit of $32 billion in investment income with that country in 2011 .

this more than offset the surplus of $18 billion in trade in services with japan .

as a result , the current account deficit with japan of $82 billion in 2011 exceeded the bilateral merchandise trade deficit of $65 billion .

likewise with china ; the u.s. deficit on investment income of $33 billion far overshadowed the u.s. surplus of $15 billion in services .

the rising deficit with many countries in investment income reflects the accumulating debt of the united states relative to various countries and country groups of the world .

inflows of capital to compensate for the u.s. trade deficit and a low u.s. savings rate help to maintain the value of the dollar , but interest paid and other income that accrues to that capital is often repatriated to the home countries .

that means more capital must be invested in the united states or the united states must export more to compensate for the outflows of investment income .

despite increasing debts , again , in 2011 , the united states ran an overall surplus of $227 billion in investment income with the rest of the world .

the u.s. surplus in services at $179 billion also continued to grow .

the deficit of $133 billion in unilateral transfers reflects the many workers in the united states who remit funds back to their home countries .

listed below are a list of resources available online for international trade statistics .

the single most authoritative , comprehensive , and frequently - published trade data statistical source is the monthly "ft900. .

its actual title is u.s. international trade in goods and services .

the ft - 900 is issued monthly by the u.s. census bureau and the u.s. bureau of economic analysis of the u.s. department of commerce .

it provides information on u.s. trade in goods and services ( balance , exports , and imports ) in specific commodities and end - use categories and with selected countries .

the report also provides information on trade in advanced technology , petroleum , and motor vehicle products .

the report is available from the u.s. bureau of economic analysis at http: / / www.bea.gov / newsreleases / rels.htm .

under "international" click on latest news release .

information on trade in specific commodities , with particular regions , or for different time periods also can be obtained from the u.s. international trade commission at http: / / dataweb.usitc.gov / ( registration is free but required ) .

historical and current u.s. exchange rate data are available from the federal reserve bank of st. louis at http: / / research.stlouisfed.org / fred2 / .

information on foreign country holdings of u.s. treasury securities are available at http: / / www.treasury.gov / tic / .

