the administration's response to the september 11 , 2001 events was swift , wide - ranging , and decisive .

after administration officials attributed responsibility for the attack to osama bin laden and the al qaeda organization , there was an announced policy shift from deterrence to preemption , generally referred to as the "bush doctrine. .

given the potentially catastrophic consequences of terrorist attacks employing weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , administration decisionmakers felt that the united states could not afford to sit back , wait for attacks to occur , and then respond .

the nation was mobilized ; combating terrorism and crippling al qaeda became top national priorities .

preemptive use of military force against foreign terrorist groups and infrastructure gained increasing acceptance in administration policy circles .

a full - scale campaign was launched , using all elements of national and international power , to go after al qaeda and its affiliates and support structures .

the campaign involved rallying the international community , especially law enforcement and intelligence components , to shut down al qaeda cells and financial networks .

a u.s. military operation was initiated in early october , 2001 against the taliban regime — which had harbored al qaeda since 1996 — and against al qaeda strongholds in afghanistan .

a total of 136 countries offered a range of military assistance to the united states , including overflight and landing rights and accommodations for u.s. forces .

as a result , the taliban was removed from power , all known al qaeda training sites were destroyed , and a number of taliban and al qaeda leaders were killed or detained .

since then , according to president bush in his address to the nation on may 1 , 2003 , nearly half of the known al qaeda leadership has been captured or killed .

notwithstanding , top al qaeda leaders osama bin laden and ayman al zawahiri , as well as the taliban leader mullah mohammed omar , apparently remain at large , and a resurgence of taliban warlords and militia is reportedly occurring in southern and northern afghanistan .

on march 19 , 2003 , after an intensive military buildup in the persian gulf , the united states launched the war against iraq , at the time one of seven nations on the state department's sponsors of terrorism list , with an attack on a suspected meeting site of saddam hussein .

president bush , in his january 28 , 2003 state of the union address , had emphasized the threat posed to world security by a saddam hussein armed with weapons of mass destruction and stated that iraq "aids and protects" the al qaeda terrorist organization .

after a swift military campaign , president bush announced on april 15 , 2003 that "the regime of saddam hussein is no more. .

saddam hussein was arrested by u.s. personnel december 13 , 2003 , near his hometown of tikrit .

in addition to u.s. troops currently in afghanistan and iraq , u.s. forces have been dispatched to yemen , the philippines , and the former soviet republic of georgia to train local militaries to fight terrorists .

in fy2002 and fy2003 , the administration sought and received funding ( subject to annual review ) for u.s. military aid to colombia to support the colombian government's "unified campaign against narcotics trafficking , terrorist activities , and other threats to its national security. .

similar authorization was granted for fy2004-fy2006 .

previously , such assistance had been restricted to supporting counternarcotics operations in colombia .

a february 14 , 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism gave added emphasis to the role of international cooperation , law enforcement and economic development in countering terrorism .

in the context of this campaign , the united states has stepped up intelligence - sharing and law enforcement cooperation with other governments to root out terrorist cells .

experts believe that terrorist cells are operating not just in places where they are welcomed or tolerated , but in many other areas as well , including western europe and the united states .

according to patterns of global terrorism 2003 ( patterns 2003 ) , as of january 2003 an aggressive international law enforcement effort had resulted in detention of approximately 3,000 terrorists and their supporters in more than 100 countries and in the freezing of $124 million in assets in some 600 bank accounts around the world , including $36 million in the united states alone .

on june 2 , 2003 , the g - 8 leaders publicized plans , subsequently implemented , to create a counter - terrorism action group to assist nations in enhancing their anti - terrorism capabilities through initiatives including ( 1 ) outreach to countries in the area of counter - terrorism cooperation , and ( 2 ) providing capacity building assistance to nations with insufficient capacity to fight terrorism .

an encouraging sign in the anti - terrorism struggle has been the apparent willingness of certain previously recalcitrant states to distance themselves from international terrorism and / or development of weapons of mass destruction .

libya renounced its wmd programs on december 21 , 2003 , and has cooperated extensively with the united states and the international community in dismantling those programs .

sudan , in cooperation with u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies , has arrested al qaeda members and "by and large" shut down al qaeda training camps on its territory .

in contrast , iran , according to the department of state , remained the primary state sponsor of terrorism in 2005 and has been actively conducting a longstanding nuclear development program , raising concerns in the international community that iran's nuclear ambitions extend well beyond nuclear research , with direct implications for a host of ongoing terrorist activities .

in order to stave off punitive action by the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) board of governors , iran , on december 19 , 2003 , signed an agreement to suspend its enrichment - related and reprocessing activities and to allow international inspections of its nuclear facilities .

intensive inspections , however , revealed likely violations of its suspension obligations , hence in late 2005 , the iaea board of governors voted to call iran into noncompliance with its nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) obligations .

the u.n. security council passed a resolution on july 31 , 2006 , giving iran a one - month deadline to comply with demands for halting enrichment , or face possible sanctions .

notwithstanding , iran insists on the "right" to continue its enrichment program under the label of "nuclear research," ostensibly for its energy industry .

iran did not comply with the demands of the resolution , according to a report by the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) dated august 31 , 2006 ( gov / 2006 / 53 ) .

increasingly , international terrorism is recognized as a threat to u.s. foreign , as well as domestic , security .

both timing and target selection by terrorists can affect u.s. interests in areas ranging from preservation of commerce to nuclear non - proliferation to the middle east peace process .

a growing number of analysts expresses concern that radical islamist groups seek to exploit economic and political tensions in saudi arabia , egypt , indonesia , russia , jordan , pakistan , and other countries .

because of their avowed goal of overthrowing secular or western - allied regimes in certain countries with large moslem populations , such groups are seen as a particular threat to u.s. foreign policy objectives .

facing the possibility that a number of states might reduce or withdraw their sponsorship of terrorist organizations , such organizations appear to be seeking and establishing operating bases in countries that lack functioning central governments or that do not exercise effective control over their national territory .

for example , on november 17 , 2003 , the washington post reported that al qaeda affiliates were training indonesian operatives in the southern philippines .

in general , the gray area of "terrorist activity not functionally linked to any supporting or sponsoring nation" represents an increasingly difficult challenge for u.s. policymakers .

terrorists have been able to develop their own sources of financing , which range from ngos and charities to illegal enterprises such as narcotics , extortion , and kidnapping .

colombia's farc is said to make hundreds of millions of dollars annually from criminal activities , mostly from "taxing" of , or participating in , the narcotics trade .

bin laden's al qaeda depends on a formidable array of fundraising operations including moslem charities and wealthy well - wishers , legitimate - seeming businesses , and banking connections in the persian gulf , as well as various smuggling and fraud activities .

furthermore , reports are ongoing of cross - national links among different terrorist organizations .

of utmost concern to policymakers is the specter of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) or the means to make them .

all of the five officially designated state sponsors of terrorism , cuba , iran , north korea , sudan , and syria , are known or suspected to have had one or more wmd - related program .

two of the states — iran and north korea — have , or have had , nuclear weapons - oriented programs in varying stages of development .

terrorists have attempted to acquire wmd technology through their own resources and connections .

for instance , the aum shinrikyo cult in japan was able to procure technology and instructions for producing sarin , a deadly nerve gas , through contacts in russia in the early 1990s .

the gas was subsequently used in an attack on the tokyo subway in march 1995 that killed 12 people and injured over 1,000 .

media reports of varying credibility suggest that osama bin laden is interested in joining the wmd procurement game , but open - source evidence to date remains scant .

a london daily telegraph dispatch of december 14 , 2001 , cited "long discussions" between bin laden and pakistani nuclear scientists concerning nuclear , chemical and biological weapons .

earlier , on november 12 , 2001 , time magazine reported that a bin laden emissary tried to buy radioactive waste from an atomic power plant in bulgaria , and cited the september 1998 arrest in germany of an alleged bin laden associate on charges of trying to buy reactor fuel .

bbc reports cite the discovery by intelligence officials of documents indicating that al qaeda had built a radiological "dirty" bomb near herat in western afghanistan .

in january , 2003 british authorities reportedly disrupted a plot to use the poison ricin against personnel in england .

the department of state provides to congress annually a report on global terrorism .

the most recent edition , released in march 2006 is: country reports on terrorism 2005 .

statistical data on terrorist incidents , analyzed in the report , are provided by the national counter terrorism center ( nctc ) .

the analysis addresses trends in terrorism and the evolving nature of the terrorist threat , and presents information on anti - terror cooperation by nations worldwide .

the report and underlying data portray a threat from radical jihadists which is becoming more widespread , diffuse , possibly more deadly , and increasingly homegrown , often with a lack of apparent formal operational connection with al qaeda ideological leaders , although perhaps inspired by them or assisted through training .

related to the issue of homegrown terrorism is growing concern that limited terrorist sanctuaries may already be found within the cities of democratic societies .

three trends in terrorism are identified in the department of state report .

first is the emergence of so - called "micro actors," spurred in part by u.s. and allied successes in isolating and killing much of al qaeda's leadership .

the result is an al qaeda perceived as having a more subdued operational role , but assuming more of an ideological , motivational , and propaganda role .

second is a trend toward "sophistication" ; i.e .

terrorists exploiting the global interchange of information , finance , and ideas to their benefit , often through the internet .

third is a growing overlap between terrorist activity and international crime , which may expose the terrorists to a broad range of law enforcement activities .

also cited in the report is an overall increase in suicide bombings and a strong connection between the ongoing unrest in iraq and the broader terrorism conflict .

the report suggests that "terror" incidents in iraq accounted for almost a third of all terror incidents in 2005 and more than half of terror related deaths worldwide that year .

data released by the nctc concomitantly with the department of state's 2006 terror report indicate that in 2005 roughly 40,000 individuals were wounded or killed in terrorist incidents , as compared to 9,300 the previous year and 4,271 in 2003 .

terror - related deaths in 2005 numbered 14,602 as compared to 1,907 deaths in 2004 and 625 in 2003 .

the report placed the number of total reported terrorist attacks in 2005 at 11,111 as compared to 3,168 in 2004 and 208 in 2003 .

foiled attacks are not included in the data reported .

some would argue , however , that nctc data concerning iraq casualties — which are largely the product of sectarian violence , rampant criminal activity , and home grown insurgency — grossly distort the global terrorism picture and perhaps should not be attributed to terrorist activity .

looking at the data outside of iraq , according to the nctc , the total number of incidents with ten or more deaths remained at approximately the 2003-2004 level: 70 per year .

this suggests that , excluding iraq , the number of higher casualty terror attacks remains relatively stable .

aside from iran , and perhaps to some degree syria , the report suggests that , but for a few notable exceptions , active state sponsorship of terror is declining .

it continues to list iran as the most active state sponsor of terrorism .

in general , it praises the saudi government for its antiterrorism efforts .

some observers might suggest , however , that the report tends to mute criticism of nations of strategic importance to the united states , such as pakistan and saudi arabia , that arguably could do much more to curb terror .

echoing language of previous years' versions of the report , the 2006 edition states that libya and sudan "continued to take significant steps to cooperate in the global war on terror," and shortly after the report's release , libya was removed from the u.s. list of state sponsors of international terrorism .

as in previous years , syria is cited for providing political and material support ( presumably weapons ) to both hezbollah and palestinian terrorist groups , which also enjoy sanctuary in syria .

cuba and north korea are primarily cited for lack of anti - terror cooperation and past involvement in terrorist incidents , thereby possibly suggesting a trend of their less active support for terrorism than in previous decades .

however , many perceive north korea's nuclear program , with its potential for future sales of wmd to terrorists , as extremely worrisome .

although not included on the state department's list of state sponsors of terrorism , lebanon is cited in the report for its recognition of several terrorist organizations , including hezbollah .

also , the report stresses that because the government of lebanon does not exercise effective control over areas in the south and in palestinian refugee camps , terrorists can operate "relative freely" in such areas .

this loss of governmental control is representative of a broader phenomenon that countries with weak counterterrorism resources and infrastructure are , more and more , subject to becoming sanctuaries for terrorism .

a core premise of the state department's 2006 report is recognition that because the al qaeda network is increasingly assuming the characteristics of an ideological movement , it will not be decisively defeated in the near future .

however , some indicate elimination of bin laden and al zawahiri would go a long way in that direction .

as in any long - term campaign , international cooperation and capacity - building programs , such as the state department's anti - terrorism assistance program ( ata ) , are seen as having a central role in combating terrorism .

most terrorist acts do not take place in the united states , nor do most terror - related arrests and prosecutions .

likewise , much , if not most , intelligence gathering on terrorist groups today is not done by the united states .

the report also presents countering terrorism on the economic front as an important component of a successful strategy .

however , some independent analysts suggest that efforts to curb terrorist finances have reached a point of diminishing returns , as terrorist groups are often self - supporting , and that the amount of terrorist funds governments seize is insignificant .

subsequent to the release of the state department's report , the administration declassified and released excerpts from an april 2006 national intelligence estimate titled trends in global terrorism , implications for the united state s. declassified key judgments of the report were generally consistent with findings in the state department's march 2006 country reports on terrorism 2005 and concomitant nctc data which cited decentralization of al qaeda and expressed concern over the potential for "spillover" of battlefield skills , technology , and ordnance from iraq .

of concern to many observers is the overall growth in numbers and political influence of radical islamist political parties throughout the world , some of which reportedly serve — or might serve — as fronts for terrorist activity .

even if the parties are not actively serving as fronts , some are concerned that the actions and agendas of such groups could facilitate creation of a political climate in their home countries which views terrorism as a politically acceptable tactic and which might make their home countries appear as attractive locations for active terrorist groups to establish secure bases .

others view political participation as a sign that these groups may be adopting channels other than violence to secure their base .

examples include groups in indonesia , pakistan , malaysia , and in the middle east notably hamas and hezbollah .

any rise in the power and influence of such terror - linked or terror - supportive political parties — especially should their representatives be elected through democratic processes — presents major policy dilemmas for the united states , since it pits u.s. support for democracy directly against america's commitment to aggressively combat terrorism .

well before the september 11 , 2001 events , various legislative proposals and congressionally mandated panels had called for reconfiguring the federal government's strategic planning and decision processes vis - à - vis the global terrorist threat .

on november 25 , 2002 , the president signed the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , consolidating at least 22 separate federal agencies , offices , and research centers comprising more than 169,000 employees into a new cabinet level department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the creation of the new department , charged with coordinating defenses and responses to terrorist attacks on u.s. soil , constitutes the most substantial reorganization of the federal government since the national security act of 1947 , which placed the different military departments under a secretary of defense and created the national security council ( nsc ) and cia .

p.l .

107-296 includes provisions for an information analysis element within dhs , many of the envisioned tasks of which appear assigned to the administration's terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) , which was activated may 1 , 2003 and subsequently became the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) .

the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) , enacted in october 2001 and renewed in march 2006 gave law enforcement increased authority to investigate suspected terrorists , including enhanced surveillance procedures such as roving wiretaps ; provided for strengthened controls on international money laundering and financing of terrorism ; improved measures for strengthening of defenses along the u.s. northern border ; and authorized disclosure of foreign intelligence information obtained in criminal investigations to intelligence and national security officials .

on july 22 , 2004 , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( "9 / 11 commission" ) issued its final report .

included are 41 recommendations for changing the way the government is organized to combat terrorism and how it prioritizes its efforts .

many of these dovetail with elements of the administration's february 14 , 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism , such as diplomacy and counter - proliferation efforts , preemption , intelligence and information fusion , and winning hearts and minds — including not only public diplomacy , but also policies that encourage development and more open societies , law enforcement cooperation , and defending the homeland .

recommendations generally fall into the categories of ( 1 ) preemption ( attacking terrorists and combating the growth of islamist terrorism ) ; ( 2 ) protecting against and preparing for attacks ; ( 3 ) coordination and unity of operational planning , intelligence and sharing of information ; ( 4 ) enhancing , through centralization , congressional effectiveness of intelligence and counterterrorism oversight , authorization , and appropriations ; ( 5 ) centralizing congressional oversight and review of homeland security activities ; and ( 6 ) beefing up fbi , dod , and dhs capacity to assess terrorist threats and improving the agencies' concomitant response strategies and capabilities .

the report deals only indirectly with problems in the u.s. - saudi relationship , such as terrorist financing and the issue of ideological incitement .

recommendations of the commission are at various stages of acceptance , funding and implementation .

press reports dated may 29 , 2005 , indicated that the bush administration launched a high - level internal review of its anti - terrorism strategy , with an emphasis on developing a strategy more focused on combating violent extremism .

under the revised strategy concept , public diplomacy received a major boost in emphasis .

a new national anti - terrorism strategic approach followed which is currently being elaborated by the united states government .

the approach , embodied in a nctc coordinated interagency national implementation plan ( nip ) for the national strategy for combating terrorism , was reportedly approved by the president in mid - summer 2006 .

its overarching goals are to: ( 1 ) defeat terrorism as a threat to america's way of life as a free and open society , and ( 2 ) create an environment inhospitable to terrorism worldwide .

the document , according to press reports , designates lead and subordinate agencies to carry out a multitude of tasks to include: destroying al qaeda ; enlisting support from allies ; and training of experts in foreign languages and cultures with emphasis on gaining a better understanding of islam .

the approach seeks to enhance effectiveness of the 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism in the long term by strengthening the ideological component in the war on terror .

inherent here is widespread recognition that the united states will need to increasingly engage in the realm of ideas ( public diplomacy ) , in conjunction with other efforts to protect and defend the homeland and efforts to attack terrorists and reduce their capabilities .

in september 2006 , an updated version of the national strategy for combating terrorism was released .

the 2006 strategy document gives added weight to earlier efforts aimed towards placing enhanced long - term policy emphasis on the "war of ideas" ; i.e .

confronting the radical ideology that justifies the use of violence against innocents in the name of religion .

seen as core to the success of the strategy in the long run is the advancement of "effective" democracies which is seen as central to minimizing conditions which fuel terrorist support and recruitment .

two assumptions would appear to underlie the reasoning upon which the countering ideological support component of the strategy is based: ( 1 ) that it is indeed realistically possible for the united states to advance effective democracies in regions where political compromise and respect for minority rights may not be established cultural , political , or religious norms , and ( 2 ) that terrorist causes are less likely to win recruits in democratic societies and / or that individual terrorists and terrorist organizations will be less likely to recruit , operate , and / or base in societies where protection of individual liberties is strong .

both assumptions are subject to rational debate and the possibility that democratic nations may be increasingly spawning a trend of homegrown terrorist recruits remains generally problematic to policymakers .

crs report rl33742 , 9 / 11 commission recommendations: implementation status , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21937 , 9 / 11 terrorism: global economic costs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32759 , al qaeda: statements and evolving ideology , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33038 , al qaeda: profile and threat assessment , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33160 , combating terrorism: the challenge of measuring effectiveness , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30252 , intelligence and law enforcement: countering transnational threats to the u.s. , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22211 , islamist extremism in europe , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32816 , the national counterterrorism center: implementation challenges and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22373 , navy role in irregular warfare and counterterrorism: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31672 , terrorism in southeast asia , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl33123 , terrorist capabilities for cyberattack: overview and policy issues , by john rollins and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33555 , trends in terrorism: 2006 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32758 , u.s. military operations in the global war on terrorism: afghanistan , africa , the philippines , and colombia , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32607 , u.s. public diplomacy: background and the 9 / 11 commission recommendations , by [author name scrubbed] .

there is no universally accepted definition of international terrorism .

one definition widely used in u.s. government circles , and incorporated into law , defines international terrorism as terrorism involving the citizens or property of more than one country .

terrorism is broadly defined as politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents .

for example , kidnaping of u.s. birdwatchers or bombing of u.s. - owned oil pipelines by leftist guerrillas in colombia would qualify as international terrorism .

a terrorist group is defined as a group which practices or which has significant subgroups which practice terrorism ( 22 u.s.c .

2656f ) .

one shortfall of this traditional definition is its focus on groups and its exclusion of individual ( "lone wolf" ) terrorist activity — philosophically but not organizationally aligned with any group — which has recently risen in frequency and visibility .

to these standard definitions , which refer to violence in a traditional form , must be added cyberterrorism .

analysts warn that terrorist acts will now include more sophisticated forms of destruction and extortion such as disabling a national computer infrastructure or penetrating vital commercial computer systems .

also , the october 12 , 2000 bombing of the u.s.s .

cole , a u.s. military vessel , raised issues of whether the standard definition would categorize this attack as terrorist , as the cole would not under conventional definitions be considered a "non - combatant. .

current definitions of terrorism mostly share one common element: politically motivated behavior , although religious motivation is increasingly being recognized as an important motivating factor , as high - profile activities of such groups as al qaeda underscore the significance of radical religious ideologies in driving terrorist violence , or at least providing a pretext .

to illustrate: osama bin laden issued a fatwah ( edict ) in 1998 proclaiming in effect that all those who believe in allah and his prophet muhammad must kill americans wherever they find them .

moreover , the growth of international and transnational criminal organizations , plus the growing range and scale of such operations , have resulted in a potential for widespread criminal violence with financial profit as the driving motivation .

notwithstanding , current definitions of terrorism do not include using violence for financial profit , even in cases where mass casualties might result with entire populations "terrorized. .

complicating matters is that internationally , nations and organizations historically have been unable to agree on a definition of terrorism , since one person's terrorist is often another person's freedom fighter .

to circumvent this political constraint , countries have taken the approach of enacting laws or negotiating conventions which criminalize specific acts such as kidnaping , detonating bombs or hijacking airplanes .

the 1999 international convention for the suppression of the financing of terrorism comes close to a consensus definition , by making it a crime to collect or provide funds with the intent of killing or injuring civilians where the purpose is to intimidate a population or coerce a government .

