presidential signing statements are official pronouncements issued by the president contemporaneously to the signing of a bill into law that , in addition to commenting on the law generally , have been used to forward the president's interpretation of the statutory language ; to assert constitutional objections to the provisions contained therein ; and , concordantly , to announce that the provisions of the law will be administered in a manner that comports with the administration's conception of the president's constitutional prerogatives .

while the history of presidential issuance of signing statements dates to the early 19 th century , the practice has become the source of significant controversy in the modern era as presidents have increasingly employed the statements to assert constitutional objections to congressional enactments .

the number and scope of such assertions in the george w. bush administration in particular gave rise to extensive debate over the issuance of signing statements , with the american bar association ( aba ) publishing a report declaring that these instruments are "contrary to the rule of law and our constitutional separation of powers" when they "claim the authority or state the intention to disregard or decline to enforce all or part of a law ... or to interpret such a law in a manner inconsistent with the clear intent of congress. .

however , in analyzing the constitutional basis for , and legal effect of , presidential signing statements , it becomes apparent that no constitutional or legal deficiencies adhere to the issuance of such statements in and of themselves .

rather , it appears that the appropriate focus of inquiry in this context is on the assertions of presidential authority contained therein , coupled with an examination of substantive executive action taken or forborne with regard to the provisions of law implicated in a presidential signing statement .

applying this analytical rubric , it seems evident that the issues involved center not on the simple issue of signing statements , but rather on the view of presidential authority that governs the substantive actions of the administration in question .

this report focuses on the use of signing statements by recent administrations , with particular emphasis on the administrations of george w. bush and barack obama .

there is no explicit constitutional provision authorizing the issuance of presidential signing statements .

article i of the constitution provides only that the president "shall sign" a bill of which he approves , while in vetoing a measure the president is required to return the measure "with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated. .

however , presidents have issued such statements since the monroe administration , and there is little evident constitutional or legal support for the proposition that the president may be constrained from issuing a statement regarding a provision of law .

the first controversy arising in this context stemmed from a signing statement issued by andrew jackson in 1830 that raised objections to an appropriations bill that involved internal improvements .

the bill specifically addressed road examinations and surveys .

in his signing statement president jackson declared that the road in question , which was to reach from detroit to chicago , should not extend beyond the territory of michigan .

a subsequently issued house report criticized jackson's action , characterizing it as in effect constituting a line item veto .

likewise , a signing statement issued by president tyler in 1842 expressing doubts about the constitutionality of a bill regarding the apportionment of congressional districts was characterized by a select committee of the house as "a defacement of the public records and archives. .

perhaps sensitized by this rebuke , presidents polk and pierce apologized for the issuance of signing statements , noting that such action departed from the traditional practice of notifying congress of the approval of a bill via an oral message from the president's private secretary .

this conception of a signing statement as an unusual instrument was again noted by president grant in 1875 , when he declared that his use of a signing statement was an "unusual method of conveying the notice of approval. .

signing statements remained comparatively rare through the end of the 19 th century , but had become common instruments by 1950 .

president truman , for instance , issued nearly 16 signing statements per year , on average , with the figure steadily increasing up to the modern day .

concurrent with the rise in the number of statements issued , the use of signing statements to voice constitutional objections to acts of congress has become increasingly prevalent over the past 60 years .

this type of executive action began in earnest during the reagan administration , as one aspect of a comprehensive strategy employed by the reagan administration to assert aggressively the constitutional prerogatives of the presidency .

as has been illustrated , there is a long history of presidential issuance of signing statements .

these statements provide "one way in which a president may indicate his intent to refuse to enforce a provision of a congressionally enacted law that he believes to be unconstitutional. .

however , there is little evident support for the notion that objections or concerns raised in a signing statement may be given substantive legal effect .

as one commentator has suggested: "where the president has played a major role in drafting or supporting a particular statutory provision , presidential statements should be granted interpretive significance... .

when the president opposed the provision being interpreted , however , his signing statements ... lack persuasive authority. .

this observation is buttressed by the analysis of the district court in dacosta v. nixon , which stated that a bill , when passed by congress and approved by the president , "establishe[s] 'the policy of the united states' to the exclusion of any different executive or administrative policy , and ha[s] binding force and effect on every officer of the government , no matter what their private judgments of that policy , and illegalize[s] the pursuit of an inconsistent executive or administration policy .

no executive statement denying efficacy to legislation could have either validity or effect. .

irrespective of this maxim , presidents have repeatedly declared their intention to disregard laws that they view as unconstitutional .

this persistent practice on the part of presidents gives rise to the question of whether a president can refuse to comply with a law he believes to be unconstitutional .

the supreme court has not directly addressed this issue , but a long line of precedent could be taken to indicate a consistent view on the part of the court that the take care clause imposes a duty on the president to ensure that officials obey congress's instructions , and , conversely , that the clause does not imbue the president with the authority to dispense with congressional enactments .

in kendall v. united states ex rel stokes , for instance , the court declared that where congress has imposed upon an executive officer a valid duty , "the duty and responsibility grow out of and are subject to the control of the law , and not to the direction of the president. .

underlying the court's rejection of the government's argument that the take care clause carried with it the power to control executive officials was the desire to avoid "clothing the president with a power entirely to control the legislation of congress ... to contend that the obligation imposed on the president to see the laws faithfully executed implies a power to forbid their execution , is a novel construction of the constitution , and entirely inadmissible. .

since kendall , the court has consistently rejected the assertion that the clause is a substantive grant of power to the president .

in myers v. united states , for instance , the court declared that "[t]he duty of the president to see that the laws be executed is a duty that does not go beyond the laws or require him to achieve more than congress sees fit to leave within his power. .

likewise , in youngstown sheet & tube co. v. sawyer , the court declared that "the president's power to see that the laws are faithfully executed refutes the idea that he is to be a lawmaker .

the constitution limits his functions in the lawmaking process to the recommending of laws he thinks wise and the vetoing of laws he thinks bad. .

despite these declarations from the court , the executive branch has consistently maintained that the president possesses authority to decline to enforce enactments he views as unconstitutional .

as enunciated in the dellinger memo , the department of justice ( doj ) has pointed to the court's decision in myers v. united states , for support for this proposition , asserting that since "the court sustained the president's view that the statute at issue was unconstitutional without any member of the court suggesting that the president had acted improperly in refusing to abide by the statute," the court could therefore "be seen to have implicitly vindicated the view that the president may refuse to comply with a statute that limits his constitutional powers if he believes it to be unconstitutional. .

additionally , the dellinger memo pointed to justice jackson's concurrence in youngstown as recognizing the existence of the "president's authority to act contrary to a statutory command," and has likewise cited justice scalia's concurrence in freytag v. commissioner , for the proposition that "the president has the 'power to veto encroaching laws ... or even to disregard them when they are unconstitutional.' .

it is not at all clear that the reliance of the doj on these factors would bear the weight of direct judicial scrutiny .

specifically , as noted above , the court in myers v. united states evidenced a clear appreciation of the limits of the president's authority under the take care clause .

as such , there would appear to be little support for the doj's conclusion that myers implicitly validated the notion that the president may refuse to enforce laws he deems unconstitutional , particularly in light of the fact that the court in myers did not address the president's refusal to enforce the law at issue .

as was stated by the court in powell v. mccormack , "[t]hat an unconstitutional action has been taken before surely does not render that same action any less unconstitutional at a later date. .

it is also difficult to see how justice jackson's concurrence in youngstown can be cited as dispositive of the issue .

first , while the concurrence contemplates the allocation of power between congress and the executive in the event that the "president takes measures incompatible with the express or implied will of congress," it , like the majority opinion in myers , does not give any substantive consideration whatsoever to the president's authority to decline to enforce the law .

second , the doj opinion does not address the holding of the majority in youngstown that the "constitution limits [the president's] functions in the lawmaking process to the recommending of laws he thinks wise and the vetoing of laws he thinks bad. .

likewise , justice scalia's concurrence in freytag , while probative , does not provide any substantive analysis in support of this proposition , and arose in a case that did not involve executive refusal to comply with the law .

while the court has not had occasion to address the issue directly , the cases discussed above could be taken to indicate a rejection on the part of the court that the president possesses the power to suspend acts of congress , instead establishing that the president is bound to give effect to such enactments pursuant to the take care clause .

the natural corollary of this proposition , as touched upon by the court in youngstown , is that the proper course of action for the president , when faced with a bill he deems unconstitutional , is to exercise his article i veto authority .

however , as is evidenced by the doj opinion discussed above , there are competing viewpoints on this issue .

as such it is not possible to state conclusively that the president lacks any authority whatsoever to decline to enforce laws he deems unconstitutional absent a definitive consideration of the issue by the court .

while presidential authority to refuse to enforce laws the president considers unconstitutional is a matter of significant constitutional importance , the issue is ultimately of little concern with regard to the legality or effect of signing statements themselves .

as the judicial maxims discussed above establish , there is little evident support for the notion that signing statements are instruments with legal force and effect in and of themselves .

if an action taken by a president in fact contravenes legal or constitutional provisions , that illegality is not augmented or assuaged merely by the issuance of a signing statement .

commentators argue that this dynamic lends credence to the notion that signing statements have been employed by several administrations not to flatly reject congressional enactments , but , rather , are intended to sensitize other parties to the president's conception of executive authority .

moreover , the use of signing statements as an instrument to expand executive authority generally , as opposed to a mechanism by which the president has claimed summary authority to dispense with the laws enacted by congress , becomes more apparent when the merits of the objections that typify signing statements are examined .

in particular , such analysis indicates that while there are instances in which signing statements are predicated on specific and supportable concerns , the majority of the objections raised , especially with respect to the signing statements issued by the bush ii administration , were largely non - substantive or were so general as to appear to be hortatory assertions of executive authority .

the constitutional and legal principles discussed below are applicable to any signing statement that raises constitutional objections or challenges to congressional enactments based on a general assertion of authority in the specific substantive area identified .

the generalized nature of the constitutional objections and assertions of authority that pervade signing statements , coupled with the fact that such instruments do not have any legal force or effect in and of themselves , lends support to the notion that presidential administrations may employ these instruments as a means by which to make broad claims to extensive and exclusive authority .

this approach necessarily raises questions regarding the impact of signing statements on the exercise of executive authority in relation to the traditional roles of congress and the judiciary .

presidential signing statements have a long historical pedigree and there is no discernible constitutional or legal impediment to their issuance .

while from the reagan administration to the george w. bush administration such statements had become increasingly common and were increasingly utilized to raise constitutional or interpretive objections to congressional enactments , the obama administration's decreased use of signing statements may signify a break from this trend .

nevertheless , utilizing signing statements to raise constitutional objections to enacted statutes remains a tool of presidential authority .

while the broad assertions of executive authority contained in many signing statements carry significant implications , both practical and constitutional , for the traditional relationship between the executive branch and congress , they do not have legal force or effect , and have not been utilized to effect the formal nullification of laws .

instead , it appears that recent administrations , as made apparent by the voluminous challenges lodged by president george w. bush , have employed these instruments in an attempt to leverage power and control away from congress by establishing these broad assertions of authority as a constitutional norm .

it can be argued that the appropriate focus of congressional concern should center not on the issuance of signing statements themselves , but on the broad assertions of presidential authority forwarded by presidents and the substantive actions taken to establish that authority .

accordingly , a robust oversight regime focusing on substantive executive action , as opposed to the vague and generalized assertions of authority typical of signing statements , might allow congress in turn to more effectively assert its constitutional prerogatives and ensure compliance with its enactments .

