the united states army and marine corps have been at war — first in afghanistan and , then iraq — since november 2001 .

in a similar manner , the marine corps has deployed its forces and equipment in what has been described as "the harsh operating environments of iraq and afghanistan" where the heat , sand , and dust as well as operational rates "well in excess of peacetime rates" have taken a heavy toll on the service's equipment , which , in some cases , was more than 20 years old when the conflicts first began .

equipping reserve and national guard units also presents challenges to the services .

traditionally , the army national guard and reserve have been characterized as under - equipped and often times equipped with older equipment than their active component counterparts .

the army has committed to both man and equip the army reserves and national guard in a similar manner to the active component .

the army and marine corps are also undertaking efforts to re - equip their pre - positioned stocks which were drawn upon to provide equipment for use in afghanistan and iraq .

the army and marines are also actively pursuing the acquisition of new equipment based on wartime experiences .

the army and marines have a number of equipment - related challenges to rectify which may require significant funding and management efforts .

the wars in afghanistan and iraq have generated a variety of equipment requirements .

these requirements range from developing new equipment , providing commercially - available equipment to service members and units , and modifying existing equipment .

the early years of the afghan and iraq wars revealed deficiencies both in quantity and quality of protective equipment such as body armor for individual troops and armor protection for wheeled vehicles .

congressional involvement has played a significant role in focusing dod's attention and resources in addressing these force protection deficiencies , which have seen significant improvement over the past few years .

body armor remains an ongoing issue ; some are concerned that the army's m - 16 series of weapons are not reliable ; and one relatively current force protection initiative , the mine - resistant , ambush - proof ( mrap ) vehicle , is receiving considerable attention .

there are continued concerns about the availability of equipment for reserve forces — particularly the army national guard — in terms of readiness to address domestic responsibilities as well as when these units are deployed to iraq and afghanistan .

in january 2007 , government accountability office ( gao ) noted that: the high use of the national guard for federal overseas missions has reduced equipment available for its state - led domestic missions , at the same time it faces an expanded array of threats at home .

on march 27 , 2007 , lieutenant general h. steven blum , chief of the national guard bureau , told the house subcommittee on readiness that the army national guard had only 40% of its required equipment on - hand , with an additional 11% of that equipment either deployed with units or left in theater for other units to use .

lieutenant general blum further maintained that this situation hindered the ability to train units and could slow the national guard's domestic response to disasters or terrorist incidents .

recent reports suggest that national guard soldiers training for deployment to iraq and afghanistan are not able to train with the same rifles , hmmwvs , night vision , and other types of equipment that these soldiers will be issued when they arrive in theater which has raised questions as to how well these units will be able to function in combat when they are provided equipment that they are not familiar with ? .

the army has reportedly pledged to spend $21 billion over the next four years to re - equip the national guard , but some are concerned that this equipment will instead be deployed to iraq to support the "surge" instead of being used to re - equip depleted national guard units at home as they prepare to support domestic missions and train for overseas deployments .

given these concerns , congress might decide to examine dod's and the army's plans to re - equip national guard units .

such an examination could focus on how units will be re - equipped to deal with domestic responsibilities and also how these units will be provided with the same equipment that they will receive upon deployment for home - station training in the united states .

this examination might also examine how dod and the army plan to bring the reserve's aggregate equipment level from about the current 40% level to at least the 80% level that guard and reserve leadership have called an "acceptable level" to meet both domestic and overseas requirements .

some in congress have expressed alarm in both the extended duration of time that dod has allocated to reconstitute prepositioned stocks as well as a lack of a comprehensive plan to reconstitute these strategic assets .

in its version of the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1585 ) , the house armed services committee requires dod to submit an annual report on the status of u.s. prepositioned stocks , including funding requirements , intended future strategic use of these stocks , and strategic risk mitigation plan if these stocks are used before fully replenished .

there are other potential considerations related to preposition stocks that congress might decide to review .

will the army and marines reconstitute preposition stocks with equipment such as armored security vehicles ( asvs ) , mraps , and other specialized equipment developed in response to wartime needs or will the services instead replenish prepositioned stocks to pre - war authorization standards ? .

another consideration is the readiness status of equipment being used for replenishment .

some reports have asserted that much of the equipment being used in dod's current restocking efforts is in poor condition and requires extensive maintenance .

on november 30 , 2007 , the marines reduced their mrap requirement from 3,700 to approximately 2,300 vehicles .

the marines cited six factors in their decision: ied attacks were dramatically down over the preceding six months .

the relatively heavy mrap cannot operate or pursue the enemy off - road , in confined areas , or across most bridges .

reduced need to put marines on high - threat roads through the use of persistent surveillance and airlift of supplies .

counterinsurgency focus requires marines dismount and interact closely with the local populace .

mraps associated with surge forces were no longer needed .

mrap sustainment numbers were lower due to fewer than expected combat losses .

the marine's reduction in its mrap requirement from 3,700 to 2,300 was anticipated to result in a potential cost savings of approximately $1.7 billion in fy2008 and fy2009 .

the army is also expected to cut a number of mraps from its current 10,000-vehicle requirement but has not yet publically committed to a specific requirement .

the army also cited decreasing casualties and ied attacks over the previous six months , as well as the need to dismount and interact with the populace , as factors in reducing its original mrap requirement .

while decreasing mrap requirements based on the improving tactical situation in iraq and in anticipation of a reduction in troop levels can be considered prudent management by dod , at some point dod will need to establish a firm requirement for the total number of mraps to be procured .

allegations that the successor of the army's m - 16 / m - 4 carbine , the heckler & koch's xm - 8 assault rifle , was cancelled due to bureaucratic conflicts among army and dod acquisition officials might be an issue for congressional examination .

some may question why the army remains committed to upgrading an almost 50-year - old weapon when other dod organizations , such as special operations units , have adopted other weapons that are considered more reliable and effective in combat than the m - 4 carbine .

it can be argued that the army has exhibited a tendency to pursue incremental improvements to legacy systems , such as repeated add - on armor upgrades to hmmwvs , instead of fully examining and rapidly procuring commercially - available systems that prove to be more effective than current systems .

