in a statement issued by president bush on september 28 , 2005 titled fighting a global war on terror , he emphasized four core elements of america's strategy for victory in the war on terror: ( 1 ) fighting the enemy abroad ; ( 2 ) denying terrorists state support and sanctuary ; ( 3 ) denying terrorists access to weapons of mass destruction ; and ( 4 ) spreading democracy .

these elements generally echo administration anti - terror strategy as set forth in its february 14 , 2003 , national strategy for combating terrorism .

in the wake of 9 / 11 , the administration has pointed to the killing or capture of more than 2 / 3 of al qaeda's top leadership and seizure of over $200 million in terrorist financing as examples of progress against terrorism .

more recently , progress milestones cited by president bush in his september 28 , 2005 statement included ( 1 ) removal of brutal regimes in afghanistan and iraq that harbored terrorists ; ( 2 ) moving forward in the "march" of democracy worldwide , noting lebanon ; ( 3 ) shutting down a major weapons of mass destruction [wmd] black market network originating in pakistan , and libya's rejoining a community of nations ; and ( 4 ) capturing a number of key terrorists in pakistan and iraq , as well as capturing and killing hundreds of insurgents in iraq .

disruption of al qaeda terrorist plots and efforts to infiltrate the united states were subsequently cited as an additional indication of success by the president in his discussion of the war on terror at the national endowment for democracy on october 6 , 2005 .

though some $200 million is said to have been have been confiscated , it is not clear how much damage has been done to the terrorist's ability to raise or transfer additional funds .

moreover , if one terminates 2 / 3 of the senior leadership of a particular terrorist organization , the ranks of the organization may grow and decentralize , similar to the impact of attacks on drug cartels , evolving into a more resilient adversary .

another key issue is how one measures the impact of unintended consequences — or side effects and by - products — and other results , such as diverting scarce resources from one policy area to another , increasing spending and possibly adding to the budget deficit , or eroding civil liberties .

these types of issues were often not addressed in the patterns of global terrorism reports of previous years .

however , in contrast , the successor to patterns , titled country reports on terrorism , now emphasizes in - depth , comprehensive analysis .

progress may be defined differently by the terrorists and those who oppose them .

hence both can claim progress , and both can be correct in their assessments .

how can this be reconciled ? .

how can measurements of progress be established which are not politicized or biased ? .

in this regard , one must be cautious that success is not defined retrospectively , with goals reformulated after the fact to correspond with the known outcomes .

arguably , measurements of progress have greater validity if strategies are established before , and not after , taking action .

in a search for meaningful measurement criteria , the academic , engineering , scientific and actuarial communities may have much to offer government policymakers .

extensive mathematical tools exist to help define and validate proposed measurement systems , and indeed one might employ a variety of such systems used by different groups .

as long as measurements are clearly defined and linked to goals and objectives , these differences need not be divisive .

the conduct of a survey of data on terrorism is an option .

that is , a survey of what data on terrorism — especially data bases — currently exist , what categories and details are found within that data , and what the data can reasonably inform policymakers about .

existing methodologies for measuring progress in combating complex social phenomena such as drug trafficking and crime could contribute valuable insights .

effective responses to terrorism may need to take into account , and to some degree be individually configured to respond to , the evolving goals , strategies , tactics , and operating environment of different terrorist groups .

better understanding of the dynamics of terrorism allows for a more complete picture of the complexities involved in measuring success or failure and can assist the 110 th congress as it coordinates , funds , and oversees anti - terrorism policy and programs .

although terrorism's complex webs of characteristics — along with the inherent secrecy and compartmentalization of both terrorist organizations and government responses — limit available data , the formulation of practical , useful measurement criteria appears both tractable and ready to be addressed .

