in recent years , congress has been increasingly concerned that other countries — china , japan , taiwan and korea in particular — are manipulating the value of their national currencies in ways injurious to the u.s. economy .

a spate of legislation was introduced in the 109 th congress seeking to pressure foreign countries to revalue their currencies or seeking changes in the international financial system — particularly changes in the international monetary fund ( imf ) — that would help accomplish that end .

this is not a new issue .

for several decades , u.s. policy makers in the executive branch and congress have sought through legislation and the imf to influence international exchange rate policy in ways they believe compatible with u.s. interests .

two decades ago , congress enacted the exchange rates and international economic policy coordination act of 1988 ( called here the 1988 exchange rates act ) out of concern that "policy initiatives by some major trading nations that manipulate the value of their currencies in relation to the united states dollar to gain competitive advantage continue to create serious competitive problems for united states industry. .

congress also said in the same section of the law that it thought greater cooperation among the major countries could reduce the distortions and uncertainties in financial markets and in the international exchange rate system .

economic theory holds that , if currencies are valued at rates that reflect their true relative value , the flow of world trade and investment will likely be based more on efficiency and comparative advantage and less on price distortions caused by exchange rate misalignment .

this is expected to enhance , in turn , the benefits that countries realize from international trade and to promote a more balanced pattern of growth in the world economy .

the 1988 exchange rates act requires the president ( section 3004 ) to confer with other countries on a multilateral basis to achieve better coordination in macroeconomic policies in order to ensure that their levels of trade and current account balances are sustainable .

it also directs the secretary of the treasury to analyze the foreign exchange rate policies of foreign countries , in consultation with the imf , to determine whether they are manipulating the exchange rate between their currency and the us dollar for the purpose of preventing effective adjustment or gaining unfair trade advantage .

when this is found , the secretary must undertake negotiations in the imf or bilaterally for the purpose of eliminating this situation .

the secretary need not pursue such negotiations , however , if he deems this detrimental to u.s. interests .

in any case , the secretary must inform the senate banking committee and the house financial services committee of his determination .

section 3005 of the act requires the treasury secretary to report to congress twice annually on currency market developments , the underlying economic factors that affect those developments , actions the united states has taken ( "interventions" ) to adjust the exchange rate of the dollar , and the impact of the dollar exchange rate on the u.s. international balance of payments , the u.s. economy and the competitiveness of u.s. industry .

it also requires the secretary to report whether countries are manipulating their currencies to the detriment of the united states and what steps he has taken to address that situation .

the imf was created at the end of world war ii to help stabilize the exchange rates among the world's major currencies and to prevent a return to the patterns of currency manipulation and competitive devaluations which plagued the pre - war international economy .

initially , under the imf's original format , the world was on a fixed - parity exchange rate system .

the value of the u.s. dollar was fixed in terms of gold and the value of all other currencies defined in terms of the u.s. dollar .

countries could change the value of their currencies relative to the dollar only with the permission of the imf and only if they agreed to undertake economic policies that would stabilize their economies .

the system broke down after president nixon announced in 1971 that the u.s. treasury would no longer exchange dollars for gold .

the united states devalued the dollar twice and it decreed that the dollar would "float" and its value would be determined by the daily interaction of supply and demand in world currency markets .

a period of international financial instability ensued .

in the end , there being no consensus among the major countries as to how to fix the situation , an amendment to the imf charter was adopted in 1976 authorizing countries to adopt whatever exchange rate system — fixed , floating or other — they found appropriate .

thus , different exchange rate systems can be operating simultaneously in different countries .

the 1976 amendment also provided that , if countries holding 85% of the imf voting power should ever agree , a uniform exchange rate system could be mandated for all imf member countries .

given the differences of view among the major countries , most analysts believe the prospect for such an agreement is very small .

article iv of the imf charter requires countries to cooperate with each other in order to assure orderly exchange arrangements and a stable exchange rate system .

in particular , it says they must pursue economic policies which aim at fostering orderly economic growth with price stability , promote stable international monetary conditions , and avoid manipulating the exchange rate of their currencies in order to gain unfair competitive advantage in international trade or to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment .

article iv says that the imf shall "exercise firm surveillance over the exchange rate policies of members" and "oversee the compliance of each member with its obligations" to cooperate with other countries and not to manipulate the value of their currency in order to gain unfair trade advantage .

the imf charter gives the international agency no effective tools , however , to help it enforce its oversight responsibilities or its judgment whether countries are meeting their article iv responsibilities .

it can issue statements but it has no tools to force them to alter their exchange policies .

previously , most of the imf's surveillance over countries' exchange policies occurred during the fund's annual bilateral discussions with its member countries about their domestic and international economic policies .

these discussions are mandated by article iv and called "article iv consultations. .

the imf also discussed international economic issues in publications — such as the annual world economic outlook report ( weo ) — which focus on cross - national or regional trends .

the fund's independent evaluation office ( ieo ) estimates that only about 9% of the imf's resources are used for the preparation of such reports , however , while more than three times this volume of resources was spent for bilateral surveillance of individual countries .

surprisingly , ieo reports that for all the emphasis given in imf commentaries to the importance of multilateral surveillance , discussion of foreign exchange issues accounts for only a small portion of the effort devoted to the analysis of global trends .

moreover , ieo says , "conspicuously missing [from the fund's discussion of issues in the weo and other major reports] was an analysis of china's exchange rate , which in recent years has figured prominently in international policy debate. .

ieo reports that "the imf did not use the weo to discuss whether the renminbi ( or any other asian currency for that matter ) was undervalued and , if so , what the alternative paths to adjustment might be and their implications for the adjustment of global imbalances. .

in 2006 , the imf adopted a new approach to multilateral surveillance of exchange rates .

instead of discussing issues singly with countries , the imf's new program of multilateral consultations aims to bring together countries with shared concerns for debate and potential action .

changes are also reportedly being made in the fund's surveillance procedures in order to strengthen its oversight of exchange rate issues .

the managing director told the international monetary and financial committee ( the smaller panel of key countries that meets midway between fund's annual meetings ) in september 2006 that a policy dialog between five countries or groups of countries — the united states , china , japan , saudi arabia and the euro area — was underway in order to discuss the problem of global imbalances , their causes , and spillover and linkage effects .

a report to the imf executive board is planned for early 2007 .

exchange rate issues would be a central element of this discussion .

these changes in the imf's surveillance procedures may facilitate a deeper and more thorough review of exchange rate issues as well as dialog among the countries most affected .

the imf will also play a more active role in any negotiations which might occur .

nevertheless , the result of this process depends mainly on the willingness of the countries to reach settlement and not on the rules or guidelines of the imf themselves .

if countries do not wish to let the value of their currencies rise or to revise their exchange rate policies , there is nothing intrinsic in the new process that would require them to take action along those lines .

in late 2005 , congress passed legislation which urged the president to create a comprehensive plan to address a range of issues concerning china .

in particular , it said the administration should encourage china to revalue its currency further against the u.s. dollar by allowing the yuan to float against a trade - weighted basket of currencies .

the legislation did not say , however , how the president should seek to persuade china to act in conformity with that goal .

this was the only legislation relating to exchange rate issues in 2005-2006 that was enacted into law .

at least 15 other bills were introduced in the 109 th congress which sought to indicate specific ways the united states might pursue that objective .

several would authorize the imposition of countervailing duties or special tariffs on goods imported from countries with undervalued currencies unless those currencies have risen to a level at or near their appropriate fair market rate .

others would change the reporting requirement in the 1988 exchange rates act in ways that would make it more likely that the treasury department would find that countries are manipulating their currencies .

still others would press for international action to remedy the problem .

some wanted the imf to be more active in promoting shifts in currency values , perhaps through institutional changes that would give it more authority over the international exchange rate system .

others wanted the united states seek redress in the world trade organization ( wto ) for the damage some undervalued currencies may have done the u.s. economy .

throughout history , civilization has sought to create authoritative bodies — bodies capable of judging disputes between individuals or groups and of enforcing their decisions — so that disputes between individuals or groups can be resolved peacefully rather than through self - help or inter - group negotiation or conflict .

self - help can resolve an immediate situation , at least from the point of view of one of the parties , but it can also perpetuate a dispute if the other party responds in a way that creates new incidents that need resolution .

inter - group negotiations can fracture a society into competing elements if a controversy between two groups is resolved on the basis of their current relative power or at someone else's expense .

if one group's relative power increases , it may want to reopen the earlier settlements in order to get new terms that better reflect its current strength .

the group now being pressured to give up an advantage gained previously may resist such change .

likewise , if a dispute is resolved by taking something away from a weaker third party , the latter may harbor resentment and seek restitution if its strength increases .

authoritative bodies can promote civil peace if they can settle disputes on the basis of general principles which all can use as guidance for future situations .

by contrast , ad hoc agreements between parties are not likely to establish guidelines or create precedents which others can use as the basis for the equitable settlement of their own disputes .

when conditions do not favor the establishment of authoritative bodies or agreed methods for resolving disputes , however , individuals , groups and nations have little choice but the use of self - help and negotiations to resolve disagreements that affect their concerns .

if the original provisions of the imf articles of agreement were still in effect and the world still operated on the fixed parity exchange rate system , controversies about exchange rate manipulation could be resolved relatively easily .

countries would need the permission of the imf executive board to change the legal value of their currencies and this would not likely be given if countries wanted to peg them at rates below their normally accepted value .

likewise , if the rules of the wto allowed export subsidies delivered through exchange rate manipulation to be causes for action , disagreements about exchange rate manipulation and currency issues could be settled through its dispute settlement procedure .

however , the old exchange rate system no longer exists and exchange rate controversies are not generally seen to be adjudicable through the wto .

the imf is responsible for surveillance over the international exchange rate system and the establishment of basic principles , but it has no role in the determination of exchange rates and little authority to make countries change their policies if these do not comply with established rules .

fixed exchange rate systems may be too inflexible for the modern fast - moving globalized economy .

they also limit countries' ability to use monetary policy as a tool for managing their economies .

on the other hand , a system of flexible or floating exchange rates without clear and enforceable rules can lead to problems .

some countries may choose to overvalue the exchange rate for their currency in order to artificially lower the cost of imports and thus to raise their domestic standard of living .

alternatively , countries may decide to undervalue their currencies in order to stimulate exports , discourage the inflow of foreign goods by making them artificially expensive , expand their foreign exchange reserves , and reduce unemployment .

in both cases , foreigners bear most of the economic cost of the currency misalignment .

in the case of overvalued currencies , however , countries may be forced to devalue their currency and to reduce their people's standard of living if investors decide in large numbers that the government lacks the resources to sustain the higher rate and — as seen in the asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 — many decide simultaneously to sell local currency and to buy dollars or other major types of foreign exchange .

if everyone is selling and nobody is buying , the value of the local currency compared to foreign currency will fall precipitously and many firms and individuals will be forced into bankruptcy .

countries undergoing such financial crises will likely apply to the imf for assistance and the imf will likely suggest reforms aimed at helping the country work its way out of its difficulties and avoiding their recurrence .

in the case of undervalued currencies , there is likely to be no corresponding situation which would force a government to raise the exchange value of its currency .

if the government decides that it can control the growing inflationary pressure , suppress the unrealized domestic demand for imports and ignore the dissatisfaction of its trading partners , it can probably sustain a policy of undervaluing its currency for a long time .

because their foreign exchange reserves will expand as long as their currencies are undervalued , countries in this situation will not need to apply to the imf for loans and they will not need to acquiesce to the imf's policy conditionality as the price for obtaining that sort of aid .

the question is what the united states can do if other countries undervalue their currencies in order to artificially expand their exports to the u.s. market .

most economists agree that the undervalued currencies of countries such as japan , korea , china , or taiwan are not the principal cause of the u.s. balance of payments deficit nor the principal reason for the decline in the u.s. manufacturing sector .

if those countries were to raise the value of their currencies , the u.s. trade deficit and the decline in u.s. manufacturing would not likely diminish so long as the united states continues to import large amounts of capital in the form of foreign investments or foreign loans .

nevertheless , the benefits of trade might be enhanced for everybody and the growing international imbalances in trade and financial flows might be lessened if the dollar and other currencies were priced appropriately .

as the diversity of the legislation before congress shows , there is no consensus as to the most effective means the united states could use to promote reform in the world exchange rate system and to offset the impact that undervalued foreign currencies have on the u.s. economy .

direct action , to offset the undervaluation of a currency through countervailing duties or special tariffs , might have the most immediate impact on the volume and price of imports from countries with such currencies .

it might also lead to negotiations or changes in foreign exchange rate policies .

on the other hand , direct action on the part of the united states — particularly action that violates the established rules of the world trading system — might induce the other countries to retaliate by reducing their imports from the united states and by reducing or restricting u.s. participation in their economy .

it is difficult at this point to calculate the prospects either way or to determine what the relative costs or benefits might be if the united states took direct action to offset the trade benefits that countries realize when they undervalue their currencies .

direct negotiations with other countries aimed at encouraging them to revalue their currencies is another approach contemplated by current legislation .

the main instrument would be changes in current law which would give the secretary of the treasury little option but to declare officially that certain foreign countries are manipulating their currencies to the detriment of the united states and to seek formal negotiations .

some bills would couple the bid for negotiations with a requirement that the united states take direct action to restrict imports from the other country through countervailing duties or other measures .

a formal u.s. request for negotiations might induce another country to talk but there is no requirement that it must do so .

the result of the negotiations would depend most likely on the relative influence each country brings to the table .

it would also depend on its willingness to trade flexibility on trade and currency issues for flexibility on other topics and the relative value it attaches to each concern .

in bilateral talks , the united states would be able to pursue its own negotiating agenda but it would likely bear the costs of any settlement even though other countries would benefit from any changes the other country makes in its foreign exchange policies .

it would be impossible to change the exchange rate between the u.s. dollar and the other currency without also affecting the rate between that currency and other currencies as well .

in multilateral talks , other countries would participate in the process and bear the cost of any trade - offs needed to reach settlement .

however , the final result would likely be a consensus of all views and it might not be the outcome that each of them might prefer .

a third approach would be reform of the imf exchange rate procedures sufficient to strengthen the rules governing currency manipulation and to discourage countries from intervening in currency markets except for short - term actions to stabilize currency prices in destabilizing situations .

the major bills of this type call on the united states to seek stronger action by the imf to exercise surveillance over exchange rates and to persuade countries not to manipulate their currencies .

some also seek changes that would strengthen the enforcement of article iv and require closer imf examination of the interventions by countries in international currency markets .

the imf is taking some relevant initiatives and the administration is encouraging action by the imf along these lines , but enactment of a legislative directive might encourage u.s. officials to be more vigorous in their efforts to achieve such imf reforms .

some of the pending legislation would require the united states to oppose ( or consider opposing ) loans to countries that manipulate their currency .

others would seek to induce countries to stop manipulating by offering them a possibly larger quota in the imf or by opposing any increase in their share unless they stop their currency manipulation .

strengthening the imf's capacity to enforce provisions such as article iv requires changes in the fund's procedures and its institutional arrangements , however , and this requires broad support by the membership and not merely greater efforts by the united states .

many countries do not see the issue of exchange rate manipulation in the same way as does the united states .

many also do not see the issue on such urgent terms .

more fundamentally , stronger enforcement of article iv would require the imf to exercise greater surveillance over the economic policy of all countries and not just over the policies of some countries which are accused of currency manipulation .

because the u.s. dollar is the benchmark currency for measuring the valuation of other currencies , for example , the imf would likely need to determine if the dollar is correctly priced before it could determine whether the exchange value of other currencies is appropriate .

it is not clear that u.s. officials or legislators would welcome imf commentary on u.s. economic policies or that they would readily adopt policy changes the imf believes necessary in order to bring the value of the u.s. dollar into line with its calculations .

officials from other countries , be they countries with major currencies or countries accused of manipulating their currency , will likely have a similar view about imf advice or policy recommendations .

it is possible , however , that legislation aimed at strengthening imf surveillance and enforcement of article iv could encourage other countries to expand their efforts along the same lines .

a new bretton woods conference to restructure the imf or new amendments to change its basic procedures seem unlikely .

nonetheless , a greater sense of urgency on the part of most major imf member countries might give the imf more influence and might make initiatives such as the new program for multilateral consultations more effective .

what the final result , if any , might look like and whether it might satisfy u.s. expectations cannot be determined at this time .

