the section 8 housing choice voucher program has come under increasing criticism from the administration and congress for its cost and its complexity .

recent changes in the way the program is funded have largely addressed concerns at the federal level about "spiraling costs" ; however , the new funding structure has not reduced budget pressures for the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer the program .

noting these concerns , the administration has argued in each of the past several years that the existing section 8 voucher program should be dismantled and replaced with a new , broader - purpose grant program .

thus far , low - income housing advocates and pha groups have generally opposed the administration's reform initiatives , although both have begun to call for some type of reform to lessen the administrative burdens on phas and to help them better administer their voucher programs in a budget - constrained environment .

the administration's reform proposals have changed over the years , and they have differed substantially from the reform proposals supported by pha groups and low - income housing advocates .

despite their differences , each proposal would alter several key features of the current program , which are discussed below .

every year since 2003 , the president has proposed eliminating the section 8 voucher program and replacing it with a new initiative .

bills to enact the president's reform have been introduced in congress , although no further action has been taken .

in 2006 , a bipartisan voucher reform bill , which would have modified the voucher program but largely retained its current structure , was approved by the house financial services committee , but no further action was taken before the close of the 109 th congress .

proposals from the 108 th and 109 th congresses are discussed briefly below ; a comparison of bills from the 109 th congress to current law can be found in table 1 .

the 2003 hanf program ( h.r .

1841 and s. 947 , 108 th congress ) was a bush administration initiative that would have replaced the existing tenant - based voucher program that is administered by local phas with a formula grant to states .

rather than receiving funding for a fixed number of units , states would have received a fixed budget , proportional to the amount of funds the state was receiving under the housing choice voucher program .

states would have had broad discretion in how they used their funds , including for homeownership purposes .

the secretary of hud would have been permitted to lower the 75% targeting requirement to 55% , impose minimum rents , increase eligibility to 80% of area median income , and reduce the frequency of housing quality inspections from annually to every three years .

low - income housing advocates opposed hanf out of concern that it could lead to an erosion of funding and that it would not serve low - income families adequately .

pha groups opposed the proposal to transfer administration to states and also voiced concerns about erosion in funding levels .

although multiple hearings were held , no further action was taken , and hanf was not enacted in the 108 th congress .

the president's flexible voucher program ( fvp ) , was first recommended in the second session of the 108 th congress in the administrative provisions section of the fy2005 hud budget request .

the hud secretary testified that the department did not plan to pursue authorizing legislation .

rather , officials stated during a hearing before the va , hud and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee on march 4 , 2004 , that they appreciated the leadership of the appropriations committees and were asking them to include the provision in the fy2005 appropriations bill .

the proposal , like hanf , would have replaced the voucher program with a broader - purpose grant program .

unlike hanf , phas would be asked to administer the fvp .

they would have received a fixed number of dollars that they could have used to serve as many families as they chose , providing a broad range of assistance ranging from cash grants to ongoing rental assistance .

adoption of fvp would have eliminated caps on how much families could be required to contribute towards rent , increased income eligibility to 80% or below of ami , and eliminated any targeting requirements .

the house financial services committee , in their views and estimates of the president's fy2005 budget , was critical of the president's fvp proposal .

the chairman of the senate va , hud and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee stated in a hearing on april 1 , 2004 , that the flexible voucher proposal was "a poor substitute for flaws in the program" and that the committee would not have the "luxury of time to consider fully" the proposal .

the fvp was not enacted before the end of the 108 th congress .

the administration's state and local housing flexibility act of 2005 ( slhfa ) was introduced in the first session of the 109 th congress by senator allard on april 13 , 2005 , and by representative gary miller on april 28 , 2005 , as s. 771 and h.r .

1999 , respectively .

the bill consisted of three titles .

title i , the flexible voucher act , is discussed further below .

title ii , public housing rent flexibility and simplification , would have permitted phas to alter income and rent calculations for public housing in the same ways as under title i .

title iii , the moving to work program , would have made the current moving to work demonstration a permanent program with expanded eligibility for phas , and expanded waiver authority for the secretary of hud .

title i of slhfa was similar to the flexible voucher program proposed by the administration as part of the fy2005 budget request .

it would have replaced the current voucher program with a broader - purpose grant program .

phas would have continued to administer the program , although if they were not meeting the secretary's performance standards , their funds could be awarded to other entities selected by the secretary .

under the bill , flexible voucher program funds could be used for six eligible activities: tenant - based rental assistance ; project - based rental assistance ; tenant - based homeownership assistance for first - time homebuyers ; self - sufficiency activities , including escrow savings accounts ; other activities , as specified by the secretary , in support of tenant - based , project - based , or homeownership assistance ; and administrative costs .

income eligibility , targeting , subsidy determination , and quality inspection rules would all have been loosened , while portability and enhanced voucher features would have been restricted .

the changes in the bill would have been phased in .

the secretary was directed to develop temporary implementing regulations within 90 days of passage , and final regulations , not including funding formulas , within 18 months .

the secretary was also directed to undertake negotiated rulemaking to develop grant and administrative fee allocation formulas , to be published within 24 months .

hearings were held on the slhfa in the house on may 11 , 2005 ; hearings were not held in the senate .

the president's fy2007 budget request , introduced on february 6 , 2006 , reiterated hud's support for the bill .

no further action was taken on slhfa before the close of the 109 th  congress .

on may 22 , 2006 , the chairman of the housing and community opportunity subcommittee of the house financial services committee introduced the section 8 voucher reform act of 2006 ( h.r .

5443 ) , a bipartisan section 8 reform bill cosponsored by the subcommittee's ranking member .

it was approved by the subcommittee on june 8 , 2006 , and by the full committee on june 14 , 2006 , although no further action was taken before the close of the 109 th congress .

unlike the bush administration proposals , which sought to eliminate the voucher program and replace it with a new program , h.r .

5443 would have retained the basic structure of the current voucher program while implementing changes primarily designed to make the program easier to administer .

specifically , the bill proposed to modify the current definition of income to exclude imputed income from assets ; eliminate or replace many of the deductions and allowances from income ; provide phas with several methods for calculating income ; change the targeting threshold to the greater of 30% of ami or the poverty level ; eliminate the gross income calculation for rent ; modify income reexamination requirements ; and modify the process and timing for conducting housing inspections .

several of these administrative changes would also have affected the public housing and project - based section 8 programs .

h.r .

5443 would have adopted a new renewal funding formula , authorized the use of vouchers to provide downpayment assistance , required the secretary to develop performance standards , and expanded and made permanent the moving to work demonstration .

amendments added during full committee consideration would have authorized a manufactured housing pilot , altered the treatment of certain military pay for purposes of several housing programs , and increased the rent levels for certain project - based vouchers in low - income housing tax credit properties .

h.r .

5443 received endorsements from pha groups and low - income housing advocates .

as noted earlier , the bill was not enacted before the close of the 109 th congress .

