nuclear weapons will continue to play a key role in u.s. security policy for many decades .

yet the department of defense ( dod ) and the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , the department of energy ( doe ) agency in charge of the nuclear weapons program , have raised concerns that maintaining current weapons , which date from the cold war , will become increasingly difficult .

at issue for congress is how best to maintain the nuclear stockpile so that it will retain , for many decades , capabilities that political and military leaders deem necessary .

there are three main options: ( 1 ) extend the service lives of current warheads without nuclear testing ; ( 2 ) develop , build , and deploy a new generation of warheads without testing to replace the current stockpile ; or ( 3 ) resume nuclear testing , which the united states suspended in 1992 , as a tool to help maintain existing warheads or develop new ones .

this report focuses on the first two options .

it compares how they respond to congressional goals , presenting pros , cons , uncertainties , costs , and potential risks and benefits , then discusses issues for congress .

regarding the third option , the united states has not conducted a nuclear test since 1992 , yet has assessed for the past 12 years that current warheads are safe and reliable .

on the other hand , some would resume testing on grounds that that is the only way to be sure that u.s. nuclear weapons remain safe and reliable , to validate tools for maintaining weapons without testing , and to develop new weapons if needed .

however , the administration and many in congress prefer not to resume nuclear testing , so this report does not consider it as a separate option , but discusses it at various points because testing would provide additional data to help maintain or develop nuclear weapons .

this report does not consider a fourth option , abolition of u.s. nuclear weapons , as it has garnered no support in congress or the administration .

this report now discusses how the competing designs and lep seek to meet congressional goals and presents the debate by supporters of lep , rrw , and others .

some of these goals are taken directly from congressional language , while others are derived from it .

to help the reader link goals to congressional language , each goal is followed by one or more numbers in brackets .

these numbers refer to excerpts from legislation ( excerpt 2 ) or committee reports ( other excerpts ) in appendix b .

several issues that bear on the future of the u.s. nuclear weapons enterprise cut across many of the goals listed above .

this discussion presents some of them , along with questions that congress may wish to consider .

many of the 20 goals are of the "more is better" variety: more reliability , more longevity , more safety , more security , more ease of manufacture .

yet each goal , while beneficial , imposes costs .

incorporating multiple safety and use control features into rrws would add costs .

some goals impose design constraints that make it harder to reach other goals .

safety and use - control features add to the complexity of ccrds , which might slightly reduce reliability .

in some cases , the benefits sought may be questioned .

while the ccrds avoid the trinity exception , congress may wish to ask how much weight should be given to that scenario .

it has never led to an accidental nuclear detonation , but past performance does not guarantee future results .

in other cases , benefits might be adequately achieved by means other than warhead design , such as features and systems external to the warhead .

congress may want to review some of the key design tradeoffs and whether current warheads are good enough .

for example , the ccrds demonstrate how much safety and use control can be obtained ; as a separate matter , it is up to congress , along with nnsa , the air force , navy , and others to decide how much safety and use control they want and what tradeoffs they are willing to accept to obtain it .

dod has seemed split in its support for rrw .

dod's 2006 quadrennial defense review gave it a mild endorsement: the department is working with the department of energy to assess the feasibility and cost of the reliable replacement warhead and , if warranted , begin development of that system .

this system could enable reductions in the number of older , non - deployed warheads maintained as a hedge against reliability problems in deployed systems , and assist in the evolution to smaller and more responsive nuclear weapons infrastructure .

in contrast , the u.s. strategic command ( usstratcom ) , which operates u.s. nuclear forces , strongly supports rrw .

general james cartwright , usmc , commander of usstratcom , testified in 2006: usstratcom supports the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) as the key to transforming our aging cold war nuclear weapons stockpile .

rrw will enhance our long - term confidence in the stockpile and reduce the need to retain high numbers of hedge weapons while exercising the people , science , technology base and facilities required for sustaining the nuclear weapons enterprise .

some concerns raised by dod components are that handling and maintenance procedures , aeroshells , and links between missile and warhead that have been developed for current warheads might have to be changed if rrws are introduced .

current warheads have been tested and are certified to work , and leps are expected to extend warhead life by 20 to 30 years .

why incur the added burden imposed by rrw ? .

others feel that rrws will reduce this burden once they are deployed .

congress may wish to determine if dod leadership strongly supports rrw at present , and if not why not .

rrw advocates argue that minor changes from leps may reduce confidence in current warheads over the long term , while rrw designs should provide high confidence because they stay well within parameters defined by nuclear test data and have wider margins than current warheads .

lep advocates respond that current warheads have extensive nuclear test pedigrees , ssp has greatly improved understanding of weapons science , and nnsa states that leps can extend the life of current warheads by 20 to 30 years .

in contrast , they feel that rrw breaks the link between testing and certification .

still others maintain that neither lep nor rrw can provide confidence because both break the link to testing , lep because of the many changes inevitably introduced and rrw because it will not be validated by testing .

the only way to have confidence in the stockpile , this position holds , is to resume nuclear testing .

a fourth possible view is that either lep or rrw , despite their differences , could maintain weapons for the long term .

crs is aware of no advocates for this fourth position .

nonetheless , a mixed rrw - lep force would be inevitable for some years if the united states moved to an all - rrw stockpile ; having two types of warheads designed decades apart to meet different requirements would lower the risk that a single failure could put at risk much of the stockpile .

congress may wish to examine competing methods for maintaining a reliable stockpile , problems that might arise in deploying a mixed lep / rrw force and how they might be addressed , and ramifications of maintaining a test moratorium or of resuming testing .

it is easy to think of the current designs as actual warheads .

however , the designs are preliminary , with considerable detailed design work remaining .

some components might prove difficult to manufacture .

design defects might emerge .

congress may wish to ask nnsa about where gaps between the current designs and actual warheads might arise , and what the historical record indicates .

a pit is the fissile core of a modern thermonuclear weapon .

it typically consists of a hollow plutonium shell and other metal shells surrounded by chemical explosives .

the plutonium shell is by far the most difficult and costly pit component to make , and is the only one discussed here .

for many years , rocky flats plant ( co ) was the only site that made pits certified for the stockpile , but it stopped making pits in 1989 .

nnsa has not made certified pits since then .

at present , the pf - 4 ( plutonium facility - 4 ) building in lanl's technical area 55 ( ta - 55 ) is producing w88 pits at a low rate , with a capacity of 10 pits per year expected by the end of fy2007 .

the first pits are expected to be certified in fy2007 .

nnsa plans to complete work in fy2012 to increase pf - 4's rrw pit production capacity to 50 certified pits per year , but does not plan to increase pf - 4's capacity beyond that level .

pit life bears on the choice between rrw and lep .

plutonium decays radioactively in ways that may eventually impair pit performance .

until recently , nnsa's best estimate of pit life was 45-60 years .

however , a november 2006 study extended that estimate considerably .

the study , by the jason scientific advisory group , reviewed an assessment of pit life by lanl and llnl and found: the assessment demonstrates that there is no degradation in performance of primaries of stockpile systems [i.e. , warheads] due to plutonium aging that would be cause for near - term concern regarding their safety and reliability .

most primary types have credible minimum lifetimes in excess of 100 years as regards aging of plutonium ; those with assessed minimum lifetimes of 100 years or less have clear mitigation paths that are proposed and / or being implemented .

this pit life "extension" would seem to favor lep .

pits of current warheads are difficult and costly to build , involve hazardous materials , and require elaborate safety and security precautions .

it is difficult to certify a remanufactured pit of current design without nuclear testing ; for example , lanl has spent several hundred million dollars and many years to certify the nuclear performance of the w88 pits that pf - 4 is manufacturing .

if existing pits could remain in the stockpile for decades to come , then there would be high confidence in them .

dod could have high confidence in life - extended warheads , and fewer pits would have to be manufactured for many decades , reducing lep costs .

rrw's supporters respond that rrw offers many advantages over lep , such as in safety , use control , and skill maintenance , as discussed earlier , independent of pit life .

they argue that wide margins will increase dod's confidence in rrw pits , and that rrw pits will cost less to manufacture than pits for leps .

pit life also bears on an issue that congress has grappled with for years , pit production capacity and the need for a new production facility .

in the fy2006 budget cycle , congress deleted funds for a modern pit facility , with a capacity of 125 pits per year .

nnsa argues that it needs more capacity than pf - 4 offers .

to that end , its preferred complex , "complex 2030," includes a consolidated plutonium center ( cpc ) with a capacity of 125 pits per year .

john harvey , director of nnsa's policy planning staff , explained why that capacity is needed despite the pit life findings: first , even with longer lifetimes , as the stockpile ages , we will need to replace considerable numbers of pits in stockpiled warheads .

second , even if pits were to live forever , we will require substantial production capacity in order to introduce , once feasibility is established , significant numbers of rrw warheads into the stockpile by 2030 .

we should not assume that rrw could employ pit reuse and still provide important efficiencies for stockpile and infrastructure transformation .

finally , at significantly smaller stockpile levels than today , we must anticipate that an adverse change in the geopolitical threat environment , or a technical problem with warheads in the operationally - deployed force , could require us to manufacture and deploy additional warheads on a relatively rapid timescale .

lep supporters challenge each point .

 ( 1 ) the jason study implies that nnsa would not need to replace large numbers of pits of current warheads for many decades .

 ( 2 ) lep supporters recognize that the competing rrw designs use pits of new design and would require pits of new manufacture , and that production of 50 pits per year would hold deployment of rrws to an extremely slow pace .

however , they see this reasoning as self - justifying: the assumption that rrw will be introduced justifies a new pit facility , and a new pit facility makes it possible to introduce rrws at an acceptable pace .

in the view of lep supporters , lep , especially if existing pits are retained , permits the united states to delay a decision on rrw for decades .

 ( 3 ) lep supporters see this argument as circular .

rrw permits a reduction in the stockpile , while the possibility of a technical or geopolitical problem requires a larger pit capacity to build more rrws if needed .

instead , lep supporters would retain current warheads and maintain them with lep and stockpile systems programs , thereby avoiding the need for rrw and a new pit facility while hedging against technical risks and geopolitical threats .

they see these reductions in cost and risk as outweighing any benefits that might arise from having fewer nondeployed warheads .

rrw supporters advance other reasons for a new pit facility .

more capacity would permit production of more than one pit type at a time , so nnsa could respond to problems that require rebuilding pits out of the planned sequence and to threats that require new - design pits .

in contrast , it would be hard to manufacture several pit types concurrently in pf - 4 , and if a problem were discovered in a pit type in the stockpile , pf - 4 might be unable to replace pits in time to prevent withdrawing some weapon systems from deployment .

since pf - 4 was completed in 1978 , it might prove less costly to build a new facility than to upgrade pf - 4 , as a recent example from industry indicates .

they doubt that pf - 4 could accommodate increasingly stringent safety and security requirements , and note that ta - 55 has problems meeting current standards .

pit production capacity is critical for rrw regardless of pit aging .

since the first rrw will use new pits , production of 50 pits per year would make for a slow deployment of rrws ; converting the stockpile to rrws would take decades .

rrw supporters argue that using certified pits from retired warheads in rrws would permit faster introduction of rrws whether nnsa uses pf - 4 or cpc .

lanl saw pit reuse as desirable for rrw in theory because it would avoid most problems and capacity limits of pit production and would save large sums .

nonetheless , it ruled out pit reuse for missile warheads because existing pits could not accommodate all the safety and use - control features in the rrw designs and because they would be harder to certify than rrw pits .

pit reuse might , however , be possible for an rrw bomb .

because bombs are larger and heavier than warheads , they permit a wider range of design tradeoffs to improve margin , safety , and use control .

reusing pits would make all the limited pit production capacity of pf - 4 available for the first rrw , rather than having to divide it between two warhead types .

regarding pit reuse , thomas d'agostino , acting administrator of nnsa , said , and what we would like to do is examine those pits [currently in storage from dismantled warheads] , those small numbers of pits as potential pits that would be used in future reliable replacement warhead concepts .

for example , if we were looking at providing reliable replacement concepts into a bomb , we would look primarily to one of those pits that we already know has these features .

and assuming the shape is not a problem , then we would use that particular pit in that system because it would have , again , offset further expense .

a warhead on top of a ballistic missile is a little bit different animal because of the constraints associated with the size .

and therefore , we had to kind of start from the ground up on that particular system .

and we didn't have enough of those old other pits .

some opponents of a new pit facility hold that pf - 4's capacity could be increased beyond 50 per year .

some equipment could be removed , including that used to fabricate plutonium - 238 components for powering deep space probes .

production equipment now in pf - 4 was set up as a pilot project .

reconfiguring it and adding new equipment could arguably support larger - scale production , though pit production would likely have to be suspended to accommodate that effort .

warheads put into the stockpile in the past have had unanticipated problems .

rrws could have a similar experience , just as there are recalls with cars and with laptop batteries .

significant finding investigations ( sfis ) illustrate issues that need to be addressed .

significant findings are defects discovered during surveillance of a warhead .

if a defect is serious , an sfi is launched by the laboratory responsible for that defect to determine its cause and remedy .

a review of sfis completed in the mid - 1990s showed that significant defects were found one to two decades after the first production unit of a warhead entered the stockpile .

there are two conflicting interpretations .

one is that the defects arose because of aging , such as deterioration of plastics or explosives .

another is that it may take two decades to find the final few percent of significant defects in a warhead type .

that is , some flaws may be there all along , and it takes time and improved knowledge to discover them .

congress may wish to inquire about each interpretation .

regarding rrw , why deploy it now , after the bugs have been shaken out of current warheads ? .

why spend large sums deploying a new warhead when it will arguably have reduced reliability with respect to sfi - type issues that may take decades to identify ? .

might rrw , which involves a new approach to design , introduce new risks and defects into the stockpile ? .

regarding current warheads , what assurance can there be that sfis and surveillance have wrung out all the defects ? .

might serious defects be found in the future because they develop with age or because advances in weapons science reveal them ? .

congress might direct nnsa to update the 1996 sfi review to learn how warhead aging and responses have developed in the past decade .

appendix a .

nuclear weapons , nuclear weapons complex , and stockpile stewardship program this report refers to nuclear weapons design , operation , and production throughout .

this appendix describes key terms , concepts , and facilities as an aid to readers not familiar with them .

current strategic ( long - range ) and most tactical nuclear weapons are of a two - stage design .

the first stage , the "primary," is an atomic bomb similar in principle to the bomb dropped on nagasaki .

the primary provides the energy needed to trigger the second stage , or "secondary. .

the primary has at its center a "pit," a hollow core containing fissile material ( typically plutonium ) and containment shells of other metals .

it is surrounded by chemical explosive shaped to generate a symmetrical inward - moving ( implosion ) shock front .

when the explosive is detonated , the implosion compresses the plutonium , increasing its density so much that it becomes supercritical and can sustain a runaway nuclear chain reaction .

a neutron generator injects neutrons into the plutonium .

the neutrons drive this reaction by splitting ( fissioning ) plutonium atoms , repeatedly doubling the number of neutrons released .

but the chain reaction can last only the briefest moment before the force of the nuclear explosion drives the plutonium outward so that it becomes subcritical and can no longer support a chain reaction .

to increase the fraction of plutonium that is fissioned , boosting the yield of the primary , another system injects "boost gas" — a mixture of deuterium and tritium ( isotopes of hydrogen ) gases — into the pit before the explosive is detonated .

the intense heat and pressure of the fission chain reaction cause this gas to undergo fusion .

while the fusion reaction generates energy , its purpose is to generate a great many neutrons and thus "boost" the fission chain reaction to a higher level .

a metal "radiation case" channels the energy of the primary to the secondary , which contains fission and fusion fuel .

the energy ignites the secondary , which releases most of the energy of a nuclear explosion .

the primary , radiation case , and secondary comprise the "nuclear explosive package. .

thousands of "nonnuclear" components are also needed to make the nuclear explosive package into a militarily usable weapon , such as an arming , firing , and fuzing system , an outer case , and electrical and physical connections linking a bomb to an airplane or a warhead to a missile .

nuclear weapons were designed , tested , and manufactured by the nuclear weapons complex , which is composed of eight government - owned contractor - operated sites: the los alamos national laboratory ( nm ) and lawrence livermore national laboratory ( ca ) , which design nuclear explosive packages ; sandia national laboratories ( nm and ca ) , which designs nonnuclear components ; y - 12 plant ( tn ) , which produces uranium components and secondaries ; kansas city plant ( mo ) , which produces many of the nonnuclear components ; savannah river site ( sc ) , which processes tritium from stockpiled weapons to remove decay products ; pantex plant ( tx ) , which assembles and disassembles nuclear weapons ; and the nevada test site , which used to conduct nuclear tests but now conducts other weapons - related experiments that do not produce a nuclear yield .

these sites are now involved in disassembly , inspection , and refurbishment of existing nuclear weapons .

the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semiautonomous part of the department of energy , manages the nuclear weapons complex and program .

nnsa maintains nuclear weapons and associated expertise through the stockpile stewardship program ( ssp ) , which congress created in the fy1994 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

103-160 , section 3138 ) .

the legislation specified that the goal of ssp is "to ensure the preservation of the core intellectual and technical competencies of the united states in nuclear weapons" through "advanced computational capabilities," "above - ground experiments" ( experiments not requiring nuclear testing ) , and construction of large experimental facilities .

ssp has three main elements .

directed stockpile work involves work directly on nuclear weapons in the stockpile , such as monitoring their condition , maintaining them through refurbishment and modifications , r&d in support of specific warheads , and dismantlement .

it includes the life extension program and the rrw program .

campaigns provide focused scientific and engineering expertise in support of directed stockpile work , in such areas as pit manufacturing and certification , computation , and study of the properties of materials .

readiness in technical base and facilities funds infrastructure and operations at the nuclear weapons complex sites .

while the legislation did not specify that ssp was not to involve nuclear testing , that goal seems clear from the history , and has become a goal of the program .

nnsa does not rule out the possible need for testing , such as if a problem were to emerge in a warhead type that could not be remedied in any other way , but the united states has been able to maintain its nuclear stockpile without testing since 1992 .

appendix b .

congressional language setting goals congress has set forth many goals for the rrw program .

[1] that program originated as a funded activity in the conference report on the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act , when conferees stated that $9.0 million "is made available for the reliable replacement warhead program to improve the reliability , longevity , and certifiability of existing weapons and their components. .

this was rrw's washington debut ; nnsa had not requested funds for it , and the relevant congressional reports had not mentioned it .

[2] p.l .

109-163 , the fy2006 national defense authorization act , section 3111 , sets seven requirements for the program .

 ( the text includes quotation marks because the requirements add a new section 4204a , reliable replacement warhead program , to the atomic energy defense act , division d of p.l .

107-314 . ) .

 ( a ) program required. — the secretary of energy shall carry out a program , to be known as the reliable replacement warhead program , which will have the following objectives: ( 1 ) to increase the reliability , safety , and security of the united states nuclear weapons stockpile .

 ( 2 ) to further reduce the likelihood of the resumption of underground nuclear weapons testing .

 ( 3 ) to remain consistent with basic design parameters by including , to the maximum extent feasible and consistent with the objective specified in paragraph ( 2 ) , components that are well understood or are certifiable without the need to resume underground nuclear weapons testing .

 ( 4 ) to ensure that the nuclear weapons infrastructure can respond to unforeseen problems , to include the ability to produce replacement warheads that are safer to manufacture , more cost - effective to produce , and less costly to maintain than existing warheads .

 ( 5 ) to achieve reductions in the future size of the nuclear weapons stockpile based on increased reliability of the reliable replacement warheads .

 ( 6 ) to use the design , certification , and production expertise resident in the nuclear complex to develop reliable replacement components to fulfill current mission requirements of the existing stockpile .

 ( 7 ) to serve as a complement to , and potentially a more cost - effective and reliable long - term replacement for , the current stockpile life extension programs .

[3] for fy2006 , the house armed services committee set forth many goals for rrw .

those not in the preceding text include the following: the committee understands that by designing and replacing components and warheads in our existing arsenal , the nuclear weapons complex can take full advantage of modern design techniques , more environmentally safe materials , and efficient manufacturing processes in a way that can make our arsenal more reliable , safe , and secure.... the committee encourages the department of defense and the department of energy to focus initial reliable replacement warhead efforts on replacement warheads for submarine launched ballistic missiles.... a second objective of this program is to further reduce the likelihood of the resumption of nuclear testing by increasing warhead design margin and manufacturability.... [a sixth goal is] ensuring that the human capital aspect is not neglected .

the nuclear complex is rapidly losing its design and production expertise , a concern highlighted by several studies in the past decade .

the reliable replacement warhead program will help train and sustain the weapons designers and engineers whose expertise is essential in ensuring the stockpile remains , reliable , safe and secure into the future .

[4] the senate armed services committee set goals in its fy2006 report: the committee understands from the testimony of the administrator of the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) that the goals of this program are: ( 1 ) to increase the security and reliability of the nuclear weapons stockpile ; ( 2 ) to develop replacement components for nuclear warheads that can be more easily manufactured with more readily available and more environmentally benign materials ; ( 3 ) to develop replacements that can be introduced into the stockpile with assured high confidence regarding their effect on warhead safety and reliability ; ( 4 ) to develop these replacements on a schedule that would reduce the possibility that the united states would ever be faced with the need to conduct a nuclear test in order to diagnose or remedy a reliability problem in the current stockpile ; ( 5 ) to reduce infrastructure costs needed to support the stockpile , while increasing the responsiveness of that infrastructure ; and ( 6 ) to increase confidence in the stockpile to a level such that significant , additional reductions in numbers of non - deployed `hedge' warheads can be made .

the committee supports these goals and this modest investment [$9.4 million] in feasibility studies ... with the goal of substantially increasing the safety , security , and reliability of the nuclear weapons stockpile and with the ultimate objective of achieving the smallest stockpile consistent with our nation's security .

[5] most house armed services committee democrats presented their goals for the program in a statement of additional views in the committee's fy2006 report: in our opinion , the rrw program is only worth[y] of support if it: • truly reduces or eliminates altogether the need for nuclear testing ; • leads to dramatic reductions in the nuclear arsenal , including complete dismantlement of the weapons and safe disposal of fissile components ; • does not introduce new mission or new weapon requirements , particularly for tactical military purposes ; • reduces the reliance of the u.s. on nuclear weapons and deemphasizes the military utility of nuclear weapons ; • significantly reduces the cost of maintaining our nuclear weapon complex , to include avoiding the need to build a modern pit facility ; • increases nuclear security and decreases the risk of unauthorized or accidental launch and / or detonation ; and • leads to ratification and entry into force of the comprehensive test ban treaty .

[6] the house appropriations committee , in its report on fy2006 energy and water development appropriations , listed various requirements for rrw: the committee is supportive of the administration taking an accelerated approach to implement a new nuclear weapons paradigm that ensures the continued moratorium on nuclear testing and results in a dramatically smaller nuclear weapons stockpile in the near future .

the rrw weapon will be designed for ease of manufacturing , maintenance , dismantlement , and certification without nuclear testing , allowing the nnsa to transition the weapons complex away from a large , expensive cold war relic into a smaller , more efficient modern complex .

a more reliable replacement warhead will allow long - term savings by phasing out the multiple redundant cold war warhead designs that require maintaining multiple obsolete production technologies to maintain the older warheads .

the committee's qualified endorsement of the rrw initiative is based on the assumption that a replacement weapon will be designed only as a re - engineered and remanufactured warhead for an existing weapon system in the stockpile .

the committee does not endorse the rrw concept as the beginning of a new production program intended to produce new warhead designs or produce new weapons for any military mission beyond the current deterrent requirements .

the committee's support of the rrw concept is contingent on the intent of the program being solely to meet the current military characteristics and requirements of the existing stockpile .

[7] the senate appropriations committee's report on fy2006 energy and water development appropriations stated: nnsa is undertaking the rrw program to understand if warhead design constraints imposed on cold war systems ( e.g .

high yield to weight ratios that have typically driven `tight' performance margins in nuclear design ) are relaxed , could replacement components for existing stockpile weapons be more easily manufactured with more readily available and more environmentally benign materials , and whose safety and reliability could be assured with high confidence , without nuclear testing .

this effort does not call into question the safety or reliability of the current stockpile but acknowledges the long - term sustainability of the legacy stockpile will be difficult .

implementation of rrw should also result in reduced life - cycle costs for supporting the stockpile .

[8] the fy2006 energy and water conference report stated: the conferees reiterate the direction provided in fiscal year 2005 that any weapon design work done under the rrw program must stay within the military requirements of the existing deployed stockpile and any new weapon design must stay within the design parameters validated by past nuclear tests .

the conferees expect the nnsa to build on the success of science - based stockpile stewardship to improve manufacturing practices , lower costs and increase performance margins , to support the administration's decision to significantly reduce the size of the u.s. nuclear stockpile .

the fy2007 committee reports were released after the preliminary rrw designs were completed , and did not add requirements for rrw design .

appendix c. abbreviation .

