t he development of offshore oil , gas , and other mineral resources in the united states is shaped by a number of interrelated legal regimes , including international , federal , and state laws .

international law provides a framework for establishing national ownership or control of offshore areas , and u.s. domestic law has , in substance , adopted these internationally recognized principles .

u.s. domestic law further defines u.s. ocean resource jurisdiction and ownership of offshore minerals , dividing regulatory authority and ownership between the states and the federal government based on the resource's proximity to the shore .

this report explains the nature of u.s. authority over offshore areas pursuant to international and domestic law .

it also describes state and federal laws governing development of offshore oil and gas and litigation under these legal regimes .

the report also discusses recent executive action and legislative proposals concerning offshore oil and natural gas exploration and production .

under the united nations convention on the law of the sea , coastal nations are entitled to exercise varying levels of authority over a series of adjacent offshore zones .

nations may claim a 12-nautical - mile territorial sea , over which they may exercise rights comparable to , in most significant respects , sovereignty .

nations may also claim an area , termed the contiguous zone , which extends 24 nautical miles from the coast ( or baseline ) .

coastal nations may regulate their contiguous zones , as necessary , to protect their territorial seas and to enforce their customs , fiscal , immigration , and sanitary laws .

further , in the contiguous zone and an additional area , the exclusive economic zone ( eez ) , coastal nations have sovereign rights to explore , exploit , conserve , and manage marine resources and assert jurisdiction over i. the establishment and use of artificial islands , installations and structures ; ii .

marine scientific research ; and iii .

the protection and preservation of the marine environment .

the eez extends 200 nautical miles from the baseline from which a nation's territorial sea is measured ( usually near the coastline ) .

this area overlaps substantially with another offshore area designation , the continental shelf .

international law defines a nation's continental shelf as the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond either "the natural prolongation of [a coastal nation's] land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin , or to a distance of 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance. .

in general , however , under unclos , a nation's continental shelf cannot extend beyond 350 nautical miles from its recognized coastline regardless of submarine geology .

in this area , as in the eez , a coastal nation may claim "sovereign rights" for the purpose of exploring and exploiting the natural resources of its continental shelf .

the primary federal law governing development of oil and gas in federal waters is the outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla ) .

as stated above , the ocsla codifies federal control of the ocs , declaring that the submerged lands seaward of the state's offshore boundaries appertain to the u.s. federal government .

more than simply declaring federal control , the ocsla has as its primary purpose "expeditious and orderly development [of ocs resources] , subject to environmental safeguards , in a manner which is consistent with the maintenance of competition and other national needs...." to effectuate this purpose , the ocsla extends application of federal laws to certain structures and devices located on the ocs ; provides that the law of adjacent states will apply to the ocs when it does not conflict with federal law ; and , significantly , provides a comprehensive leasing process for certain ocs mineral resources and a system for collecting and distributing royalties from the sale of these federal mineral resources .

the ocsla thus provides comprehensive regulation of the development of ocs oil and gas resources .

in 1978 , the ocsla was significantly amended to increase the role of coastal states in the leasing process .

the amendments also revised the bidding process and leasing procedures ; set stricter criteria to guide the environmental review process ; and established new safety and environmental standards to govern drilling operations .

the ocs leasing process consists of four distinct stages: ( 1 ) the five - year planning program ; ( 2 )  preleasing activity and the lease sale ; ( 3 ) exploration ; and ( 4 ) development and production .

multiple statutes govern aspects of offshore oil and gas development , and therefore , may give rise to legal challenges .

the marine mammal protection act , endangered species act , and other environmental laws provide mechanisms for challenging actions associated with offshore oil and gas production in the past .

of primary interest here , however , are legal challenges to agency action with respect to the planning , leasing , exploration , and development phases under the procedures mandated by the ocsla itself and the related environmental review required by the national environmental policy act .

the following paragraphs provide an overview of the existing case law , including legal challenges to the five - year plan and other aspects of the leasing process as well as controversies over revenue collection and distribution .

jurisdiction to review agency actions taken in approving the five - year program is vested in the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit pursuant to section 23 of the ocsla , subject to appellate review by writ of certiorari from the u.s. supreme court .

a few challenges to five - year programs have been brought .

the first , california ex .

rel .

brown v. watt , involved a variety of challenges to the 1980-1985 program and established the standard for review for legal challenges to five - year programs .

when reviewing "findings of ascertainable fact made by the secretary," the court required the secretary's decisions to be supported by "substantial evidence" as per the language of section 23 ( c ) ( 6 ) of the ocsla .

however , the court noted that many of the decisions that inform the five - year program involve policy determinations , and held that such determinations should be subject to a less searching standard .

the court summarized this review standard for challenges to five - year programs: when reviewing findings of ascertainable fact made by the secretary , the substantial evidence test guides our inquiry .

when reviewing the policy judgments made by the secretary , including those predictive and difficult judgmental calls the secretary is called upon to make , we will subject them to searching scrutiny to ensure that they are neither arbitrary nor irrational — in other words , we must determine whether "the decision is based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment. .

the court also noted that statutory interpretation by the agency would be subject to stricter scrutiny than either fact or policy judgments because "the interpretation of statutes is a matter which ultimately lies in the province of the judiciary. .

based on these standards the court vacated a number of the secretary's findings in the 1980-1985 five - year program and remanded to the secretary for revision of the program .

although the reference to "arbitrary" administrative decisionmaking is reminiscent of the review standard for challenges to agency action under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , the court explained in a footnote that the agency's decisions to reject certain state recommendations before promulgating the five - year program were not subject to apa review .

the court noted the following: first , the outer continental shelf lands act itself contains provisions requiring the secretary to respond to state comments and to explain and articulate his decision ... we see no reason to engraft other provisions onto those found in this comprehensive statute ... second , the apa itself exempts from its reach "matters relating to agency management or personnel or to public property , loans , grants , benefits , or contracts. .

.. .

since the leasing program related to agency management of the ocs , which is undoubtedly public property ... the apa itself would appear to take the leasing program outside its scope .

the standards for review outlined in watt have been upheld in subsequent litigation related to the five - year program .

litigation under the ocsla has also challenged actions taken during the leasing phase .

as described above , the ocsla authorizes states to submit comments during the notice of lease sale stage and directs the secretary to accept a state's recommendations if they "provide for a reasonable balance between the national interest and the well - being of the citizens of the affected state. .

according to the cases from the ninth circuit court of appeals , because the ocsla does not provide clear guidance on how to balance the national interest with state considerations , agency action will generally be upheld so long as "some consideration of the relevant factors ..." takes place .

cases from the federal courts in massachusetts , including a decision affirmed by the first circuit court of appeals , have , while embracing this deferential standard , found the secretary's balancing of interests insufficient .

however , it should be noted that the massachusetts cases reviewed agency action that was not supported by explicit analysis of the sort challenged in the ninth circuit .

thus , it is possible that , given a more thorough record of the secretary's decision , these courts may afford more significant deference to the secretary's determination .

other litigation has focused on mandatory royalty relief provisions .

in kerr - mcgee oil & gas corp. v. allred , the plaintiff , an oil and gas company operating offshore wells in the gulf of mexico pursuant to federal leases , challenged actions by the department to collect royalties on deepwater oil and gas production .

the plaintiff alleged the department does not have authority to assess royalties based on an interpretation of amendments to the ocsla found in the 1995 outer continental shelf deep water royalty relief act ( dwrra ) , that the act requires royalty - free production until a statutorily prescribed threshold volume of oil or gas production has been reached , and does not permit a price - based threshold for this royalty relief .

the dwrra separates leases into three categories based on date of issuance .

these categories are ( 1 ) leases in existence on november 28 , 1995 ; ( 2 ) leases issued after november 28 , 2000 ; and ( 3 ) leases issued in between those periods , that is , during the first five years after the act's enactment .

the third category of leases is the source of current controversy .

according to kerr - mcgee , its leases , which were issued during the initial five - year period after the dwrra's enactment , are subject to different legal requirements from those applicable to the other two categories .

kerr - mcgee argued that the department has a nondiscretionary duty under the dwrra to provide royalty relief on its deepwater leases , and that the statute does not provide an exception to this obligation based on any preset price threshold .

to the extent any price threshold has been included in these leases , kerr - mcgee argued that such provisions are contrary to doi's statutory authority and unenforceable .

section 304 of the dwrra , which addresses deepwater leases issued within five years after the dwrra's enactment , directs that such leases use the bidding system authorized in section 8 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( h ) of the ocsla , as amended by the dwrra .

sec tion 304 of the dwrra also stipulates that leases issued during the five - year post - enactment time frame must provide for royalty suspension on the basis of volume .

specifically , section 304 states the following: [a]ny lease sale within five years of the date of enactment of this title , shall use the bidding system authorized in section 8 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( h ) of the outer continental shelf lands act , as amended by this title , except that the suspension of royalties shall be set at a volume of not less than the following: ( 1 ) 17.5 million barrels of oil equivalent for leases in water depths of 200 to 400 meters ; ( 2 ) 52.5 million barrels of oil equivalent for leases in 400 to 800 meters of water ; and ( 3 ) 87.5 million barrels of oil equivalent for leases in water depths greater than 800 meters .

it is possible to interpret this provision as authorizing leases issued during the five - year period to contain only royalty suspension provisions that are based on production volume with no allowance at all for a price - related threshold in addition .

such an intent might be gleaned from the language of the quoted section alone ; in this provision , congress provides for a specific royalty suspension method and does not clearly authorize the secretary to alter or supplement it .

kerr - mcgee's challenge to the secretary's authority to impose price - based thresholds on royalty suspension was based on this interpretation of the statutory language above .

the u.s. district court for the western district of louisiana agreed with kerr - mcgee's interpretation of the language discussed above .

the court found that the dwrra allowed only for volumetric thresholds on royalty suspension for leases issued between 1996 and 2000 , and that the secretary did not have authority under the dwrra to attach price - based thresholds to royalty suspension for those leases .

on january 12 , 2009 , the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit issued a decision affirming the district court's ruling , and on october 5 , 2009 , the u.s. supreme court denied a petition for writ of certiorari .

in center for biological diversity v. u.s. department of the interior , the plaintiff challenged the five - year program for 2007-2012 on several grounds , including that doi had failed to satisfy section 18 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( g ) of the oclsa , which requires doi to consider "the relative environmental sensitivity and marine productivity of different areas of the outer continental shelf. .

the court found that doi's analysis , which relied solely on "physical characteristics" of different shoreline areas , did not satisfy the section 18 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( g ) requirements because it failed to consider non - shoreline areas of the ocs .

the court therefore vacated the five - year program and remanded it to doi for reconsideration .

in a later order , the court clarified that this relief related only to those portions of the five - year program that addressed leasing in the chukchi , beaufort , and bering seas , as the environmental sensitivity analysis for these areas was the only analysis that was found to be deficient .

in the context of proposed ocs development , nepa regulations generally require the agency to publish notice of an intent to prepare an eis , to review comments on the scope of the eis , to prepare a draft eis , to hold a comment period on the draft eis , and to publish a final eis addressing all comments received at each stage of the leasing process where government action will significantly affect the environment .

as described above , nepa figures heavily in the ocs planning and leasing process and requires various levels of environmental analysis prior to agency decisions at each phase in the leasing and development process .

lawsuits brought under nepa may indirectly challenge agency decisions by questioning the adequacy of the agency's environmental analysis .

in natural resources defense council v. hodel , the plaintiff challenged the adequacy of the alternatives examined in the eis and the level of consideration paid to cumulative effects of offshore drilling activities .

the court held that the agency did not have to examine every possible alternative , and that the determination as to adequacy was subject to the "rule of reason. .

this standard appears to afford some level of deference to the secretary , and his choice of alternatives was found to be sufficient by the court in this instance .

however , without significant explanation of the standard of review to be applied , the court found that the secretary's failure to analyze certain cumulative impacts was a violation of nepa .

thus , the secretary was required to include this analysis , although final decisions based on that analysis remained subject to the secretary's discretion , with review only under the arbitrary and capricious standard .

as mentioned above , nepa plays a role in the leasing phase as well .

the nepa procedures and standard of review remain the same at this phase ; however , due to the structure of the ocsla process , more specific information is generally required .

still , courts are deferential at the lease sale phase .

in challenges to the adequacy of environmental review , courts have stressed that inaccuracies and more stringent nepa analysis will be available at later phases .

thus , because there will be an opportunity to cure any defects in the analysis as the ocsla process continues , challenges under nepa at this phase are often unsuccessful .

it is also possible to challenge exploration and development plans under nepa .

in edwardsen v. u.s. department of the interior , the ninth circuit court of appeals applied the typical "rule of reason" to determine if the eis adequately addressed the probable environmental consequences of the development and production plan , and held that , despite certain omissions in the analysis and despite an mms decision to tier its nepa analysis to an eis prepared for a similar lease sale , the requirements of nepa were satisfied .

thus , while additional analysis was required to account for the greater specificity of the plans and to accommodate the "hard look" at environmental impacts nepa mandates , the reasonableness standard applied to what must be examined in an eis did not allow for a successful challenge to agency action .

