current law provides significant tax benefits for health insurance and expenses .

the tax subsidies ( mostly federal income tax exclusions and deductions ) are widely available , though not everyone can take advantage of them .

they reward some people more than others , raising questions of equity .

they influence the amount and type of coverage that people obtain , which affects their ability to choose doctors and other providers .

in addition , the tax benefits affect the distribution and cost of health care .

this section of the report summarizes the current tax treatment of the principal ways that people obtain health insurance and pay their health care expenses .

it describes general rules but does not discuss all limitations , qualifications , or exceptions .

to understand possible effects on tax liability , readers may want to refer to the appendix for an outline of the federal income tax formula .

for example , exclusions are omitted from gross income , whereas deductions are subtracted from gross income in order to arrive at taxable income .

section number references to the internal revenue code ( irc ) of 1986 , as amended , are included .

this section also includes joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimates of tax expenditures , where available .

tax expenditures measure the difference in tax liabilities for individuals and corporations due to provisions that are exceptions to a normative comprehensive income tax .

tax expenditures are not the same as revenue losses to the government , the measurement of which reflects assumed behavioral responses , timing considerations , and changes in employment tax receipts .

most of the tax rules discussed here have also been adopted by states that have income taxes .

feldman , roger and bryan dowd .

a new estimate of the welfare loss of excess health insurance .

american economic review .

vol .

81 ( march 1991 ) , pp .

297-301 .

furman , jason .

health reform through tax reform: a primer , health affairs , vol .

27 , no .

3 , may 2008 .

gruber , jonathan .

tax policy for health insurance .

nber working paper 10977 national bureau of economic research .

december 2004 .

hubbard , r. glenn , john f. cogan , and daniel p. kessler .

healthy , wealthy , and wise: five steps to a better health care system .

aei press / the hoover institution .

november 2005 .

kaplow , louis .

the income tax as insurance: the casualty loss and medical expense deductions and the exclusion of medical insurance premiums .

california law review , vol .

79 ( 1991 ) , pp .

1485-1510 .

kahn , charles n. and ronald f. pollack .

building a consensus for expanding health coverage .

health affairs , vol .

20 ( january / february 2001 ) , pp .

40-48 .

smart , michael and mark stabile .

tax credits and the use of medical care .

nber working paper 9855 .

national bureau of economic research .

july 2003 .

pauly , mark .

taxation , health insurance , and market failure in the medical economy .

journal of economic literature , vol .

24 ( 1986 ) , pp .

629-675 .

pauly , mark and bradley herring .

expanding coverage via tax credits: trade - offs and outcomes .

health affairs , vol .

20 ( january / february , 2001 ) , pp .

9-26 .

the president's advisory panel on federal tax reform .

simple , fair , and pro - growth: proposals to fix america ' s tax system .

november 2005 .

sheils , john and randall haught .

the cost of tax - exempt health benefits in 2004 .

health affairs , web exclusive ( january - june 2004 ) , pp .

w106-w112 .

u.s. congressional budget office .

consumer - directed health plans: potential effects on health care spending and outcomes .

december 2006 .

 — — the tax treatment of employment - based health insurance .

march 1994 .

the general formula for calculating federal income taxes appears below .

the list omits some steps , such as prepayments ( from withholding and estimated payments ) and the alternative minimum tax .

