hurricane katrina struck the gulf coast in late august 2005 , causing extensive wind damageand catastrophic flooding , and leading to presidential disaster declarations for alabama , florida,louisiana and mississippi .

the storm was one of the worst natural disasters in the nation's history .

hurricane rita , which made landfall along the gulf coast in late september 2005 , was somewhatless severe than katrina when it hit .

but a few days earlier in the gulf it had been a powerfulcategory five hurricane .

government officials and citizens shaken by the devastation of the earlierstorm mounted aggressive preparedness efforts in anticipation of hurricane rita , drawing on lessonslearned from katrina just weeks earlier .

hurricane katrina is estimated to have killed more than 1,200 people , and displaced about2 million .

the death toll continues to be revised , as bodies continue to be found , and investigationsinto the causes of death of others continue .

 ( 1 ) more than 4,000 persons are still reported missing .

the federalemergency management agency ( fema ) recently increased its estimate of the number of personsdisplaced by hurricanes katrina and rita to about 2 million .

 ( 2 ) the logistical hurdles posed by hurricane katrina were formidable .

communications wereknocked out in hard - hit areas , which compromised the process of assessing and prioritizing needs .

physical access was blocked in some areas , and civil disorder was a problem in some others .

eachkept responders from delivering aid .

in some cases , victims were isolated without water andmedicines , and hospitals that had not been evacuated before the hurricane were unable to sustainoperations .

each circumstance required the emergency evacuation of critically ill patients to a triagecenter , which then itself became overwhelmed .

federal , state , and local governments , businessesand corporations , the faith community and other volunteers all pitched in to speed relief to katrina'svictims , but keeping all of it coordinated was a challenge .

responding to a catastrophe of the scope of hurricane katrina requires that a variety ofpublic health and medical activities be carried out and coordinated .

public health activities are thosethat identify , address or prevent health problems in populations .

examples include assuring thesafety of food and water , preventing the spread of disease in shelters , evaluating the safety ofneighborhoods for rehabitation , and assuring the health and safety of responders .

medical activitiesare those that deliver healthcare services to individuals .

examples include treatment of injuries,continuity of care for those with chronic illnesses , mental health counseling , and cause - of - deathinvestigation .

the medical response to hurricane katrina may have posed the greater challenge .

the publichealth response required the coordination of variety of agencies , community - based organizations,and private parties at different levels of government , though these entities had generally workedtogether in the past .

the medical response , in contrast , required the coordination of a broader mixof federal , state and local government agencies , private parties and others , with no comparable recentprecedent or experience in such an effort on this scale .

over the past decade , in response to the oklahoma city bombing , the terror attacks of 2001and several serious natural disasters , congress and the administration created new authorities,structures and plans to assure that government at all levels can respond well to disasters likehurricane katrina .

local and state governments are to be the first responders in a disaster .

whentheir resources are overwhelmed , federal assistance is provided under the robert t. stafford disasterrelief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) and other authorities .

a new nationalresponse plan ( nrp ) places the secretary of homeland security in charge of coordinating theoverall federal response .

the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) is in charge ofcoordinating the federal public health and medical response during a disaster .

in the wake of hurricanes katrina and rita , congress is likely to review response efforts,recent public health preparedness laws and the nrp .

while even the best plan and response maybe overwhelmed in a disaster of the scope of hurricane katrina , congress may nonetheless findopportunities to revisit management structures , programs and goals in order that national responsecapability can be steadily improved .

this report will discuss relevant authorities and response plans that guided the public healthand medical response to the 2005 hurricanes .

given its catastrophic scope , the response to hurricanekatrina will be the primary focus of this report , with reference to the hurricane rita response whenrelevant .

the roles and response activities of selected agencies in hhs and dhs will be discussed.finally , a number of policy issues will be discussed .

this report will be updated as circumstanceswarrant .

for a broader discussion of all - hazards public health and medical preparedness , see crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergencypreparedness .

crs report rs22292 , hurricanes katrina & rita: addressing the victims' mental health andsubstance abuse treatment needs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22279 , hurricane katrina and veteran s , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33083 , hurricane katrina: medicaid issues , by evelyne baumrucker , [author name scrubbed],[author name scrubbed] , elicia herz , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22254 , the americans with disabilities act and emergency preparedness andresponse , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22255 , emergency response: civil liability of volunteer health professionals , bykathleen swendiman and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22252 , older americans act: disaster assistance for older persons after hurricanekatrina , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22235 , disaster evacuation and displacement policy: issues for congress , by keithbea .

crs report rl32803 , the national preparedness system: issues in the 109th congress , by keithbea .

crs report rl32858 , health information technology: promoting electronic connectivity inhealthcare , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22310 , hurricane katrina: hipaa privacy and electronic health records ofevacuees , by gina marie stevens .

crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergencypreparedness , by [author name scrubbed] .

