hurricanes katrina and rita shut down oil and gas production from the outer continentalshelf in the gulf of mexico , the source for 25% of u.s. crude oil production and 20% of natural gasoutput .

katrina , which made landfall on august 29 , resulted in the shutdown of most crude oil andnatural gas production in the gulf of mexico , as well as a great deal of refining capacity in louisianaand alabama .

offshore oil and gas production was resuming when hurricane rita made landfall onseptember 24 , and an additional 4.8 million barrels per day ( mbd ) of refining capacity in texas andnearby louisiana was closed .

the most profound impacts of the hurricanes were on refined product supply , althoughnatural gas supply to the u.s. pipeline grid is also a concern .

at one point , about one - third of thenation's refining capacity was closed .

virtually all have been restored , although output at a coupleof units is still in the process of ramping up .

heroic recovery efforts at refineries and increasedimports of refined products met a warm heating season's needs and kept gasoline supplies flowingwithout isolated run - outs .

about 400,000 bd of crude oil from the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) and louisiana statelands is currently shut in .

this is the equivalent of about 5% of total u.s. petroleum demand .

imported crude has kept stocks at more than adequate levels .

refined product supplies were initially made up from the release of 30 million barrels ofgasoline , middle distillate and other products from the strategic reserves of member nations of theorganization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) who are international energyagency ( iea ) members .

since those barrels arrived in early fall 2005 , the world market privatesector has provided the united states with an increased level of imports .

supply appears to havematched demand , as prices fell through late 2005 and early 2006 .

a number of crosscurrents bear on this situation , including how fuel demand is affected byprices , and when winter weather arrives and how cold it might be .

on the supply side of therelationship are factors which include the rate at which u.s. refining recovers , and the availabilityon world markets of commercial refined products .

in addition , some waivers of gasolinespecifications have been granted by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , aimed at makinggasoline easier to supply .

with natural gas , about 85% of the nation's supply comes from domestic production ; thereis very little opportunity to import replacement supply .

as of october , nearly 10% of totalnationwide consumption was shut - in because of production problems in the federal offshore gulfof mexico , or because of damage to critical infrastructure .

another 3% of nationwide supply fromlouisiana state lands is shut - in .

despite reduced output , gas was still being placed in storage ; theadditions during the week ending october 14 were 75 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) .

the amount of gasalready in storage was equivalent to the five - year average , although it was slightly below year - earlierlevels .

gas sold from storage is used to balance seasonal demand swings , and not to replace acatastrophic loss of production .

given that the current amount of shut - in ocs and louisiana statelands gas is the equivalent of half the most recent week's storage addition , the perception of a robustinjection to storage should be adjusted accordingly .

despite the fact that supplies continue to flow , wellhead prices have doubled since lastsummer .

issues for the onset of cold weather include timing and severity , as with oil , as well as"demand destruction" resulting from higher prices .

but if gulf of mexico production does notrecover , there is no import safety - valve , and supplies could become tight and prices could spike .

in the immediate wake of katrina and rita , much of the impacted area was without electricpower .

but nearly all customers who had been without power in texas have had service restored.in louisiana , power outages are more widespread , although many customers listed as being withoutpower are unable to receive it because of damage to the premises .

nearly 1.6 mbd of crude oil - - the equivalent of 7.6% of u.s. oil consumption - - wasproduced on the gulf of mexico federal offshore before the hurricanes struck .

production wasvirtually halted in the wake of both storms , as production facilities were evacuated and wells wereshut down .

the storms destroyed 111 production platforms , and 52 were seriously damaged .

anumber of drilling rigs were destroyed , which will limit future production from new wells yet to becompleted .

oil production has begun to resume .

output has begun to ramp - up , reaching 600,000 bd onoctober 11 .

but 60% of gulf of mexico oil remains shut in , and over 50 million barrels of oil outputhave been lost since katrina - related shutdowns began on august 26 .

the amount of lost outputcontinues to mount , as about 1 mbd of capacity remains shut - in .

between october 1 and october 7 , oil output rose by 300,000 bd , an encouraging sign ofrestarting operations .

but a full assessment of damage to facilities , including underwater productionplatform - wellhead connections and pipeline gathering systems , has not been completed .

it may betoo early to assess whether production is steadily coming back , or if all the production that has comeback was the easiest to restore while currently shut - in output presents significant challenges atproduction platforms , within transport infrastructure , and at coastal processing facilities .

productioncan come back only as fast as pipelines and processing facilities return to service .

that said , energy information administration ( eia ) administrator guy caruso has estimatedthat shut - in production will continue being restored ; the amounts shut - in will likely average 930,000bd in october , 724,000 bd in november and 517,000 bd in december .

 ( 1 ) in addition to disrupted production , the operation of two important long - distance crude oilpipelines were impeded .

capline , which transports crude from louisiana to illinois , was shut forseveral weeks ; it is now operating at 80% capacity .

this limited crude supply to a number of refinersin the central part of the nation .

and the sun pipeline and terminal started limited operations in earlyoctober , supplying a number of texas and louisiana refineries .

some pipelines transporting refined products had service outages or throughput reductionsas a result of the hurricanes .

most notable was the colonial pipeline , which transports fuels from thegulf northeastward , ending in new york .

this is an important source of supply for consumers allalong its route , and its outage resulted in very high prices in places like maryland and washington,d.c. , which at one point had the highest gasoline prices in the nation .

colonial received fullcommercial electric power on october 13 ; full capacity is now available , subject to availability ofpipeline input .

gasoline prices in its service area are returning to parity with prices elsewhere .

about 2.5 mbd of crude oil imports - - including 0.9 mbd by way of the louisiana offshoreport ( loop ) - - flow through storm - damaged ports in louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .

thisconstitutes more than 12% of petroleum consumption .

 ( 2 ) loop was operating at full capacity when it was shut down againas a precautionary measure in anticipation of hurricane rita .

it is reportedly operating at 100%capacity , having escaped more damage from rita .

other gulf coast ports through which oil importsflow have resumed operation , except for port arthur , which can accept barge traffic only duringdaylight hours .

the mississippi river is open with some restrictions .

in the days after rita , 5.6 mbd of refining capacity was shut - - nearly one - third of the nation'stotal .

by mid - october , most of this capacity was operating or in the start - up process .

four facilitieswere closed in the wake of hurricane katrina ; one has restarted , and full production is expected atthe end of october .

electric power has recently been restored to three other louisiana plants whichsustained substantial damage , and they are expected to be down for an extended period .

they havea combined capacity of 554,000 bd ( 3 ) .

an additional 722,000 bd of capacity shuttered in the wake of rita remains off - line , leavinga total of 1.3 mbd down as a result of both hurricanes .

this represents nearly 8% of nationalcapacity , and presents potentially serious supply problems , given the lack of any spare u.s. refiningcapacity .

additionally , the shutdown of over 5 mbd of capacity for virtually all of september hasaffected refined product stocks as seasonal demand starts to grow .

on august 31 , secretary of energy bodman announced that the bush administration wasauthorizing releases of strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) crude oil .

seven refiners requested loansof crude oil totaling more than 13 million barrels .

the release of spr oil and the announcement onseptember 2 from the iea of a coordinated drawdown of 30 million barrels of crude and 30 millionbarrels of refined products calmed markets by early in the week of september 5 .

the u.s. spr holds crude oil only .

the net - importing iea member countries are requiredto hold at least 90 days of net imports , and this obligation is met with a combination of crude andrefined products .

at the end of june 2005 , these stocks amounted to 222 million barrels of productsand 545 million barrels of crude .

two million barrels were to be released daily by the iea .

 ( 4 ) nearly all 30 million barrelsof products have been released , gasoline and heating oil imports are still in transit and continue toreach united states .

 ( 5 ) theyare reflected in the gasoline import statistics reported each wednesday by eia .

citing falling u.s.product demand , iea executive director claude mandil told platts : there is no immediate issue right now , but there is stilla lot of oil and products that will be missing in the balance .

we still need to carefully monitor thesituation together with our american friends to see whether demand destruction is long - lasting ornot because there may be risks to supply in november anddecember .

the most recent import statistics for the four weeks ending october14 ( 6 ) show that refined productimports were about 1.4 mbd higher than year - to - date 2005 , suggesting a continued flow of this fuel.as the iea's mandil points out , it remains to be seen how u.s. gasoline and distillate stocks holdup as the oil industry recovers from the hurricane damage .

loans of crude oil from the strategic petroleum reserve were granted to seven companiestotaling roughly 13.2 million barrels .

 ( 7 ) on september 2 , as part of the 60 million barrel crude and productstock drawdown coordinated by the international energy agency ( iea ) , the united states offered30 million barrels of spr crude for sale .

on september 14 , doe announced the sale of 10.8 millionbarrels of sweet crude and 200,000 barrels of sour at prices ranging from $59.76 to $66.46 .

bids foran additional 8.2 million barrels were rejected .

additionally , some of the companies awarded loansmay not borrow the full volume of crude for which they asked .

the results of crude oil and refined product offerings from government strategic reservesshow demand for products to be stronger than crude , perhaps as a result of so much refining capacityshut by the hurricanes , and u.s. product demand exceeding the nation's refinery capacity duringperiods of normal supply and demand .

despite a list of impediments to adding to crude and refined petroleum inventories , stocksof crude oil and refined products have not dropped to levels which could cause alarm .

table 1 showsthe changes in stocks for total petroleum , crude oil , gasoline , and distillate fuel oil between the weekbefore katrina struck ( august 26 ) and the most recent week of october 14 .

table 1 .

u.s. commercial petroleum stocks afterkatrina ( million barrels ) source: eia weekly petroleum status report , table 3 .

table 1 shows that the major categories of petroleum inventories have experienced declinessince katrina , with the exception of gasoline .

total stocks have declined at a rate of about 750,000bd .

how these figures might be interpreted is a matter of some debate - - the obvious facts are thatthey have declined , and that there is some level below which spot shortages and distributionalproblems begin to appear .

prior to march 2003 , doe's weekly petroleum status report referred tothis as the "minimum operational inventory" ( moi ) .

subsequent issues have dropped any referenceto moi because of differing views within the industry regarding what the minimum level might be.because of improvements and inventory management and logistics , industry had recommended usinglower figures than doe had previously been using .

a doe - industry dialogue held by the national petroleum council in august 2004 failed toreach an agreement on moi , and it has not been referenced since it was dropped .

when last shownon doe's charts of inventory levels , ( 8 ) these statistics were 185 million barrels for gasoline and 85 millionbarrels for distillates ( which includes both heating oil and diesel fuel ) .

if these levels are a guide,there is about one day's worth of gasoline stocks available ( 10.7 million barrels of "extra" stockscompared to about 8.8 mbd of demand ) before run - outs would start to occur .

a tight inventory situation might be expected to be cause for concern ; however , prices - - forthe moment at least - - are falling .

at the pump , regular gasoline prices peaked at $3.06 ( an all - timehigh ) on september 5 ; they have steadily declined , falling to $2.70 in mid - october .

wholesaleprices and gasoline traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) fell similarly .

the market does not appear to be responding to any shortage - related fears , but it may beresponding to concerns about "demand destruction" resulting from high prices .

indeed , the data forthe four weeks ending october 14 show demand for gasoline and middle distillates each about200,000 bd below the year - ago period ( 9 ) distillate stocks are 37.7 million barrels above the old moi level ; demand is about 4.0 mbd,implying less than 10 days worth of supply cover .

wholesale trading on the nymex has seendistillates decline from $2.13 per gallon at the end of september , to $1.85 in mid - october,suggesting few current concerns - - other than the level fo retail prices - - for the approaching heatingseason .

eia's heating oil and propane update for october 10 shows a residential heating oil priceof $2.65 per gallon , down 4.4 cents from the prior week .

doe has forecast that home heating costs will be much higher this winter than last .

eiaadministrator caruso indicated heating oil was forecast to cost $2.54 per gallon , an increase fromthe 2004-05 heating season average price of $1.92 .

he added that it could range as low as $2.34 pergallon if the weather is warmer than normal , or as high as $2.80 in a colder winter .

on october 12 , the eia lowered its estimates of fourth - quarter 2005 demand for the unitedstates by 900,000 bd - - from 21.3 mbd to 20.4 mbd .

reductions included 160,000 bd in gasoline,170,000 bd in distillates , and 430,000 bd of intermediate products , petrochemical feed stocks , andlubricants .

 ( 10 ) it remainsto be seen how this demand scenario plays out against fuel supply as refineries recover from thehurricanes , and if there are additional sales from iea strategic stocks .

on august 31 , 2005 , environmental protection agency ( epa ) administrator stephenjohnson announced that epa would temporarily waive certain gasoline and diesel fuel standardsnationwide through september 15 , 2005 , in order to help increase available fuel supplies .

forgasoline , epa waived volatility standards that would have otherwise prohibited the sale of gasolineproduced for northern states in the south , or the sale of "winter" gasoline in the summer months .

this waiver was intended to make it possible for gasoline normally prohibited in certain areas to betransported to those areas in response to supply limitations .

after september 15 , many of the waived standards no longer applied , as the countrytransitioned from "summer" to "winter" gasoline .

 ( 12 ) epa also waived national sulfur standards for diesel fuel , so thatthrough september 15 , fuel produced for non - road uses could be legally used in highway vehicles .

this waiver was intended to help mitigate some of the disruption in diesel fuel supplies .

 ( 13 ) in several cases , epa has also issued waivers of specific standards for certain states orregions .

these waivers have been issued on a case - by - case basis , as some standards and specific fuelsupply issues vary from state to state , and within states .

in most cases , these waivers will expire bythe end of october .

 ( 14 ) .

in addition to crude oil , about 10 billion cubic feet per day ( bcfpd ) of natural gas - - theequivalent of roughly 17% of total u.s. consumption - - is produced from the federal offshore gulfof mexico .

cumulatively , since katrina , a total of 278 bcf of production has been shut in .

as ofoctober 12 , 5.2 bcfpd ( or 52% ) of output was shut in .

in effect , this amount reduced the nation's totalcurrent gas supply by about 10% .

natural gas production from louisiana state lands was also interrupted by the hurricanes .

thelouisiana department of natural resources estimated that 0.7 bcfpd of gas production has beenrestored , which is the equivalent of 31% of the 2.2 bcfpd state total .

 ( 15 ) about 1.5 bcfpd remainsoffline in the 38 parish coastal region surveyed .

combining lost gas output from state and federal lands , the total amount of 6.7 bcfpd is theequivalent of 11% of an average day's total consumption for the whole country .

at the end of september , more than 340,000 customers remained without power in louisiana - - more than 190,000 from hurricane katrina , and an additional 149,000 from hurricane rita .

intexas , 316,000 remained without electricity .

october saw great progress in restoring electricity to customers whose premises were ableto accept power .

at the middle of the month , only 12,500 customers were without power in texas ; 129,300 did not have electric service in louisiana .

