members of the 111 th congress have sought to understand regional perspectives on iraq and the policies of iraq's neighbors as congress has considered u.s. troop withdrawal plans , the implementation of u.s. - iraq security agreements , and annual appropriations and authorization legislation .

principal current concerns include alleged iranian political , financial , and military support for various iraqi shiite political parties and militia groups ; turkish military operations against the kurdistan workers party in northern iraq ; and sunni arab states' anxiety about the future of iraq's minority sunni arab population and the growth of iran's regional influence .

longer - term concerns focus on the challenges likely to arise during the reintegration of a deeply changed iraq into the region's strategic military balance , political system , and global economic and energy markets .

the recent history of conflict in iraq suggests that if iraqis are unable to resolve their differences and control the activities of armed groups , then widespread sectarian or ethnic violence could return to iraq and draw iraq's neighbors toward interference and intervention .

iraq's ongoing process of stabilization and development presents iraq's neighbors with choices about how best to deepen their economic and political re - engagement with iraqis while seeking to minimize the potential for the new iraqi government to threaten their security or regional standing .

under any circumstances , iraq's neighbors are expected to seek to defend their perceived national interests , and iraq is likely to remain a field of political and economic competition for its neighbors as its people seek to define their own course on the regional and global stages .

the united states , iraq's neighbors , and iraqi political groups have distinct views and interests with regard to a common set of policy questions about iraq's future .

as observers of and participants in iraqi affairs , iraq's neighbors are seeking to understand and influence changes in the following five areas: the regional strategic balance ; prospects for sectarian and ethnic violence ( in iraq and elsewhere ) ; the strength of iraq - based transnational terrorist groups ; the status of iraqi refugees and internally displaced persons ; and the emergence of viable long - term economic opportunities .

the manner in which the united states and regional parties prioritize and pursue their interests in these areas will influence whether greater cooperation or confrontation define iraq's future and its long - term relations with its neighbors .

the diversity of political actors in iraq and the confluence of regional and international policy problems with iraqi affairs complicate efforts to predict the course of events in iraq .

as u.s. policy and circumstances in iraq and the region have changed since 2003 , the perspectives and policies of iraq's neighbors have evolved .

looking forward , iraq's neighbors can be expected to react differently to different scenarios and u.s. policy choices .

the following discussion uses a scenario - based framework to illustrate challenges that may confront the united states and iraq's neighbors during the term of the 111 th congress .

official policy statements and independent sources of analysis are available that help to illustrate regional governments' perspectives and policies on iraq .

nevertheless , there remain inherent limits on the ability of outside observers to fully understand and describe the priorities , perspectives , and policies of foreign governments , particularly on an issue of such fluidity and importance .

the influence of broader regional and international issues such as arab - israeli peace negotiations and iran's nuclear program further complicate analysis .

with these limits in mind , the profiles below seek to define the key interests of iraq's neighbors , review their diplomatic engagement and trade with iraq , and discuss their perspectives on iraq's future in light of the issues and scenarios outlined above .

the divergent interests and policies of iraq's neighbors and the united states' need to reconcile its policy in iraq with the pursuit of wider regional interests create a challenging context for u.s. policy makers and members of congress .

during the 111 th congress , members have been asked to consider policy proposals to modify u.s. policy in iraq and to ensure comprehensive regional and international support for iraq's stabilization .

congress and the obama administration continue to provide and execute funding for u.s. support to the iraqi government , iraqi idps and refugees , and initiatives to promote economic reform in iraq and iraq's reintegration in the region .

the following section reviews stated u.s. objectives in iraq and the region and outlines how congress may influence the new administration's use of various instruments of national power to pursue them .

the security and stability of the persian gulf region and its energy resources are of critical strategic and economic importance to the united states , iraq's neighbors , and the wider international community .

insurgency and sectarian violence in iraq created unique political challenges and security threats for iraq's neighbors , contributing to regional uncertainty and insecurity .

as those threats have subsided , the reintegration of iraq in the region's security balance has emerged as a pressing issue .

the u.s. military presence in iraq and elsewhere in the middle east remains politically unpopular in the region in spite of a measure of support from sunni arab - led governments and sunni citizens' fears of terrorist threats and possible iranian ambitions .

as u.s. forces withdraw from iraq , popular perceptions of the united states in the region may shift , and changes are likely to occur in the use and posture of u.s. military facilities in neighboring countries .

disputes between iran and the united states over iraq , iran's nuclear program , and iranian support for terrorist groups opposed to peace with israel are likely to continue to create regional tension .

insurgent and terrorist threats to energy infrastructure in the region constitute the other main security risk .

greater coordination between the united states and its regional allies may improve u.s. chances of meeting and overcoming these challenges .

however , regional political rivalry and local political developments may limit the ability of governments to respond effectively to these threats or to coordinate among themselves and with the united states .

the success of u.s. efforts to contain terrorist elements within iraq and reduce the flow of foreign fighters to and from iraq remains largely dependent on the success of iraq's security forces , who now hold responsibility for security in iraq , and the cooperation of regional governments .

the concern over potential iraqi government cooperation with terrorist groups that drove u.s. policy toward iraq in 2002 and early 2003 has given way to a wider concern that instability in iraq created safe havens for expanded operations by al qaeda and regional terrorist entities such as the pkk .

success against al qaeda in iraq has reduced these threats , although iranian and turkish concerns about kurdish militants persist , and sunni governments are uniformly wary about returning fighters from iraq .

while al qaeda's presence in iraq is now reportedly small and under threat , its organization there could regenerate in an atmosphere of renewed instability .

the dispute between iraq and syria following the august 2009 ministry bombings in baghdad illustrated the potential for continuing tension stemming from allegations of cross - border interference .

iran's role in the strategic balance of the persian gulf region has been a central policy concern for the united states since the second world war .

the removal of the saddam hussein regime and the disbanding of iraq's armed forces removed the region's principal military counterweight to iran .

the subsequent political successes of iraq's shiite arab majority have created new opportunities for the expansion of iran's political influence .

however , some built - in barriers to the spread of iranian influence in the region persist , such as political divisions among iraq's shiite arab population , arab - persian ethnic and linguistic differences , and policy coordination mechanisms such as the gcc and the arab league .

israel and the sunni arab - led governments of the region largely share u.s. apprehension about iran's regional ambitions , its nuclear program , and the potential consequences of armed confrontation with iran .

political sensitivities and the priorities of individual governments will continue to complicate u.s. consultations and cooperation with these countries and their citizens with regard to iran .

the bush administration made the advancement of political and economic reform a centerpiece of its middle east policy agenda , in spite of difficulties it found in reconciling reform goals with other national priorities .

in some countries , governments and interest groups have carried out parallel reform efforts to increase political participation and broaden economic development , fueled by shared concerns about the potential for political dissatisfaction and limited economic prospects among young , growing populations .

reformers and their opponents have closely monitored the course of the u.s. - led intervention in iraq and the establishment of the democratically elected , yet politically divided iraqi government .

some observers have suggested that events in iraq have encouraged islamist parties , opposition groups , and minorities to push for greater representation and reform , while others warn that iraq's instability and political paralysis have tarnished the image of groups promoting political and economic change .

in the event of renewed conflict in iraq , regional governments and some of their citizens may begin to favor steps that promote short - term stability and security at the expense of reforms designed to meet long - term development goals and requirements .

iraq's successful transition to political reconciliation and economic development may have the opposite effect and could increase regional demands for more participatory and accountable government .

for members of the 111 th congress , consideration of annual appropriations and authorization legislation , as well as ongoing oversight activities and outreach efforts by individual members and committees , will provide opportunities to discuss proposals and recommendations for strengthening iraq's relationships with its neighbors .

issues of interest may include u.s. diplomatic engagement with iraq's neighbors , efforts to contain the negative side effects of conflict to iraq , and preparations to facilitate iraq's reintegration into the regional security balance and economy .

from early 2003 through early 2007 , the united states engaged regularly with iraq's neighbors , with the exception of syria and iran , on iraq - related issues of common concern .

u.s. - supported diplomatic efforts include the international conference on iraq that was held in november 2004 , in sharm al shaykh , egypt , which included high - level representatives from iraq , its key neighbors ( including iran and syria ) , the g - 8 , the united nations , the european union , the arab league , and the organization of the islamic conference .

select multilateral fora , such as the meetings of the u.n. - sponsored international compact for iraq , also provided opportunities for u.s. officials to hear from and potentially interact with iraq's neighbors , including their iranian and syrian counterparts .

during the bush administration , engagement efforts also focused on a series of ministerial conferences of iraq's neighbors: the last was held in april 2008 in kuwait .

iraq is now a member of what the u.s. government refers to as the "gcc plus three" group , which includes the six members of the gulf cooperation council plus jordan and egypt .

the group met in new york in september 2009 .

u.s. engagement with syria and iran on matters pertaining to iraq has grown since early 2007 .

u.s. dialogue with syria began when then - u.s. secretary of state condoleezza rice met with syrian foreign minister walid muallam in may 2007 at the international compact for iraq meeting in sharm el shaykh ; the obama administration has continued and expanded this dialogue since march 2009 .

as described above , the bush administration also opened discussions with iranian government representatives regarding iraq , and a working group chaired by the u.s. and iranian ambassadors to iraq met periodically in baghdad .

the key questions with regard to diplomatic outreach proposals remain: how much political and material support will iraq's neighbors be willing to provide to sustain the implementation of iraqi reconciliation arrangements ; and , which iraqis will be willing to cooperate with regionally supported initiatives ? .

statements agreed to and commitments made by iraqis and their neighbors in regional conferences held since 2003 generally have not been implemented , although as security conditions have improved , some neighboring states have expanded their engagement with iraq .

the ability and willingness of the iraqi people and their leaders to resolve outstanding political differences and to eliminate residual security threats from insurgents , terrorists , and criminal organizations may remain limited or deteriorate significantly .

although the u.s. - iraq strategic framework agreement and status of forces agreement place the united states in a conditional assistance role vis - à - vis the iraqi government , new u.s. efforts to help contain the negative effects of potential renewed insurgency , civil conflict , and criminality in iraq may become necessary in order to preserve wider regional interests .

such steps could require requests for new congressional authorization and appropriations or require expanded oversight , and could include: appropriation and authorization requests for increased levels of military and counterterrorism assistance for iraq or some of iraq's neighbors ; border security cooperation and / or joint efforts to target transnational groups of primary concern to the u.s. and iraq's neighbors , such as the kurdistan worker's party ( pkk ) ; modification of sanctions laws targeting iran and syria , or introduction of new sanctions legislation targeting other governments ; efforts to restrict the reverse flow of foreign fighters and other combatants from iraq ; or the provision of emergency support for humanitarian operations .

