this report focuses on the major factors affecting price formation for the five largest u.s.program crops - - wheat , rice , corn , soybeans , and cotton .

 ( 1 ) according to the u.s .

agricultural census , these five cropsaccounted for 67% of harvested crop land in the united states in 2002 .

 ( 2 ) certain commoncharacteristics make a general description of market price formation relevant across this diverse setof commodities: each of these crops is produced annually ; under modest conditions they are allstorable for long periods of time ( potentially spanning several years ) ; they all move from farm tomarket in bulk form ; and they are all actively traded on at least one of the major commodity futuresexchanges which facilitates hedging and forward contracting .

in addition , frequently several or ( insome cases ) all of them compete for the same crop land in production , thus , indirectly linking theirprices across markets .

this report begins by briefly introducing some economic fundamentals common to mostagricultural commodity markets .

this is followed in the second section by a discussion of the roleof futures markets in price determination of storable agricultural commodities with seasonalproduction patterns .

the third section reviews the important role provided by the u.s. departmentof agriculture ( usda ) in monitoring and disseminating agricultural market information .

therelease of timely information facilitates price discovery and helps to level the playing field betweensmall market participants and the large multinational agri - businesses .

the fourth and final sectionhighlights some of the differences unique to each of these commodities that make pricedetermination in each market somewhat different .

 appendix table 1 .

major agricultural commodity futuresexchanges a .

the euronext is a synthesis of stock markets within the european union including the previous london and paris commodity futures exchanges .

appendix table 2 .

major agricultural commodity futurescontracts , futures exchanges , and contract months source: compiled by crs from sources listed in appendix table 1 .

na = not applicable .

a. jan = f ; feb = g ; mar = h ; apr = j ; may =k ; june = m ; july = n ; aug. = q ; sep. = u ; oct. =v ; nov. = x ; and dec. = z. b .

refer to the contract specification information available at each exchanges website provided in appendix table 1 .

in general , other grades are available for delivery at quality premiumsand discounts .

c. the mge introduced a durum futures contract in 1998 .

however , the durum contract was endedon march 20 , 2003 , due to low volume .

d. cash settlement only , no physical delivery of the commodity is accepted .

e. for 2004 , the april ( j ) and june ( m ) contract months are available .

appendix table 3 .

annual release schedule for key usdacrop and market information reports source: usda , nass for winter wheat and rye seedings , prospective plantings , acreage , cropproduction , grain stocks , and rice stocks reports ; usda , waob for the wasde report .

a. t represents the current calendar year ; t - 1 represents the previous calendar year ; and t+1represents the next calendar year .

season - average prices and supply - and - use balances arecalculated for a crop's marketing year , i.e. , the 12-month period starting from the first harvestmonth in the crop's primary growing region .

because most of the marketing year for mostcrops extends over parts of two different calendar years , they are represented by theexpressions t / t+1 .

for example , the 2005-2006 marketing year is often referred to simplyas the 2005 marketing or crop year .

for the specific release date of a usda report in 2006,see a calendar of 2006 release dates at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / inforeg / pei_calendar2006.pdf .

b .

in usda reports the terms estimate , forecast , and projection have very distinct and differentmeanings .

see section "estimates , forecasts , & projections" for a description .

c. these preliminary u.s. s&u projections use: linear - trend yield forecasts ; planting intentions areafrom the prospective plantings report ; and the historical harvested - to - planted arearelationship to derive harvested area for u.s. spring - planted crops .

winter wheat harvestedarea is available from the crop production report for may .

appendix table 4 .

major nass crop production reports acreage winter wheat and rye seedings report ( january ) contains the first forecast of winter wheat and ryeplanted area .

prospective plantings report ( end of march ) is a survey of farmer planting intentions allspring - planted field crops as of early march .

acreage report ( late june ) is a survey of actual and intended farmer plantings of all field crops as ofearly june .

this survey represents the first area forecast for crops .

small grains summary ( late september ) contains the first estimate of winter and spring wheatharvested area for the just - finished marketing year .

yields crop progress reports are released weekly between april and november .

each report contains state - and national - level information on: ( 1 ) crop progress as of the report date in terms of plantings , various plant growth stages , andharvesting .

comparisons are made with the previous week , the previous year , and thefive - year average .

 ( 2 ) crop condition rated as percent that is: very poor , poor , fair , good , and excellent .

the weekly weather and crop bulletin provides a weekly weather update for the principal cropproducing regions .

it includes weather map contours and indexes for crop moisture , extrememinimum and maximum temperatures , weekly precipitation , departure from average temperature,growing degree days , and a summer review of national weather , as well as the long - term palmerdrought severity index .

in addition , the bulletin contains an international weather and crop summaryfor major foreign production regions .

production crop production reports are released monthly throughout the calendar year .

each report containsstate - by - state area , yield , and production estimates for major field and specialty crops .

the cropcoverage varies in each report with a focus on those crops that are currently in an active seasonalgrowth pattern .

prices the agricultural prices report , released monthly throughout the calendar year , contains estimatesof previous month's average farm price received for major field and specialty crops , as well as forlivestock , poultry , meat , and produce .

each report also contains a preliminary farm price estimatefor the current month .

monthly average prices are weighted by marketings .

each report alsoincludes an all - farm products index of prices received and prices paid index for commodities andservices , interest , taxes , and farm wages paid .

the july issue includes an annual summary .

crop values - - annual summary , released in february , includes state - by - state estimates for averageprices received and the value of production for the preceding crop marketing years for major fieldand specialty crops .

source: usda , nass .

