many experts consider national reconciliation the key to halting sectarian warfare and the displacement of iraqis from their homes .

while some experts agree that iraq's major communities remain sharply divided over their relative positions in the power structure , in 2008 the bush administration reportedly attributed signs of movement on political reconciliation and a reduction in the level of violence to the impact of the 2007 troop surge .

the reduced violence has , at the very least , ensured that the displacement problem did not worsen any further in 2008 and there are possibly small signs of improvement .

if movement toward political reconciliation as a result of the january 2009 elections takes hold , this could create also conditions for decreasing the current rates of displacement and could increase the desire of the international community to address the refugee and displaced persons issue .

most experts believe that reconciliation would also enhance capacity in iraq's ministries responsible for security , basic services , and providing assistance to those displaced iraqis .

the insecurity resulting from ongoing violence in iraq continues to have a marked impact on civilian displacement in various parts of the country .

this was particularly the case beginning in early 2006 , when sectarian violence accelerated an already developing pattern of population displacement and emigration .

the numbers of displaced iraqis are very fluid and vary by source .

for example , the iraqi red crescent society estimates of refugees and internally displaced persons ( idps ) exceeded those published in a january 2008 report by the migration policy institute , which states that there were close to 4.5 million displaced iraqis ( 2.2 refugees and 2.3 idps ) .

the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) now estimates close to 4.7 million iraqis are currently displaced from their homes , including roughly 2.7 million inside iraq and 2 million refugees who have fled iraq , mostly to neighboring jordan and syria .

when the displacement crisis accelerated in 2006,unhcr observed that the humanitarian crisis many feared would take place in march 2003 as a result of the war then began to occur .

"the massive displacement has emerged quietly and without fanfare but the numbers affected are in excess of what many agencies had predicted in 2003. .

then , as now , there were also concerns about the absorptive capacity of neighboring countries , whether they could provide adequately for the populations moving across borders , and the potential impact of refugee flows on stability in the region .

the iraq situation is one of the largest population displacement crises worldwide .

as the situation continues , higher food and fuel prices and decreasing subsidies are limiting the ability of aid agencies to provide assistance .

it is estimated that 1.2 million iraqis were displaced before 2006 , 1.5 million iraqis were displaced between 2006 and 2007 , and less than 1% have been displaced in 2008 .

while there are some reports of limited improvements — decreasing violence , reduced levels of displacement , and some returns in a few governorates — the situation in general remains serious and requires sustained attention .

unhcr estimates that the number of iraqi idps who need food and shelter exceeds 1 million people .

the figures on population displacement illustrate the challenges ahead .

as the 111 th congress considers various policy options toward iraq , the impact of this level of displacement — which is the largest in the middle east since 1948 — cannot be overestimated in terms of its impact on regional stability and the potential for humanitarian suffering .

experts suggest that what is badly needed — and quickly — is the development of a robust response on the part of the international community that provides and funds humanitarian relief ; conducts a close examination of resettlement policies and options in third countries ; develops a strategy to manage the displaced , particularly within iraq ; and implements increased funding to host countries and aid agencies outside iraq .

displacement within iraq has usually been the result of sectarian conflict and general armed violence , local criminal activity , coalition military operations , and fighting among militias and insurgents .

direct personal threats , abductions , assassinations , and death threats remain commonplace , although less so than in 2007 .

religious belief , political or tribal affiliation , and association with u.s. forces or iraqi authorities can also make someone a target for violence .

all of these activities continue to create an atmosphere of generalized fear for many ordinary iraqis .

within iraq , the current conditions clearly bear the mark of sectarian polarization and "cleansing" in neighborhoods formerly of mixed religious orientation that took place during 2006 and 2007 .

in recent studies , the international organization for migration ( iom ) found that idps tended to be from mixed neighborhoods and displaced to homogenous ones .

the movement occurred predominantly in and between urban areas — with more than 70% fleeing baghdad .

at least 10 of the 18 iraqi provinces have now tried to place entry restrictions on their internal borders to iraqis displaced from elsewhere in the country .

overall living standards within iraq have declined sharply since 2003 .

human development indicators — access to health care , social services , education , employment — have fractured under the current circumstances and affected wider social networks in iraqi society .

limited assistance activities and access by the international community have made implementation of tangible , long - term policy objectives difficult .

within many areas in iraq , conditions are deteriorating and , for those already displaced , are becoming more permanent problems .

many who cannot secure protection or assistance could soon find themselves in the same situation .

according to some estimates , iraq's population is 26.8 million , this means that nearly approximately 17% of the population may be displaced .

there are many patterns of displacement , some that have their origins decades ago , but have now evolved into a new phase — for example , the approximately 300,000 refugees who were in iran before the 2003 war , then returned to iraq , and now are believed to have been displaced again , this time within iraq .

others were refugees from other countries in the region who fled to iraq and are now on the move again within its borders .

saddam hussein's brutal regime left a legacy of displacement , as his regime forcibly displaced iraqi shiites and kurds in order to control territory , terrorize the population , and fight insurrection .

some experts estimate as many as 1.5 million may have been displaced over the three decades of his regime .

the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended .

under the ina , a refugee is typically a person who is outside his or her country and who is unable or unwilling to return because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

the department of state ( dos ) handles overseas processing of refugees , which is conducted through a system of three priorities for admission .

priority one ( p - 1 ) covers compelling protection cases and individuals for whom no durable solution exists , who are referred to the u.s. refugee program by the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , a u.s. embassy , or a designated nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) .

iraqis , like all nationalities , are eligible for p - 1 processing .

priority two ( p - 2 ) covers groups of special humanitarian concern to the united states .

it includes specific groups within certain nationalities , clans , or ethnic groups .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 specifies certain groups of iraqis that are to be processed under priority two .

these new priority two groups include iraqis who are or were employed by the u.s. government in iraq ; iraqis who are or were employed in iraq by either a media or nongovernmental organization headquartered in the united states , or an entity closely associated with the u.s. mission in iraq that has received u.s. government funding ; and iraqis who are members of a persecuted religious or minority group and have close family members in the united states .

the fy2008 national defense authorization act directs the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , to establish in - country refugee processing mechanisms for these iraqi refugees .

priority three ( p - 3 ) comprises family reunification cases involving spouses , unmarried children under age 21 , and parents of persons who were admitted to the united states as refugees or granted asylum .

iraqis are among the nationalities eligible for p - 3 processing in fy2009 .

all refugee applicants are checked through dos's consular lookout and support system ( class ) .

in addition , dos must obtain a security advisory opinion ( sao ) from the federal bureau of investigation on certain applicants .

in the sao process , additional databases are checked for information on the individual .

iraqi refugees are subject to enhanced security screening procedures established by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

individuals who are preliminarily determined to qualify for a processing priority are presented to dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) for an in - person interview .

uscis makes determinations about whether individuals are eligible for refugee status and are otherwise admissible to the united states .

each year , the president submits a report to congress , known as the consultation document , which contains the administration's proposed refugee ceiling and regional allocations for the upcoming fiscal year .

following congressional consultations on the proposal , the president issues a presidential determination setting the refugee numbers for that year .

the fy2009 worldwide refugee ceiling is 80,000 .

it includes 75,000 admissions numbers allocated among the regions of the world and an unallocated reserve of 5,000 numbers that can be used if , and where , a need for additional refugee slots develops .

the fy2009 allocation for the near east / south asia region , which includes iraq , is 37,000 .

according to the fy2009 consultation document , this allocation includes vulnerable iraqis , bhutanese , and iranians , and afghans .

admissions of iraqi refugees to the united states totaled 198 in fy2005 , 202 in fy2006 , 1,608 in fy2007 , and 13,823 in fy2008 .

according to a january 2009 state department report , it is the administration's goal to admit at least 17,000 iraqi refugees in fy2009 .

beyond the formal refugee program , other immigration mechanisms have been established to facilitate the admission to the united states of iraqis who have worked for or been closely associated with the u.s. government , including the u.s. military .

provisions enacted in 2006 as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2006 , as subsequently amended , authorize dhs to grant legal permanent resident status as special immigrants to certain nationals of iraq and afghanistan who have worked directly with the u.s. armed forces , or under chief of mission authority , as translators or interpreters , and their spouses and children .

this program was capped at 500 aliens ( excluding spouses and children ) for fy2007 and fy2008 , and is capped at 50 aliens ( excluding spouses and children ) for fy2009 and subsequent years .

in fy2008 , 1,142 special immigrant visas were issued under this program .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , in addition to making changes to the refugee program discussed above , broadens dhs's authority to provide special immigrant status to certain nationals of iraq .

it also grants the secretary of state the authority to provide such status in consultation with the secretary of homeland security .

under this law , as amended , iraqi nationals are eligible for special immigrant status if they are or were employed by or on behalf of the u.s. government in iraq on or after march 20 , 2003 , for not less than one year ; provided documented valuable service to the u.s. government ; and have experienced "an ongoing serious threat as a consequence of the alien's employment by the united states government. .

this special immigrant program is capped at 5,000 principal aliens ( excluding spouses and children ) each year from fy2008 through fy2012 .

the national defense authorization act requires the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , to establish or use existing refugee processing mechanisms in iraq and elsewhere in the region for processing iraqis under the new special immigrant program .

furthermore , the law makes iraqi special immigrants eligible for the same resettlement assistance , entitlement programs , and other benefits as refugees for up to eight months .

in fy2008 , 705 special immigrant visas were issued under this program .

some argue that the returns ( mainly by refugees ) to iraq in late 2007 were due to improved security .

others contend that it was more about politics and pressure felt by the iraqi government to demonstrate progress and sustain confidence in reduced violence and by the united states to show the critical and positive impact of the troop surge .

unhcr stated at the time that it did not consider current conditions in iraq to be conducive for a voluntary returns program due primarily to concerns about security and protection for returnees and the lack of capacity on the ground to implement a returns program .

reports indicate up to 70% of those who returned to baghdad could not resettle in their own homes , either because someone else was living there or because the ethnic composition of the neighborhood made it unsafe .

with increased security and reduced violence , returns continue to increase throughout iraq , especially in baghdad , idps continue to experience harsh living conditions as many cannot fulfill simple needs such as potable water , safe and clean shelter , food and sanitation .

many homes have been destroyed and infrastructure is in disrepair .

basic public services are in need of rehabilitation .

morever , returnees have no access to employment .

although the iraqi modm was offering some assistance to idps in the last quarter of 2008 , some experts do not believe it has the resources and competency to be effective and that preparation and coordination mechanisms need to be put in place for potential large - scale returns .

it has been reported that some iraqis have been forced to return to iraq .

for example , iraqis arrested in lebanon were given the option of "voluntary deportation,"and could choose to either stay in jail or return to iraq .

reportedly , countries in europe have sent iraqis back , mainly to the kurdish - controlled north , which has been regarded by some as sufficiently stable for returns .

however , while unhcr and others in the humanitarian community view iraq as currently inhospitable to a returns program , the problem highlights the difficult balance countries need to strike in being open to asylum seekers , fulfilling their obligations , and helping those who want to resettle in third countries with consideration of the particular status of those applying , the resources within the country's communities , and the need for burdensharing between states on overall resettlement programs .

some of iraq's neighbors have quietly expressed their displeasure over a perceived lack of support from the iraqi government for its own citizens who have fled abroad .

some officials and aid workers have asserted that iraq's $25 million pledge in 2007 ( and delays in payment of this pledge until mid 2008 ) to assist iraqi refugees in neighboring states was an indication of the maliki government's unwillingness to seriously assist its own people .

other experts believe that there may be a sectarian dimension to the majority shiite iraqi government's behavior ; over 60% of iraqis in jordan and syria are sunni muslims .

in the june 2008 fy2008 and fy2009 emergency supplemental , congress raised concerns about the level of resources the government of iraq has so far dedicated to assisting iraqi refugees and idps .

other experts have suggested that the modm lacks capacity on the ground and its ability to respond to the displacement crisis must be addressed .

according to the international organization for migration ( iom ) , steps were taken to ensure idps were able to participate in voting at the provincial elections on january 31 , 2009 , either in the province of origin or at special polling centers ( with the equivalent of an absentee ballot ) in the province in which they were displaced .

provisions were not made for iraqi refugees , which represent close to 10% of the population , to vote .

experts believe that results from the elections will also influence the decisions of idps to return home .

unhcr and other experts say that more international aid in the form of contributions and program development is required for host countries , domestic ngos , and for organizations providing assistance , such as unhcr .

it is often difficult for international ngos to register in these countries , and greater access needs to be negotiated .

unhcr is short of funds and cannot provide adequate assistance or protection to iraqi refugees .

in its findings , the iraq study group ( isg ) refers specifically to the dramatic increase in population displacement that could cause further destabilization both in iraq and the region and contribute to a humanitarian crisis .

specifically the isg suggests that the united states should "take the lead in funding assistance requests from the unhcr , and other humanitarian agencies. .

 ( recommendation 66 ) .

some argue that bringing pressure to bear on other donors to participate in these relief efforts , either by funding unhcr's current supplemental appeal for iraqi refugees or by providing bilateral funding to host countries with specific allocations to iraqi refugees , could make a measurable difference in the humanitarian situation developing on the ground .

determining the immediate steps the united states can take with regard to iraqi idps in particular ( and in a more general sense to the iraqi refugees ) and how other international partners could be involved may prove to be critical in the next phase of the u.s. iraq strategy .

iraq's internal population displacement appears to have created a humanitarian crisis that may be beyond the current capacity on the ground .

difficult decisions lie ahead including identifying who should be in charge of any comprehensive relief effort , bringing together key players , and working out a coordination strategy .

whether or not the modm has the resources and competence to be effective remains to be seen in the long term , but in the immediate circumstance , it is reportedly overwhelmed .

it is not clear what role the u.s. military might play in the humanitarian response on a local level in iraq and whether the provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) may be an immediate resource to consider .

amid efforts to tackle rising u.s. budget deficits by , among other measures , slowing or reducing discretionary spending or finding the resources to sustain u.s. aid pledges may be difficult .

when disasters require immediate emergency relief , the administration may fund pledges by depleting most worldwide disaster contingency accounts .

in order to respond to future humanitarian crises , however , these resources would need to be replenished .

if not replenished , u.s. capacity to respond to other emergencies could be curtailed .

donor fatigue is also an issue , with some experts concerned about funding priorities and the ongoing need for resources for other disaster areas .

in the case of iraq , with a humanitarian crisis at hand , the question of whether sufficient funds have been requested by the administration for a potential crisis remains .

some are also concerned about whether the u.s. government should continue to fund the humanitarian needs of displaced iraqis through supplemental appropriations .

with a likely budgetary gap at hand , some believe the united states has a greater responsibility to lead the way on committing funds to address the needs of iraqi refugees and idps .

they argue that if the united states increased its funding and resettlement numbers , this would encourage other countries in the region , and more broadly in the international community , to do the same .

for broader political reasons , finding a balance on burdensharing with the international community may be unique in the iraq context .

with respect to the possible repatriation of iraqi refugees , the refugee admissions report to congress states: "it is hoped that significant numbers of iraqi refugees located throughout the middle east and europe will soon be able to return home , although the security situation will remain an important consideration in repatriation. .

while reduced violence is likely to enable more returns , it is not clear whether there are policy implications for refugee resettlement at present , and whether , when viewed as a temporary situation , the obligation by the united states to resettle iraqi refugees becomes less pressing .

in addition , there is some concern that if , among those determined to be most vulnerable and in need , proportionally more christian iraqis are resettled in the united states than muslim iraqis , this could contribute to the perception of preference granted to groups of one religion over another .

the question of granting preference to vulnerable iraqis and iraqis who are at risk because they have worked for , or been closely associated with , the u.s. government , including the u.s. military , may also have unforseen consequences .

some have questioned whether it may create resentment among iraqis seeking resettling who do not qualify for preferential treatment .

others have asked whether iraqis will see "collaboration" with the united states as a means to resettle in the united states and therefore will be eager to take advantage of any opportunity to do so .

