trafficking in persons ( tip ) , also commonly referred to as human trafficking , forced labor , or modern slavery , is considered to be one of today's leading criminal enterprises that affects virtually all countries around the globe .

in 2012 , the international labor organization ( ilo ) estimated that there were some 20.9 million victims of forced labor , which includes trafficking in persons .

of these , the ilo estimates that some 1.8 million victims are in latin america .

in 2014 , the ilo analyzed the financial value of forced labor and estimated that it results in roughly $12 billion in illegal profits annually in latin america ( out of a global estimate of $150 billion ) .

the accuracy of these and other estimates , however , is difficult to assess given the clandestine nature of human trafficking .

internal trafficking generally flows from rural to urban or tourist centers within a given country , and trafficking across international borders generally flows toward more developed nations .

countries are generally described as source , transit , and / or destination countries for tip victims .

research indicates that countries are more vulnerable to human trafficking if they have experienced political upheaval , armed conflict , economic crisis , or a natural disaster .

for example , the hundreds of thousands of haitian children who were orphaned after a catastrophic earthquake hit that country in january 2010 proved vulnerable to trafficking .

some assert that hosting major international events can exacerbate preexisting human trafficking problems , whereas others maintain that those fears may be overblown .

this report describes the nature and scope of the problem of trafficking in persons in latin america and the caribbean .

it then describes u.s. efforts to deal with trafficking in persons in the region and discusses recent country and regional anti - trafficking efforts .

the report concludes by raising issues that may be helpful for congress to consider as it continues to address human trafficking as part of its authorization , appropriations , and oversight activities .

human trafficking is a growing problem in latin america and the caribbean , a region that contains major source , transit , and destination countries for trafficking victims .

major forms of tip in the region include commercial sexual exploitation of women and children , labor trafficking within national borders and among countries in the region ( particularly in south america ) , and the trafficking of illegal immigrants in mexico and central america .

according to the u.n. office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) , the share of victims trafficked for forced labor outside the commercial sex industry in latin america ( 44% ) is higher than in europe and central asia .

the two countries in latin america and the caribbean with the largest percentages of their populations subjected to "modern slavery," a term associated with human trafficking , are haiti and the dominican republic , according to the walk free foundation .

u.s. interests in latin america are multiple and , at times , conflicting .

these interests include strengthening democracy , promoting economic growth through free trade , stemming the flow of illegal narcotics and migrants , and cooperating on border security and antiterrorism measures .

these broad interests either directly or indirectly affect all u.s. policy in the region and may at times conflict with specific human rights goals , such as fighting human trafficking .

as is the case with many human rights issues , ethical concerns about human trafficking must be balanced against broader u.s. geopolitical goals and interests in each country .

broader u.s. foreign policy goals may influence the tip report and sanctions process in several ways .

some observers maintain that certain u.s. allies in the region could never be sanctioned for political reasons .

others contend that the repeated inclusion of cuba on the tier 3 list until 2014 constituted "selective indignation" on the part of the u.s. government .

u.s. officials working in the region have noted that it is sometimes difficult to produce an unbiased account of government efforts against trafficking without being swayed by underlying foreign policy concerns .

others say that it is difficult to deal with trafficking in persons when a country is undergoing extreme political instability and that were tip sanctions actually enforced , they might undermine the broader u.s. goals of preventing democratic breakdown in the hemisphere .

issues that may be considered when evaluating the implementation of u.s. anti - trafficking policies are discussed below .

since 2003 , no governments in latin america except cuba and venezuela have been subject to partial or full restrictions on u.s. assistance for failing to meet the minimum standards of tvpa .

ecuador appeared on the tier 3 list in both 2004 and 2005 but did not lose assistance .

some argue that restrictions will probably only be applied to countries already subject to sanctions — such as north korea — and that threatening other countries aid cuts may actually encourage them to become less open to working with the united states .

others argue that this may be the case with china or saudi arabia , but most latin american countries depend on good political and economic relations with the united states , as well as u.s. tourism , and fear the negative press that comes with a tier 3 designation nearly as much as reduced u.s. assistance .

it is often difficult to measure success in the fight against human trafficking .

many countries in latin america have reported increases in the number of training courses provided , conferences held , and workshops convened as evidence of their commitment to combat human trafficking .

however , as stated in the 2009 tip report , the state department prefers countries to focus on "concrete actions" when determining the adequacy of a particular country's anti - tip efforts .

concrete actions include enacting new or amended tip legislation ; expanding victim assistance and prevention programs ; and , perhaps most importantly , securing prosecutions , convictions , and prison sentences for tip offenders .

although many countries in latin america have passed or amended their existing tip laws , until very recently , the number of tip - related arrests , prosecutions , and convictions remained low in comparison to other regions .

some have questioned the adequacy of the state department's indicators .

they maintain that more credit should be given to countries that are seeking to address the underlying factors that put people at risk for trafficking , such as gender and racial discrimination , violence against women and children , and economic inequality .

in 2015 , there were 1,744 prosecutions of suspected traffickers , up from 944 prosecutions last year .

convictions also increased , from 470 in 2014 to 663 in 2015 .

although prosecutions and convictions are higher than five years ago , they still pale in comparison to europe , which recorded 4,990 prosecutions and 1,692 convictions in 2015 , and to south and central asia , which secured 6,915 prosecutions and 1,462 convictions .

they also pale in comparison to the number of victims that have been identified in latin america ( 9,661 in 2015 alone ) .

to continue improving enforcement of tip legislation in latin america , some observers have urged u.s. officials and other donors not to encourage countries to pass laws modeled entirely after those from other countries ( such as the tvpa ) .

instead , countries should develop trafficking laws that respond to their particular tip problems and law enforcement capacities .

once legislation is in place , more attention and resources may be needed to help countries implement that legislation , and that assistance may need to go beyond training for law enforcement and legal professionals .

according to the state department , some of the current laws in latin america are insufficient .

for example , mexico's federal anti - tip law defines human trafficking too broadly , thereby diluting the crime of trafficking .

costa rica defines trafficking only as a movement - based crime .

attention also may be needed to address broader weaknesses in criminal justice systems that hinder tip investigations and prosecutions .

corruption could be addressed by stiffening penalties for police , border guards , or other officials caught assisting traffickers .

handling of victims could be improved by training and mentoring provided by external entities , such as unodc or u.s. law enforcement , aimed at changing misperceptions that victims are complicit in crimes such as prostitution and reinforcing victims' need for specialized services and , if applicable , immigration relief .

as previously mentioned , doj's opdat regularly mentors mexican prosecutors who are now operating in an accusatorial justice system in which securing a victim's testimony may be crucial for obtaining a trafficking conviction .

the current u.n. definition of tip assumes that there are at least two different types of prostitution , one of which is the result of free choice to participate in the prostitution business and one that is the result of coercion , vulnerability , deception , or other pressures .

of these , only the latter type is considered tip .

based on the tvpa , as amended , sex trafficking is not considered a "severe form of tip" unless it is associated with commercial sex acts induced by force , fraud , or coercion or in which the person induced to perform such acts is a minor .

several groups in the united states have sought to redefine tip to include all prostitution , but many countries have rejected those attempts .

proponents of this broader definition of tip argue that prostitution is "not 'sex work ; ' it is violence against women [that] exists because ... men are given social , moral and legal permission to buy women on demand. .

several european and latin american countries , which have legal or government - regulated prostitution , reject such a definitional change and argue that this broader definition would impede the capacity of the international community to achieve consensus and work together to combat trafficking .

some policymakers and researchers assert that prostitution and tip are inextricably linked , with countries where prostitution is legal experiencing greater inflows of human trafficking .

others , including amnesty international , maintain that legalizing prostitution and improving working conditions for sex workers reduces the pool of potential tip victims and helps those workers gain access to police protection in the event they are victimized .

regardless of whether prostitution is legal or illegal , the state department has reiterated the importance of not punishing victims of tip who have been forced into prostitution for their actions , even in places where prostitution is illegal .

the european union and the council of europe have adopted that principle as part of their directives on combating human trafficking .

research suggests that although tip for sexual exploitation is both a highly prevalent and particularly visible form of human trafficking , tip for forced labor exploitation may account for a large , often unreported , and possibly growing share of tip globally .

recent interest in forced labor as a form of tip has sparked calls for greater research in analyzing the prevalence of forced labor , increased international efforts to combat this form of tip , and more awareness to prevent and educate potential victims .

the state department's tip reports since 2005 have placed an added emphasis on evaluating country efforts to combat trafficking for forced labor , and several other programmatic efforts to combat tip for forced labor are under way at the state department .

other international groups , particularly the ilo , also play a large role in efforts to combat forced labor .

according to the 2016 global slavery index by the walk free foundation , brazil has been one of the countries recognized for its efforts to address forced labor despite not having as many resources as wealthier countries .

it has done so by investigating businesses allegedly using slave labor and publicly holding those businesses accountable for their actions .

at a regional level , labor trafficking prosecutions and convictions went from one prosecution and one conviction in the 2007 reporting period to 369 prosecutions and 107 convictions in 2012 , before falling back to 83 prosecutions and 26 convictions in 2015 .

some latin american countries have yet to broaden their anti - tip efforts out from focusing largely on the commercial sexual exploitation of women and children .

even in countries with well - established efforts against forced labor , like brazil , many perpetrators have been able to avoid jail time by paying fines to settle cases .

