with the signing of the omnibus appropriations act for fy2009 ( h.r .

1105 , p.l .

111-5 ) on march 11 , 2009 , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) was funded at $17.78 billion for the fiscal year .

of that total , $5.76 billion was allocated to space operations , which include the space shuttle and the international space station .

for fy2008 , nasa had received $5.53 billion for space operations .

as nasa continued to fly space shuttle missions to the international space station , the agency awaited the announcement of a new administrator to replace michael griffin , who resigned in january .

on march 11 president obama said he would appoint a new nasa director soon , and that one of biggest tasks of the new director would be "shaping a mission for nasa that is appropriate for the 21 st century. .

nasa launched its first space station , skylab , in 1973 .

three crews were sent to live and work there in 1973-1974 .

it remained in orbit , unoccupied , until it reentered earth's atmosphere in july 1979 , disintegrating over australia and the indian ocean .

skylab was never intended to be permanently occupied , but the goal of a permanently occupied space station with crews rotating on a regular basis , employing a reusable space transportation system ( the space shuttle ) was high on nasa's list for the post - apollo years following the moon landings .

budget constraints forced nasa to choose to build the space shuttle first .

the first launch of the shuttle was in april 1981 .

when nasa declared the shuttle "operational" in 1982 , it was ready to initiate the space station program .

in his january 25 , 1984 state of the union address , president reagan directed nasa to develop a permanently occupied space station within a decade , and to invite other countries to join .

on july 20 , 1989 , the 20 th anniversary of the first apollo landing on the moon , president george h. w. bush voiced his support for the space station as the cornerstone of a long - range civilian space program eventually leading to bases on the moon and mars .

that "moon / mars" program , the space exploration initiative , was not greeted with enthusiasm in congress , primarily due to budget concerns , and ended in fy1993 , although the space station program continued .

president clinton dramatically changed the character of the space station program in 1993 by adding russia as a partner to this already international endeavor .

that decision made the space station part of the u.s. foreign policy agenda to encourage russia to abide by agreements to stop the proliferation of ballistic missile technology , and to support russia economically and politically as it transitioned from the soviet era .

the clinton administration strongly supported the space station within certain budget limits .

the international space station program thus began in 1993 , with russia joining the united states , europe , japan , and canada .

an intergovernmental agreement ( iga ) established three phases of space station cooperation .

the iga is a treaty in all the countries except the united states , where it is an executive agreement .

it is implemented through memoranda of understanding ( mous ) between nasa and its counterpart agencies .

during phase i ( 1995-1998 ) , seven u.s. astronauts remained on russia's space station mir for long duration ( several month ) missions with russian cosmonauts , russian cosmonauts flew on the u.s. space shuttle seven times , and nine space shuttle missions docked with mir to exchange crews and deliver supplies .

repeated system failures and two life - threatening emergencies on mir in 1997 raised questions about whether nasa should leave more astronauts on mir , but nasa decided mir was sufficiently safe to continue the program .

 ( mir was deorbited in 2001. ) .

phases ii and iii involve construction of the international space station itself , and blend into each other .

phase ii began in 1998 and was completed in july 2001 ; phase iii is underway .

president george w. bush , prompted in part by the february 2003 space shuttle columbia tragedy , made a major space policy address on january 14 , 2004 , directing nasa to focus its activities on returning humans to the moon and eventually sending them to mars .

included in this "vision for space exploration" was a decision to retire the space shuttle in 2010 .

the president said the united states would fulfill its commitments to its space station partners .

the space transportation system ( sts ) — the space shuttle — is a partially reusable launch vehicle and is the sole u.s. means for launching humans into orbit .

it consists of an airplane - like orbiter , with two solid rocket boosters ( srbs ) on each side , and a large , cylindrical external tank ( et ) that carries fuel for the orbiter's main engines .

the orbiters and srbs are reused ; the et is not .

nasa has three remaining spaceflight - worthy orbiters: discovery , atlantis , and endeavour .

in passing the 2005 nasa authorization act ( p.l .

109 - 105 ) , congress basically agreed with the president's plan for directing nasa's attention to a return to the moon and manned missions to mars .

included in the moon - mars "vision" is the plan to end flights of the space shuttle in 2010 , and restriction of u.s. experiments on the iss mostly to those that forward the goal moon - mars goal .

a number of critical questions remain , however .

adequacy of funding is the chief question raised about nasa's activities .

in presenting the moon - mars vision , the president did not request significantly increased money for nasa , despite chronic indications that the missions it was already charged with were underfunded .

nasa has responded to the new mission by cutting back funding for its other activities , primarily in scientific research and aeronautics .

although discovery ' s "return to flight" mission of july 2006 was a success , the ability of the shuttle fleet to carry out enough flights to complete construction of the iss by 2010 is still in question .

with a history of more than a hundred successful missions , it might be assumed that another 15 or so would be considered more or less routine , but instead , each launch is still a major and risky event .

the great complexity of the vehicle and the extreme environment in which it operates require constant attention to possible accidents and malfunctions , many of which must be addressed on an ad hoc basis .

the future role of the iss is also unclear .

assuming that enough shuttle flights are made to carry out "core completion" of the station by 2010 , it is not clear what will be done with the iss after that .

in particular , there will be a gap of several years between retirement of the shuttle in 2010 and beginning of flight of the crew exploration vehicle , to be designed for the return to the moon but able to serve as a vehicle to reach the iss .

