the broadband loan and grant programs at rus are intended to accelerate the deployment of broadband services in rural america .

"broadband" refers to high - speed internet access and advanced telecommunications services for private homes , commercial establishments , schools , and public institutions .

currently in the united states , residential broadband is primarily provided via cable modem ( from the local provider of cable television service ) , fiber - optic cable , mobile wireless ( eg , smartphones ) , or over the copper telephone line ( digital subscriber line or "dsl" ) .

other broadband technologies include fixed wireless and satellite .

broadband access enables a number of beneficial applications to individual users and to communities .

these include ecommerce , telecommuting , voice service ( voice over the internet protocol or "voip" ) , distance learning , telemedicine , public safety , and others .

it is becoming generally accepted that broadband access in a community can play an important role in economic development .

access to affordable broadband is viewed as particularly important for the economic development of rural areas because it enables individuals and businesses to participate fully in the online economy regardless of geographical location .

for example , aside from enabling existing businesses to remain in their rural locations , broadband access could attract new business enterprises drawn by lower costs and a more desirable lifestyle .

essentially , broadband potentially allows businesses and individuals in rural america to live locally while competing globally in an online environment .

a 2016 study from the hudson institute found that rural broadband providers directly and indirectly added $24.1 billion to the u.s. economy in 2015 .

the rural broadband industry supported 69,595 jobs in 2015 , both through its own employment and the employment that its purchases of goods and services generated .

given the large potential impact broadband may have on the economic development of rural america , concern has been raised over a "digital divide" between rural and urban or suburban areas with respect to broadband deployment .

while there are many examples of rural communities with state - of - the - art telecommunications facilities , recent surveys and studies have indicated that , in general , rural areas tend to lag behind urban and suburban areas in broadband deployment .

for example according to the federal communications commission's ( fcc's ) communications marketplace report , "as of year - end 2017 , 94% of the overall population had coverage [of fixed terrestrial broadband at speeds of 25 mbps / 3 mbps] , up from 91.9% in 2016 .

nonetheless , the gap in rural and tribal america remains notable: 24% of americans in rural areas and 32% of americans in tribal lands lack coverage from fixed terrestrial 25 mbps / 3 mbps broadband , as compared to only 1.5% of americans in urban areas .

the data demonstrate , however , that the gap between urban and rural or tribal areas has narrowed each year over the last five years. .

also according to the fcc's communications market report , rural areas continue to lag behind urban areas in mobile broadband deployment .

although evaluated urban areas saw an increase of 10 mbps / 3 mbps mobile lte from 81.9% in 2014 to 92.6% in 2017 , such deployment in evaluated rural areas remained relatively flat at about 70% .

according to january 2018 survey data from the pew research center , 58% of adults in rural areas said they have a high - speed broadband connection at home , as opposed to 67% of adults in urban areas and 70% of adults in suburban areas .

a november 2017 census bureau survey reported by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) digital nation data explorer showed 72.9% of rural residents reporting using the internet , versus 78.5% of urban residents .

according to ntia , the data "indicates a fairly constant 6-9 percentage point gap between rural and urban communities' internet use over time. .

the comparatively lower population density of rural areas is likely the major reason why broadband is less deployed than in more highly populated suburban and urban areas .

particularly for wireline broadband technologies — such as cable modem , fiber , and dsl — the greater the geographical distances among customers , the larger the cost to serve those customers .

thus , there is often less incentive for companies to invest in broadband in rural areas than , for example , in an urban area where there is more demand ( more customers with perhaps higher incomes ) and less cost to wire the market area .

the terrain of rural areas can also be a hindrance , in that it is more expensive to deploy broadband technologies in a mountainous or heavily forested area .

an additional added cost factor for remote areas can be the expense of "backhaul" ( eg , the "middle mile" ) , which refers to the installation of a dedicated line that transmits a signal to and from an internet backbone , which is typically located in or near an urban area .

another important broadband availability issue is the extent to which there are multiple broadband providers offering competition and consumer choice .

typically , multiple providers are more prevalent in urban than in rural areas .

because private providers are unlikely to earn enough revenue to cover the costs of deploying and operating broadband networks in many unserved rural areas , it is unlikely that private investment alone will bring service to these areas .

in 2000 , given the lagging deployment of broadband in rural areas , congress and the administration acted to initiate pilot broadband loan and grant programs within the rural utilities service of the u.s. department of agriculture .

while rus had long maintained telecommunications loan and grant programs ( rural telephone loans and loan guarantees , rural telephone bank , and more recently , the distance learning and telemedicine loans and grants ) , none were exclusively dedicated to financing rural broadband deployment .

title iii of the fy2001 agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l .

106-387 ) directed usda / rus to conduct a "pilot program to finance broadband transmission and local dial - up internet service in areas that meet the definition of 'rural area' used for the distance learning and telemedicine program. .

subsequently , on december 5 , 2000 , rus announced the availability of $100 million in loan funding through a one - year pilot program "to finance the construction and installation of broadband telecommunications services in rural america. .

the broadband pilot loan program was authorized under the authority of the distance learning and telemedicine program ( 7 u.s.c .

950aaa ) , and was available to "legally organized entities" not located within the boundaries of a city or town having a population in excess of 20,000 .

the fy2002 agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l .

107-76 ) designated a loan level of $80 million for broadband loans , and on january 23 , 2002 , rus announced that the pilot program would be extended into fy2002 , with $80 million in loans made available to fund many of the applications that did not receive funding during the previous year .

meanwhile , the fy2002 agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l .

107-76 ) allocated $20 million for a pilot broadband grant program , also authorized under the distance learning and telemedicine program .

on july 8 , 2002 , rus announced the availability of $20 million for a pilot grant program for the provision of broadband service in rural america .

the program was specifically targeted to economically challenged rural communities with no existing broadband service .

grants were made available to entities providing "community - oriented connectivity," which the rus defined as those entities "who will connect the critical community facilities including the local schools , libraries , hospitals , police , fire and rescue services and who will operate a community center that provides free and open access to residents. .

the pilot program was extended into fy2003 , as the consolidated appropriations resolution of 2003 ( p.l .

108-7 ) allocated $10 million for broadband grants .

currently , rus has four ongoing programs that have been established to incentivize and subsidize broadband infrastructure investment in unserved and underserved rural areas .

these include the following: rural broadband access loan s — funds the costs of construction , improvement , or acquisition of facilities and equipment needed to provide service in eligible rural areas .

community connect grants — funds broadband deployment into rural communities where it is not yet economically viable for private sector providers to deliver service .

telecommunications infrastructure loans and loan guarantees — funds the construction , maintenance , improvement , and expansion of telephone service and broadband in extremely rural areas with a population of 5,000 or less .

distance learning and telemedicine grants — principally funds end - user equipment to help rural communities use telecommunications to link teachers and medical service providers in one area to students and patients in another .

in addition , a new broadband loan and grant pilot program — the reconnect program — has been established and funded at $600 million by the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

table a - 1 in the appendix shows the total amount and number of awards provided by the rus broadband programs for each state between fy2009 and fy2016 .

in its april 2017 report , rural broadband deployment: improved consistency with leading practices could enhance management of loan and grant programs , gao reported that ( according to rus data ) since fy2004 , rus has approved 704 broadband projects totaling almost $8.6 billion in loans and $144.8 million in grants to deploy telecommunications or broadband infrastructure networks in rural areas .

rus has three programs that provide or have provided loans for broadband infrastructure projects: the rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program ( also known as the farm bill broadband loan program ) , the broadband initiatives program ( bip under the arra ) , and the telecommunications infrastructure loan program ( established in 1949 as the rural telephone loan and loan guarantee program ) .

whereas rus broadband loans are used as up - front capital to invest in broadband infrastructure , the federal communications commission's ( fcc's ) universal service fund ( usf ) — specifically , the high cost fund — has functioned as an ongoing subsidy to keep the operation of telecommunications networks in high cost areas profitable for providers .

many rus telecommunications and broadband borrowers ( loan recipients ) receive high cost usf subsidies .

in many cases , the subsidy received from usf helps provide the revenue necessary to keep the loan viable .

the telecommunications infrastructure loan program is highly dependent on high cost usf revenues , with 99% ( 476 out of 480 borrowers ) receiving interstate high cost usf support .

this is not surprising , given that the rus telecommunications infrastructure loans are available only to the most rural and high cost areas ( towns with populations less than 5,000 ) .

regarding broadband loans , 60% of bip ( stimulus ) borrowers draw from state or interstate usf support mechanisms , while 10% of farm bill ( rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program ) broadband borrowers receive interstate high cost usf support .

the fcc , in an october 2011 decision , adopted an order that calls for the usf to be transformed , in stages , over a multiyear period — from a mechanism to support voice telephone service to one that supports the deployment , adoption , and use of both fixed and mobile broadband .

more specifically , the high cost program is being phased out and a new fund , the connect america fund ( caf ) , which includes the targeted mobility fund and new remote areas fund , is replacing it .

during this transition , the uncertainty surrounding the fcc's proposed methodology for distributing connect america fund monies has led many small rural providers to postpone or cancel investment in broadband network upgrades .

according to rus , "demand for rus loans dropped to roughly 37% of the total amount of loan funds appropriated by congress in fy2012," and "[c]urrent and prospective rus borrowers have communicated their hesitation to increase their outstanding debt and move forward with planned construction due to the recently implemented reductions in usf support and inter - carrier compensation ( icc ) payments. .

the rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program , the community connect grant program , the telecommunications infrastructure loan and loan guarantee program , the rural broadband reconnect program , and the distance learning and telemedicine grant program are funded through the annual agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act .

the appropriations provided to the broadband loan programs are loan subsidies which support a significantly higher loan level .

table 3 shows recent and proposed appropriations for the rural broadband programs in the rural utilities service .

rus broadband programs have been awarding funds to entities serving rural communities since fy2001 .

since their inception , a number of criticisms have emerged .

the rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program is authorized by section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 .

since the program was established in the 2002 farm bill , it has been subsequently reauthorized and modified by the 2008 and 2014 farm bills .

the 2018 farm bill seeks to again reauthorize and modify the program , as well as addressing other rus broadband programs and issues .

aside from the 2018 farm bills and annual appropriations legislation , the following bills were introduced into the 115 th congress seeking to impact the rus broadband programs: h.r .

800 ( huffman ) , introduced on february 1 , 2017 , as the new deal rural broadband act of 2017 , would establish an office of rural broadband within usda ; authorize a "breaking ground on rural broadband program" to make grants , loans , or loan guarantees to eligible entities for serving rural and underserved areas ( $20 billion to remain available until september 30 , 2022 ) ; establish a tribal broadband assistance program ( $25 million for each of fiscal years 2017 through 2022 ) ; establish a broadband grant program to accompany the rural broadband loan program ; modify the telecommunications infrastructure loan program by raising the threshold for an eligible rural area from 5,000 to 20,000 population and by permitting rus to give preference to loan applications that support regional telecommunications development ; and direct usda to establish and maintain an inventory of any real property that is owned , leased , or otherwise managed by the federal government on which a broadband facility could be constructed , as determined by the under secretary for rural broadband initiatives .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committees on natural resources and energy and commerce .

h.r .

1084 ( kelly of illinois ) , introduced on february 15 , 2017 , as the today's american dream act , would direct gao to submit to congress a report on the efficiency and effectiveness of efforts by federal agencies to expand access to broadband service , including the rus telecommunications and broadband programs .

referred to the committee on ways and means , and in addition to the committees on education and the workforce , agriculture , financial services , small business , energy and commerce , the judiciary , and oversight and government reform .

h.r .

4232 ( pocan ) , introduced on november 2 , 2017 , as the broadband connections for rural opportunities program ( bcrop ) act , would amend section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 ( 7 u.s.c .

950bb ) to establish a broadband grant program to accompany the rural broadband loan program .

also would raise the broadband loan program authorization from $25 million to $50 million .

referred to the committees on energy and commerce and on agriculture .

h.r .

4291 ( stefanik ) , introduced on november 7 , 2017 , as the precision farming act , would utilize rural utilities service loans and loan guarantees under the rural broadband access program to provide broadband service for agricultural producers , and would provide universal service support for installation charges for broadband service for agricultural producers in order to improve precision farming and ranching .

referred to the committees on energy and commerce and on agriculture .

h.r .

4308 ( lujan grisham ) , introduced on november 8 , 2017 , as the rural broadband expansion act , would authorize the rural utility service's community connect broadband grant program at $100 million for each of fiscal years 2019 through 2023 .

referred to the committees on agriculture and on energy and commerce .

h.r .

5172 ( o'halleran ) , introduced on march 6 , 2018 , would assist indian tribes in maintaining , expanding , and deploying broadband systems .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

5213 ( hartzler ) , introduced on march 8 , 2018 , would prohibit the rural utilities service from providing assistance for the provision of broadband service with a download speed of less than 25 megabits per second or an upload speed of less than 3 megabits per second , and clarify the broadband loan and loan guarantee authority provided in section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

6073 ( cramer ) , introduced on june 12 , 2018 , as the rural broadband act of 2018 , would prohibit usda from providing broadband loans or grants for projects that overbuild or otherwise duplicate broadband networks operated by another provider that have received universal service support from the fcc or previous broadband assistance from rus .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committee on energy and commerce .

s. 1676 ( gillibrand ) , introduced on july 31 , 2017 , as the broadband connections for rural opportunities program ( bcrop ) act , would amend section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 ( 7 u.s.c .

950bb ) to establish a broadband grant program to accompany the rural broadband loan program .

also would raise the broadband loan program authorization from $25 million to $50 million .

referred to the committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

s. 2654 ( smith ) , introduced on april 12 , 2018 , as the community connect grant program act of 2018 , would amend the rural electrification act of 1936 to authorize the community connect grant program at an annual level of $50 million per year .

defines "eligible broadband service" as operating at or above the applicable minimum download and upload speeds established by the fcc in defining the term "advanced telecommunications capability. .

referred to committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

s. 2970 ( daines ) , introduced on may 24 , 2018 , as the rural broadband act of 2018 , would prohibit usda from providing broadband loans or grants for projects that overbuild or otherwise duplicate broadband networks operated by another provider that have received universal service support from the fcc or previous broadband assistance from rus .

referred to the committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

s. 3080 ( murkowski ) , introduced on june 18 , 2018 , as the food security , housing , and sanitation improvements in rural , remote , and frontier areas act of 2018 , would amend the rural electrification act of 1936 to include a satellite project or technology within the definition of broadband service .

referred to the committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

s. 3360 ( wyden ) , introduced august 21 , 2018 , as the broadband internet for small ports act , would establish priority for small harbors to receive rus broadband funding .

referred to the committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

