directing the use of nuclear weapons is surely the gravest decision a president can make .

the process established for the president to perform this function is "nuclear command andcontrol" ( nc2 ) .

nc2 is defined as the exercise of authority and direction by the president,as commander in chief , through established command lines , over nuclear weapon operations ofmilitary forces ; as chief executive over all government activities that support those operations ; and,as head of state over required multinational actions that support those operations .

 ( 1 ) the infrastructure that supports the president and his unified command commanders inexercising this authority is the nuclear command and control system ( nccs ) .

 ( 2 ) the nccs is defined as: the designated combination of flexible and enduringelements including facilities , equipment , communications , procedures , personnel , and the structurein which these elements are integrated , all of which are essential for planning , directing , andcontrolling nuclear weapon operations of military forces and the activities that support thoseoperations .

the purpose of the nccs shall be to provide the president with all capabilities requiredto exercise his authority over nuclear weapons operations .

 ( 3 ) the nccs supports the president's constitutional responsibilities as commander in chiefand is part of continuity of government activities , and so may warrant congressional oversight andinterest .

congress , when authorizing and appropriating funds and in its oversight role , reviewsdepartment of defense's ( dod's ) plans to sustain and modernize the nccs .

in the past , dod hasconducted reviews of nuclear posture and systems and communicated those findings to thelegislative branch .

 ( 4 ) increased momentum to implement the 2001 nuclear posture review ( npr ) findings , as well as thepublication of dod's 2006 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) , could provide an opportunity forcongress to revisit the structure and future relevance of the nccs .

today's nccs architecture still largely bears a shape that stems from its cold war origins,despite the 14 years since the dissolution of the ussr .

however , as the threat from russia haswaned , some analysts see the potential for nuclear challenges from china , north korea , or iran,which could drive a continued need for robust nc2 , but possibly with a structure different fromtoday .

other analysts note that the addition of non - nuclear responses and active defenses advocatedby the 2001 npr could drive additional complex requirements .

further , the individual platformsthat make up the nccs serve in secondary roles that give other user agencies equities in continuedsupport for legacy systems .

these equities will need to be reconciled with the recommendationsfrom the 2006 qdr to retire some of these cold war platforms .

despite its strategic and budgetary implications , the nccs is often not well understood andreceives little attention from outside the military establishment .

this report will describe nccsplatforms and functions , discuss the current role of the nccs in light of the 2001 npr and 2006qdr , examine current issues related to the role of the nccs from both process and technologyperspectives , and review proposed modernization initiatives .

the increased demands on the nuclear command and control system driven by the 2001 nprand subsequent dod policy will pose challenges for the nccs in the future .

the system's legacycold war architecture will compete for budgetary priority against conventional systems that mayseem to some to be more immediately relevant to today's threat environment and the war on terror .

whether the threat that should shape the nccs comes from china ( or some other nuclear armedpeer competitor ) , rogue states , or terrorism , some suggest there is continued value in this robustsystem .

others may argue that the system's continued value lies in its ability to fulfill missions oftenviewed as subsidiary or even beyond the traditional dod purview .

however , the key functionsperformed by the nccs will likely remain requirements as long as the united states maintains anuclear deterrent .

the dod continues to pursue modernization initiatives across the system , but in a budgetconstrained environment these activities will come under competing pressure from moreconventional missions .

through the fy2007 budget request , the defense department has continuedto focus on evolutionary upgrades of the cold war nccs architecture .

however , usstratcom'sactivation of functional component commands , and some recommendations in the 2006 qdr couldsignal a change in direction .

questions congress may confront include: what is the nature of the threat ? .

some schoolsof thought contend that china is rising to be the us's next military peer competitor , while otherscontend that china is growing to be a partner in the world community .

the extent of the threat fromnorth korea , iran , or terrorist organizations , whether from a nuclear strike or from an emp attackare also subject to debate .

the capabilities posed by these potential threats may present a "worstcase" against which to configure the nuclear command and control system .

what is the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. strategy and howmight that role affect command and control ? .

there is competition between thosewho believe the role of nuclear weapons should be reduced to give non - proliferation effortscredibility , and those who want to increase their utility to confront proliferators .

the role of theweapons will shape the command and control system to support them .

what is the appropriate architecture for thenccs ? .

is the current , centralized , linear system developed during the cold warstill the right approach to ensuring presidential positive control and minimizing command andcontrol confusion ? .

revisions to the nccs architecture may need to incorporate the additional 2001npr - driven command and control requirements for non - nuclear offensive responses and activemissile defense .

a debate and possibly legislation regarding release authorities may need to precedesuch architectural decisions .

perhaps a more dispersed approach , such as usstratcom nowproposes , may be a better fit for the current threat environment .

that approach might also conveymanpower and budget economies in the long run .

however , applying a distributed , network styleapproach to nuclear command and control has not yet been tested or proven .

what level of investment in modernization or new procurementis needed or justified ? .

all of the nccs modernization or procurement initiativesdiscussed above are projected to continue for years into the future .

the continued implementationof the 2001 npr and the findings of the 2006 qdr may adjust or add to those requirements .

theretirement of the e - 4b naoc and mccc may offer some opportunities for short term savings .

asall of the services look to recapitalize equipment after the wear and tear from duty in iraq , the nccswill be competing against immediate day - to - day services' needs .

are the existing nccs platformsadequate to requirements ? .

are they still needed ? .

what value are the secondary uses of the nccs ? .

the nccs represents a national asset built up over decades .

can the taxpayer get added value byemploying these capabilities for ancillary functions ? .

as homeland security missions and domesticdisaster response receive greater government attention , some platforms that already provide supportin these areas have the potential for even greater utility .

do those functions justify continuedinvestment if their primary mission requirements are superseded ? .

if so , should the procurement andoperation of these systems be transferred to civilian agencies ? .

