the lihtc was created by the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra ; p.l .

99-514 ) to provide an incentive for the acquisition and development or rehabilitation of affordable rental housing .

in the two decades since its enactment , the lihtc has become the leading source of financing for affordable rental housing .

as the 110 th congress begins , and legislative conversations turn toward affordable housing , the lihtc may receive attention .

proponents of the lihtc view the credit as highly efficient and effective .

as evidence of effectiveness , advocates state that the lihtc is responsible for producing 50% of all multifamily housing starts annually , and virtually all affordable rental housing in the united states since the credit was introduced .

proponents also suggest that the very high price of tax credits in equity markets is a sign of the credit's popularity .

opponents claim that the lihtc has crowded out other forms of rental housing finance , and that result , not the credit's value , is the leading source of financing for rental housing .

additionally , the credit is perceived as more costly and less efficient than demand - side subsidies like the section 8 housing voucher program .

opponents also claim that the price of tax credit dollars is high , not because of its efficiency , but because the credit offers a deep subsidy to investors as well as other tax benefits .

as policymakers begin to address affordable housing issues , modifications to the lihtc will likely be considered .

this report discusses some fundamental public - policy questions that have not received much attention .

is the lack of affordable housing a result of a housing - market failure ? .

does the lihtc address the affordable housing problem ? .

and is the lihtc efficient , or can it be improved ? .

despite the significance of the tax credit in housing finance markets , these questions are not definitively answered in economics literature .

this report , where possible , attempts to answer these questions .

where it is not possible to answer the policy questions , this report draws attention to the information , actions , or both , necessary to obtain the answers .

the principal conclusions of this report are as follows: the perceived lack of affordable housing , while of concern to policymakers , the press , and to some degree , the general public , is not necessarily caused by a housing - market failure .

there is insufficient empirical evidence to determine what is causing the affordable housing "crisis. .

the evidence is unclear that the lihtc actually helps to solve the affordable housing problem , and there is some evidence that it may actually crowd out ( replace ) other affordable housing development rather than increase the number of housing units .

the lihtc has a complicated system of delivery that may increase costs relative to the benefits it provides .

moreover , it may be less efficient than other affordable housing programs .

after discussing how affordable housing is defined , this report examines whether a housing - market failure exists , whether the lihtc program is efficient , and whether the lihtc is cost effective relative to other programs ; and concludes with a discussion of several policy options .

there is a growing consensus among policymakers and the general public that the nation faces a shortage of affordable housing , particularly rental housing .

the 2002 bipartisan , congressionally mandated millennial housing commission's final report confirmed and defined the shortage as a "crisis. .

the harvard joint center for housing studies' 2006 state of the nation's housing report identified housing affordability as one of the key challenges facing the nation .

but is the "affordability crisis" the result of a housing market failure , warranting government intervention in housing markets ? .

to answer that question , we start by defining the concept of affordable housing .

the term "affordable housing" is widely used and generally refers to housing of standard , decent quality , and that a family can afford without compromising their ability to meet other needs .

while higher - income families generally have a range of housing that , under this definition , is available to them , families with lower incomes have fewer options .

housing affordability for middle - and lower - income groups is generally measured in terms of cost burden .

generally , cost burden measures the actual percentage of household income spent on housing by renters .

households are considered cost - burdened if more than 30% of annual income is spent on housing .

when families are considered housing - cost burdened , they may have difficulty affording necessities such as food , clothing , transportation , and medical care .

in 2004 , 7.6 million renter households were considered cost burdened , with an additional 8.4 million renter households considered severely cost burdened — paying more than 50% of their income toward housing .

while some moderate - income renters experience severe rent burdens , low - income renters face the greatest burdens ; more than 86% of severely cost - burdened renters were in the bottom quintile of the income distribution .

economists report that the problem of severe rent burdens may be growing while the supply of low - cost rental units may be declining , creating an affordable housing shortage .

it is estimated that the inventory of affordable units — with inflation - adjusted rents of $400 or less , including utilities — declined by 1.2 million from 1993 to 2003 .

with losses of units due to repair , abandonment , or demolition , the shortage of affordable rentals available to low - income households is estimated at 5.4 million .

according to standard economic theory , an economy best satisfies the wants and needs of its participants if markets operate free from distortions such as taxes .

government intervention in housing markets , as in any market , may be justified on economic grounds if market failures exist .

market failures can occur when a market , left on its own , fails to allocate resources efficiently .

if a market failure exists and a subsidy remedies that failure , then there is economic justification for the subsidy based on efficiency .

if a market failure does not exist , then there is no economic justification for the subsidy based on efficiency .

there may , however , be justifications for government intervention based on other public - policy goals , such as ensuring a minimum level of housing consumption for all households or equalizing opportunities for housing consumption .

certain socially undesirable phenomena may be valid targets of public policy , such as pay inequality , poverty , lack of affordable housing , and inflation , but there is no consensus as to whether these problems meet the definition of economic inefficiency .

some economists argue that the lack of affordable housing is not a market failure to be corrected , but rather a result of increased demand being met with a slow supply response , which causes prices to rise .

if the lack of affordable housing is a supply - response problem , state and local land - use regulations may be contributing factors .

land - use restrictions and zoning laws are examples of government regulatory areas that can hinder the timeliness of supply responses to changes in demand .

another key factor potentially contributing to a lack of affordable housing , but one not categorized as a market failure , is the unwillingness of lenders to make loans to investors because of class or race bias , a form of discrimination often referred to as redlining .

where discrimination in lending occurs , capital subsidies for affordable housing might improve the allocation of capital .

if a market failure exists , the presence of externalities may be the culprit .

an externality , itself a type of market failure , exists when the activity of an individual directly affects , positively or negatively , the welfare of another , and that result , or consequence , is not incorporated in market prices .

economic theory suggests that there are externalities in housing - services markets because there are both private costs and benefits for individuals as well as social costs and benefits for the public at large .

high prices for housing in certain areas can increase housing prices in adjacent areas .

also , to the extent that housing structures , perhaps older ones , induce blight , there is an imposition of external costs on society .

these externalities of housing sometime serve as grounds for government intervention in such areas as neighborhood redevelopment and housing production .

yet , the few studies that have examined the lihtc's contribution to neighborhood quality have found only small effects , both negative and positive .

in some cases , the new construction of lihtc projects positively influenced the price of single - family homes in the immediate surrounding area .

in other cases , the lihtc projects negatively influenced the price of single - family homes .

the lack of affordable housing raises a host of important economic issues .

for example , to the extent that households spend disproportionate amounts of income on housing , other basic necessities might be neglected .

one recent report found that households devoting more than 50% of their income to housing paid an average of $175 for food and $35 for healthcare per month in 2003 .

in comparison , households spending less than 30% of their income on housing paid an average of $248 for food and $109 for healthcare monthly .

if health care spending , for instance , is insufficient for households , it could lead to poor health and well - being .

this outcome could create both private costs for the household and social costs for the community ( negative externalities ) , either through increased public subsidies for health care or increased disease and poor health for others .

yet , it can be argued that the negative externality experienced by households in the example above is not confined solely to the housing market .

in that case , the externality might be more appropriately viewed as a matter for the health care marketplace .

correcting market failures may not be the only reason for government intervention .

other reasons could include the desire to increase equality of outcomes ( to provide a minimum level of housing consumption by all members of society ) or to create equity of opportunity ( ensuring viable participation in housing markets by providing some minimum endowment of assets ) .

if housing subsidies , like the lihtc , contribute toward these outcomes , then the subsidies may be justified .

most economists , however , would argue that a demand - side subsidy , like housing vouchers , would be more appropriate than the lihtc ( a supply - side subsidy ) in satisfying this type of policy objective .

other economists argue that the supply of rental housing is insufficient to meet demand and thus supply - side subsidies are necessary policy tools to complement demand - side subsidies .

once the question justifying the lihtc is addressed , the next policy question that arises is does the lihtc address the affordable housing problem ? .

the next section of this report addresses this question .

even if the lihtc does add to the affordable housing stock , there are questions as to whether it is the most efficient system .

the lihtc involves a complicated subsidy mechanism that adds to the cost of the program relative to its benefits .

this section examines three areas in which the program can be examined for inefficiencies: ( 1 ) the complicated system of distributing tax credits , ( 2 ) the value of the credits themselves , and ( 3 ) the cost effectiveness of the lihtc relative to other housing programs .

the cost effectiveness of the lihtc program is typically examined in the context of housing - production programs as compared to housing - consumption programs .

subsidies that support the production of rental housing , like the lihtc , are project - based assistance programs , while subsidies that subsidize tenants' ability to pay rent ( consume housing ) are tenant - based assistance programs .

project - based programs are also referred to as supply programs , while tenant - based assistance programs are referred to as demand programs .

tenant - based assistance is most commonly available in the form of housing vouchers , particularly , the housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program , also referred to as the section 8 voucher program .

the economics literature provides mixed views about the relative merits of project - based and tenant - based housing assistance .

tenant - based assistance is promoted on the grounds that it allows residents freedom of choice for both housing and the neighborhood .

yet , some landlords do not accept vouchers and , where vacancy rates are low , voucher holders may face competition for units .

the value of vouchers rises and falls with market rents .

studies on the relative costs of housing programs have generally found that vouchers are less expensive and more cost - effective than production programs .

dipasquale , fricke , and garcia - diaz estimated that , in both metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas , the average total per - unit cost of each housing - production program exceeded the cost of providing a voucher for a unit of similar size .

their estimates range from 8% to as much as 44% difference in cost for units , depending on the number of bedrooms and the location .

for instance , lihtc costs were 19% more than costs of voucher units .

those costs were for metropolitan areas .

when the authors examined nonmetropolitan areas , the differentials rose .

compared to vouchers , lihtc production costs were 44% higher .

other studies have confirmed that the cost of production programs outweighs the cost of voucher programs .

one economist examined studies of housing assistance programs and found larger excess costs to be associated with housing production programs relative to voucher programs .

in particular , the author stated that , in the absence of distortions that lead to too little housing construction , subsidies that result in the construction of additional housing will inevitably produce dwellings whose construction costs exceed their market values .

as the lihtc program was examined , the author found that since the tax credit subsidizes initial development of projects but not operating inputs , profit - maximizing firms will invest more in capital resources than other inputs , such as operating expenses and reserves for future maintenance .

because the lihtc program provides subsidies to selected private suppliers ( approximately 30% of applicants ) , the author argues , the excess demand from private suppliers infers higher returns are available with tax credit projects than without .

that developers tend to reserve 100% of housing units in a project for low - income households , rather than only meeting the minimum requirement ( typically 40% ) also suggests , according to the author , that larger profits can be made .

the government accountability office ( gao ) also estimated the costs of housing assistance programs .

gao found that first year total costs of lihtc units were about 32% greater than housing vouchers , and the total federal cost for lihtc units was 50% greater than vouchers .

over the life of the housing units studied , the total cost of tax credit units was 16% greater than the cost of vouchers and the federal cost of tax credit units was 19% greater than for vouchers .

aside from comparisons of the costs of tax credit units to other programs , the total costs of the lihtc program have been criticized because lihtc projects are dependent on additional subsidies in order to be viable .

many lihtc projects rely on debt financing from private and government lenders , state - issued tax credits , and other federal housing assistance programs .

additionally , tenants of lihtc are often housing voucher recipients , further subsidizing the lihtc project .

estimates of the average subsidy per lihtc unit have been as high as 96% of total development costs .

advocates of the lihtc program , however , argue that the program is cost effective and that deep subsidies for projects are required because of the demands of the affordable housing market , not the lihtc program .

this report has raised issues for policymakers to consider .

first , it is unclear whether the lack of affordable housing is caused by a market failure .

second , it is difficult to assess the question given the problems with the existing definition of affordable housing as well as the lack of available information about the stock of low - cost housing .

third , the question of whether the lihtc adds to the housing stock is an unresolved empirical question .

this report concludes with comments about selected policy options available to the congress .

congress may not alter the lihtc program .

as a tax expenditure , the program does not require an appropriation or reauthorization .

if the program remains unaltered , it would continue , essentially as an entitlement program .

the only change under this option is that the allocation amounts to states may increase , since they are adjusted for inflation annually .

alternatively , congress might modify the lihtc program .

in the 109 th congress there were several proposals for administrative change which included renaming the credit , changing the income restrictions for tenants , and increasing the amount of the credit available to states .

more recently , some attention has focused on the issue of examining the rules of the lihtc program to determine where its compatibility with other housing - finance programs can be increased .

other policy suggestions have included eliminating floating tax credit rates and fixing them at the 9% and 4% amounts to eliminate investment uncertainty and to reduce administrative costs .

policymakers have also discussed whether the lihtc program could be modified to target affordable housing production for households with very - low income .

another option is to repeal the lihtc program .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) examined this option early in 2005 , suggesting that the program could be phased out by repealing tax credits for new projects and allowing existing credits to expire .

the cbo report estimated that the revenue gain from this option could be as much as $4 billion between 2006 and 2010 .

proponents of this option argue that , since housing vouchers provide housing assistance to individuals at a lower cost than the lihtc , then the revenue gain from repealing the lihtc could be applied to the housing voucher program .

opponents of this option argue that the existing supply of affordable housing is insufficient to satisfy the demands of those with housing vouchers and thus the lihtc is necessary .

appendix a .

calculation of the value of the lihtc as described in the body of the report , the annual lihtc rate is set by the treasury department ( as required by statute ) so that the discounted present value of the 10-year stream of credits is 70% of the project's cost .

the discount rate used in the treasury's calculation is the after - tax average of mid - and long - term applicable federal interest rates ; the assumed tax rate is 28% .

in other words pv credits = 70% q where q is the cost of the project .

using discrete discounting , this equation translates to where k is the lihtc rate and r is the treasury's discount rate .

the treasury department solves for k to determine the statutory rate for the 9% credit for the month: the treasury department also solves for k to determine the statutory rate for the 4% credit for the month: appendix b .

calculation of the discount rate of the investor the investor's discount rate , d , is the rate of return the investor must earn , after inflation and paying its taxes , in order to attract funds from savers .

it is where     i = the nominal interest rate u = the marginal tax rate of the investor p = the rate of inflation r = the risk premium for equity this equation assumes investors have a ratio of one - third debt financing and two - thirds equity financing , where debt financing is represented by and equity financing is represented by the example in table 1 stated a discount rate for the investor of 4.21% .

this assumes a nominal interest rate of 5.6% , a marginal tax rate of 35% , a 3.4% rate of inflation , and a risk premium for equity of 4% .

appendix c. calculation of the user cost of capital the user cost of capital , c , is the minimum rate of return a corporation requires on an investment , before taxes , to break even and can be represented in the following manner: where     r = the investor's real discount rate d = the rate of economic depreciation u = the statutory corporate tax rate z = the present value of depreciation the user cost of capital , c , before the incorporation of the lihtc , is 7.50% given the investor's real discount rate of 4.21% , a 1.50% rate of economic depreciation , a statutory corporate tax rate of 35% , and a 41.87% present value of depreciation .

when tax credits are added to the equation , user cost becomes the user cost of capital is reduced by tax credits , with the largest reduction caused by the lihtc at 79.1% as compared to an 11.7% reduction caused by itc and 24% reduction caused by the hrtc .

