pursuant to article 36 of the vienna convention on consular relations ( vccr ) , when a foreign national of a signatory state is arrested or otherwise detained , appropriate authorities within the receiving signatory state must inform him "without delay" of his right to have his consulate notified .

in the consolidated cases of moises sanchez - llamas v. oregon and bustillo v. johnson , decided on june 28 , 2006 , the supreme court considered arguments as to what judicial remedy , if any , is available to foreign nationals in u.s. criminal proceedings who are not provided requisite consular information .

the vccr is a multilateral agreement codifying consular practices which have traditionally been governed by custom and bilateral agreements between nations .

the vccr enumerates basic legal rights and duties of signatory states relating to , inter alia , the conduct of consular relations and the privileges and immunities accorded to consular officers and offices .

the united states ratified the vccr in 1969 , and most countries are parties to the agreement .

when the united states became a party to the vccr , it also chose to become a party to the vccr's optional protocol concerning the compulsory settlement of disputes ( optional protocol ) .

parties to the optional protocol agree to accept the jurisdiction of the international court of justice ( icj ) to resolve disputes arising between nations with respect to the vccr .

on march 7 , 2005 , the united states withdrew from the optional protocol .

as a result , the icj's jurisdiction over vccr claims is no longer recognized by the united states .

on november 2 , 2005 , the supreme court granted certiorari in two cases concerning article 36 violations , moises sanchez - llamas v. oregon and bustillo v. johnson .

the court consolidated these cases for argument .

the cases involved review of state convictions of two foreign nationals who were not promptly informed of their ability under vccr article 36 to have their consul notified of their arrest .

this was not the first instance where the court was asked to adjudicate matters relating to the enforcement of vccr article 36 .

most notably , in the 1998 per curium opinion issued in the case of breard v. greene , the court concluded that , among other things , article 36 did not alter or create an exception to traditional u.s. procedural default rules in cases where a foreign national was not provided with requisite consular information .

nevertheless , more recent legal developments raised questions regarding the continuing precedential value of breard .

acting pursuant to the optional protocol , germany and mexico brought claims before the icj against the united states in 1999 and 2003 , respectively , for alleged article 36 violations .

in the lagrand case ( federal republic of germany v. united states ) , the icj concluded , inter alia , that ( 1 ) article 36 provides covered individuals with a right to consular notification , and a violation of that right may require review and reconsideration of a foreign national's sentence and conviction in certain instances ; and ( 2 ) the application of procedural default rules to bar the raising of article 36 claims , at least in certain instances , prevents "full effect" from being given to the purposes for which the rights accorded under article 36 were intended .

subsequently in the case of avena and other mexican nationals ( mexico v. united states of america ) , the icj reaffirmed lagrand 's interpretation of u.s. obligations under vccr article 36 .

at the time that avena was decided , the united states was still a party to the vccr's optional protocol , and accordingly recognized the icj as having jurisdiction to settle disputes between protocol parties regarding the interpretation and application of the vccr .

although the united states withdrew from the optional protocol several months prior to the u.s. supreme court granting certiorari in sanchez - llamas and bustillo , there was some question as to whether the icj's decisions in lagrand and avena would compel or persuade the court to overrule its earlier decision in breard .

despite the court's holdings in the consolidated cases of sanchez - llamas and bustillo , some issues related to interpretation and application of vccr article 36 remain unresolved .

as mentioned previously , the issue of whether the vccr confers an individually enforceable right has not been decided by the court .

the question of whether such a right is conferred by article 36 , and what judicial remedy , if any , is available for a violation of that right , will likely be the subject of continued litigation .

perhaps the most notable unresolved issue concerns u.s. implementation of the icj's ruling in avena with respect to the 51 mexican nationals at issue in that case .

as previously mentioned , in avena the icj ruled that the united states failed to comply with its obligations owed to mexico and its foreign nationals under the vccr .

it further instructed the united states to review and reconsider the convictions and sentences of named mexican foreign nationals awaiting execution who were denied requisite consular information owed under vccr article 36 .

in 2004 , the supreme court granted certiorari in the case of medellin v. dretke , in which it would have likely ruled on the enforceablity of avena by u.s. courts .

petitioner medillin , one of the mexican nationals named in the avena case , argued , among other things , that his conviction by a texas court should be reconsidered in light of the icj's ruling , despite such reconsideration being barred by texas's procedural default rules .

prior to the supreme court reaching a decision on this issue , president bush issued a memorandum instructing state courts to give effect to the avena decision in accordance with general principles of comity , in cases filed by the mexican nationals addressed in that decision .

the memorandum did not instruct state courts to reconsider article 36 claims by persons who were not named in avena .

days later , the united states withdrew from the optional protocol .

the supreme court subsequently dismissed its writ of certioriari in medellin as improvidently granted , as it was no longer clear that medellin had exhausted his remedies at the texas state level in light of the president's memorandum .

the court in sanchez - llamas cites the presidential memorandum only once , to indicate that the united states "has agreed to 'discharge its international obligations' in having state courts give effect to the decision in avena , [but] it has not taken the view that the icj's interpretation of article 36 is binding on our courts. .

accordingly , the issue of whether the president may order state courts to provide a remedy for vccr violations remains unresolved .

whether the president may instruct state courts to implement an icj order raises novel constitutional questions concerning federalism and the scope of the executive's foreign affairs power .

the supreme court has found that executive agreements — those entered into by the executive branch that are not submitted to the senate for its advice and consent — may , at least in certain areas , preempt inconsistent state laws .

most recently in the case of american insurance association v. garamendi , the supreme court held in a 5-4 opinion that a california law requiring companies to disclose holocaust - era insurance policies sold in europe was preempted , as it conflicted with the president's foreign policy objectives , reflected in various executive agreements , concerning the settlement of claims involving insurance policies confiscated by nazi germany .

however , the president's memorandum ordering state courts to implement the icj's order is not an executive agreement , and a reviewing court might therefore treat it differently .

further , even if state procedural default rules may be preempted to the extent that they conflict with a president's foreign policy objectives relating to the vccr , it is unclear whether the president has the constitutional authority to direct state courts to adopt measures to facilitate those foreign policy objectives .

although the supreme court has found in several cases that state law is preempted to the extent that it conflicts with international agreements or u.s. foreign policy objectives , these cases have not involved situations in which the federal government instructed state and local institutions to take affirmative steps to advance u.s. foreign policy interests , as is arguably the case with the president's memorandum instructing state courts to give effect to the avena decision ( i.e .

 , requiring state courts to reconsider the convictions and sentences of persons who were not provided requisite consular notification information ) .

accordingly , the extent to which the tenth amendment restricts the scope of the federal government's treaty and foreign affairs powers remains unclear .

on november , 15 , 2006 , the texas criminal court of appeals held in the case of ex parte medellin that neither avena nor the president's memorandum preempted state procedural default rules , and it rejected medellin's petition for habeas relief .

citing the supreme court's ruling in sanchez - llamas , the texas state court held that the icj's ruling in avena was not binding federal law , and therefore did not preempt texas's procedural bar .

the lead opinion also found that the president's memorandum could not be sustained under either his express or implied constitutional powers or through any power granted by congress and held that the memorandum violated the separation of powers doctrine by intruding into the domain of the judiciary .

the court suggested that texas's procedural bar might have been preempted by an executive agreement between mexico and the united states permitting reconsideration of the sentences of mexican nationals by u.s. courts , even though state law could not be preempted via unilateral action by the president to achieve a settlement .

though the majority opinion was joined by all nine members of the texas court , a concurring opinion would have also rejected the legal authority of the president's memorandum on federalism grounds , while another would have held that the memorandum did not constitute federal law and was therefore not binding on state courts .

the court's decision is potentially subject to appeal to the u.s. supreme court .

