in 2006 and early 2007 , congress considered a number of issues relating to the andean counterdrug initiative , the u.s. assistance program to help colombia and its neighbors address drug trafficking and economic development issues .

these issues included ongoing concerns with the effectiveness of the program , funding levels , human rights , and the future of the program .

the region has been viewed as particularly important because it produces virtually all of the world's cocaine and increasing amounts of high quality heroin .

it is estimated that 90% of the cocaine coming to the united states originates in , or passes through , colombia .

moreover , the stability of colombia and the region is threatened by colombia's longstanding leftist guerrilla insurgency and rightist paramilitary groups , which are believed to be largely funded by their participation in illegal narcotics production and trafficking .

the andean counterdrug initiative is the primary u.s. program that supports plan colombia , a six year plan developed in 1999 by president andres pastrana ( 1998-2002 ) of colombia , and continued by current president alvaro uribe .

the six - year plan has ostensibly ended , although the same level and types of activities are continuing .

the colombian government has reportedly developed a follow - on plan , plan colombia consolidation phase ( pccp ) , that would include support for the demobilization of rightist paramilitary groups .

although aci is the primary program , it is not the only one supporting counternarcotics and economic development in the andean region .

countries in the region also receive foreign military financing ( fmf ) and international military education and training ( imet ) .

the department of defense supports drug interdiction operations from its own counternarcotics account .

in addition , the united states provides economic development aid from development assistance ( da ) , child survival and health ( csh ) , and economic support funds ( esf ) accounts .

these programs are not considered part of the andean counterdrug initiative , although they support many programs which are tangentially related , such as poverty reduction and infrastructure improvements .

the andean counterdrug initiative was designed to provide assistance to seven countries in the broadly defined andean region: bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , and venezuela .

the region is important to u.s. drug policy because it includes three major drug producing countries ( colombia , bolivia , and peru ) where virtually all the world's cocaine and significant quantities of high quality heroin destined for the united states are produced .

u.s. objectives for the aci program are to eliminate the cultivation and production of cocaine and opium , build law enforcement infrastructure , arrest and prosecute traffickers , and seize their assets .

the region also includes two major oil producing countries ( venezuela and ecuador ) , members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , which supply significant quantities of oil to the united states .

for the five traditional andean countries ( colombia , venezuela , ecuador , peru , and bolivia ) , the andes mountain range that runs through south america poses geographical obstacles to intra - state and inter - state integration , even though the countries are linked together in the andean community economic integration pact .

u.s. support for plan colombia began in 2000 , when congress passed legislation providing $1.3 billion in interdiction and development assistance ( p.l .

106-246 ) for colombia and six regional neighbors .

funding for aci from fy2000 through fy2007 totals about $5.7 billion .

aci is managed by the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) .

some aci funds are transferred to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) for alternative development programs .

aci funds are divided between programs that support eradication or interdiction efforts and those focused on alternative crop development and democratic institution building .

on the interdiction side , programs train and support national police and military forces , provide communications and intelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host country aerial eradication aircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities .

on the alternative development side , funds support development programs in coca growing areas , including infrastructure development , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops .

they also support programs assisting internally displaced persons , promoting the rule of law , and expanding judicial capabilities .

aci also funds the air bridge denial program that is currently operational in colombia , and temporarily suspended in peru , after an accidental shooting down of a civilian aircraft carrying u.s. missionaries in 2001 .

after the incident , in which two americans died , the program in both countries was suspended until enhanced safeguards were developed .

the program in colombia resumed in august 2003 .

the program supports an aircraft fleet , pilot training , and logistical and intelligence support .

the program tracks aircraft suspected of being involved in drug trafficking , and forces them to land for inspection .

if an aircraft is repeatedly unresponsive , it may be shot down , at the direction of the commander of the colombian air force .

the resumption of a program in peru is still pending the development of safety enhancements .

additional funding for the andean region is provided through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training ( imet ) program , both managed by the state department .

recipients are subject to an aid cutoff if they have not signed so - called article 98 agreements with the united states .

such agreements , referring to article 98 of the rome treaty on the international criminal court , prevent the international criminal court from proceeding with a request for the surrender of u.s. personnel present in the country .

these agreements are required under the american services members protection act of 2002 , that was incorporated as title ii of h.r .

4775 , the fy2002 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

107-206 ) .

the president may waive the law if it is in the national interest .

colombia , the major recipient of military assistance in latin america , has signed an agreement .

others , such as bolivia , brazil , ecuador , peru , and venezuela , have not signed an agreement , or have not ratified such an agreement , and could see their assistance withheld .

counternarcotics funds are not affected .

in addition to state department programs , the defense department has a counternarcotics account for worldwide programs involving interdiction , training , equipment , and intelligence sharing .

in the western hemisphere , these programs are managed by the u.s. army southern command .

since first approving expanded assistance to colombia for counternarcotics programs in 2000 , congress has included a number of conditions on u.s. assistance in both authorization and appropriations legislation .

the most recently enacted funding legislation is the fy2007 foreign operations appropriations act , as included in the revised continuing appropriations resolution ( h.j.res .

20 , p.l .

110-5 ) .

the fy2007 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

5122 , p.l .

109-364 ) also included provisions relating to colombia .

the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1815 , p.l .

109-163 ) authorized funding for department of defense drug interdiction activities .

on june 28 , 2005 , the house passed h.r .

3057 ( h.rept .

109-152 ) fully funding the aci at $734.5 million .

the senate passed h.r .

3057 on july 20 , 2005 ( s.rept .

109-96 ) also fully funding the aci .

both house and senate versions included conditions on assistance , similar to current law , regarding human rights , expanded authority for a unified campaign , a prohibition on combat , and the use of u.s. - provided helicopters .

the house passed the conference report ( h.rept .

109-265 ) on november 4 , 2005 , and the senate followed suit on november 10 .

the president signed it into law on november 14 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-102 ) .

the final agreement fully funded the aci at $734.5 million , but provided a different mix on how that money should be spent than did either the house or senate bills .

the conference report made aci funds available until september 30 , 2008 .

it adopted language with regard to demobilization , and appropriated $20 million to assist colombia with the demobilization of rightist paramilitary groups .

the conference report removed a senate provision requiring the secretary of state to consult with the u.n. high commissioner for human rights in colombia before making a certification that colombia is meeting human rights conditions .

instead , the conference report stated the expectation that the secretary will consider the opinion of the high commissioner and the committees on appropriations prior to making the certification .

it also increased funding for alternative development and rule of law programs in colombia from $149.76 million , as provided by the senate , to $158.6 million .

the house international relations committee reported h.r .

2601 , the foreign relations authorization act , with a provision making u.s. assistance to colombia contingent on a certification from the secretary of state that colombia has a workable framework in place for the demobilization and dismantling of former combatants , and that colombia is cooperating with the united states on extradition requests .

the bill also calls for a report from the secretary of state that details tax code enforcement in colombia .

in floor action , the house approved a burton amendment to authorize the transfer of two tactical , unpressurized marine patrol aircraft for use by the colombian navy for interdiction purposes .

the bill passed the house on july 20 , 2005 .

the senate had under consideration its version of the foreign relations authorization bill , s. 600 .

the bill authorizes funding for aci and includes a number of conditions on assistance consistent with current law .

the bill authorized a unified campaign against narcotics trafficking and terrorist activities ; maintains the existing cap on military and civilian personnel allowed to be stationed in colombia ; prohibits u.s. military and civilian personnel from participating in combat operations ; and maintains reporting requirements relating to human rights and the conduct of u.s. operations .

both the house and senate approved the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1815 ) on december 19 , 2005 , which was signed by the president on january 6 , 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) .

the law authorized $901.7 million for dod - wide global drug interdiction activities .

unlike the fy2005 authorization , it did not include provisions relating to colombia or the andean counterdrug initiative .

