the u.s. - japan alliance , forged in the u.s. occupation of japan after its defeat in world war ii , provides a platform for u.s. military readiness in asia .

under the treaty of mutual cooperation and security , about 50,000 u.s. troops are stationed in japan .

the united states has the exclusive use of 85 facilities throughout the archipelago , providing the major u.s. forward logistics base in the asia - pacific region ; okinawa hosts 33 of the facilities .

the u.s. - japan alliance was originally constructed as a fundamentally asymmetric arrangement — japan hosts u.s. military bases in exchange for a one - sided security guarantee — but this partnership has shifted toward more equality .

 ( see the appendix for historical background. ) .

japan boasts its own sophisticated defense assets and the two militaries have improved their bilateral capabilities as a combined force .

the phrase "u.s. - japan alliance" can describe a wide range of cooperative activities and programs , but this report focuses on the political and military partnership between the united states and japan .

for information and analysis on the broader relationship , see crs report rl33436 , japan - u.s. relations: issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the u.s. - japan alliance has endured several geopolitical transitions , at times flourishing and at other moments seeming adrift .

after the collapse of the soviet union , the organizing principles of the cold war became obsolete , forcing the united states and japan to adjust the alliance .

the shock of the terrorist attacks on the united states in september 2001 ushered in a period of rejuvenated military ties , raising expectations that japan would move toward a more forward - leaning defense posture and shed the pacifist limitations that have at times frustrated u.s. defense officials .

however , the partnership struggled to sustain itself politically in the late 2000s ; a softening of u.s. policy toward north korea by the george w. bush administration dismayed tokyo , and the stalled implementation of a base relocation on okinawa disappointed washington .

after the democratic party of japan ( dpj ) came to power in september 2009 , tokyo hinted that it might seek a more asia - centric policy and resisted fulfilling the 1996 agreement to relocate the futenma base in okinawa .

a series of provocations by north korea and increasingly aggressive maritime operations by china since 2010 appeared to have set the relationship back on course .

from 2007 to 2012 , unstable leadership and political paralysis in tokyo slowed some bilateral security initiatives , but ultimately the turmoil that plagued japanese politics may have reinforced japan's commitment to the alliance .

in the end , both the left - leaning dpj and the conservative liberal democratic party ( ldp ) reaffirmed the centrality of the partnership with the united states .

the revision of the bilateral defense guidelines , which provide a framework for defense cooperation , in 2015 showed the enduring strength of the alliance and a vision for enhanced cooperation in the future .

despite broad and increasing strategic alignment , both the united states and japan face constraints on their ability to enhance the alliance .

fiscal conditions and sequestration - induced cuts put pressure on defense budgets .

hosting u.s. troops puts strain on japanese communities , particularly in okinawa .

despite prime minister abe's drive to upgrade japan's security capabilities , it remains unclear whether the japanese public has the appetite to shift japan's fundamental post - war military posture .

massive protests against the security legislation promoted by the abe administration in 2015 indicated the depth of opposition to even a moderate expansion of japan's military capabilities .

budgetary , legal , normative , and political constraints on japan's military activities remain .

as some analysts point out , japan still places tighter restrictions on its use of military force than other u.s. allies do , including the republic of korea , canada , and european nations .

meanwhile , china has continued to increase its defense budget and modernize its military .

emboldened by its own economic growth and a perception of u.s. decline , beijing has asserted itself more forcefully in diplomatic and military arenas , including direct challenges to japan's territorial rights over a set of islets in the east china sea .

as the united states extracted itself from wars in the middle east in 2011 , washington's attention turned more toward the asia - pacific region .

on the economic front , the united states is seeking to build trade and strategic connections to the asia - pacific through the proposed 12-country trans - pacific partnership free trade agreement .

the obama administration's "rebalance" to the pacific was seen by many as a reaction to china's rise , despite insistence by u.s. leaders that the "pivot" is not a containment policy .

the u.s. - japan alliance , missing a strategic anchor since the end of the cold war , may have found a new guiding rationale in shaping the environment for china's rise .

congress has expressed considerable interest in the u.s. - japan alliance for a range of reasons .

some members of congress have focused on strategic issues , particularly china's military expansion into maritime and airspace domains , leading to congressional resolutions and letters that largely support japan's position in territorial disputes .

section 1258 of the fy2015 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

113-291 ) expressed the sense of congress welcoming japan's recent security reforms , including collective self - defense , and reaffirming the u.s. commitment to defend territories under the administration of japan .

many of the concerns from members of congress center on the costs associated with the alliance , particularly the price tag on the realignment of marines from okinawa to guam .

a 2013 senate armed services committee inquiry into the cost of the u.s. overseas military presence once again raised the issue of appropriate cost - sharing with japan .

prime minister abe's commitment to defense reform has dovetailed effectively with the obama administration's drive to upgrade bilateral alliances as party of the "strategic rebalancing" to the asia - pacific region .

abe has shown a willingness to push for changes to japan's security posture — at times with significant political risk — that u.s. officials have encouraged privately for decades .

repeated election victories for his party ( the ldp ) , the lack of challengers for leadership of his party , and the disarray of the opposition gave him the political space to advance his long - standing agenda of increasing the flexibility and capabilities of the japanese military .

although some of abe's far - reaching aims , including amending article 9 of japan's constitution , appear to be out of grasp in the near term , he has accelerated japan's incremental pattern of adopting more muscular security practices over the past several years .

specifically , abe has adjusted japan's interpretation of its constitution to allow for the exercise of the right of collective self - defense , passed a package of security legislation that provides a legal framework for the new interpretation , slightly increased japan's defense budget , relaxed japan's restrictions on arms exports , established a national security council to facilitate decisionmaking on foreign policy , passed a "state secrets" bill that allows for more intelligence - sharing with the united states , and committed political capital and resources to advance the u.s. - japan agreement to relocate a controversial u.s. marine corps airbase in okinawa .

 ( see sections below for details. ) .

many of these initiatives still face considerable obstacles , but the momentum has created new energy in the alliance .

in april 2015 , the allies agreed upon a revision of the bilateral defense guidelines , the first such update since 1997 .

the agreement was a centerpiece of prime minister abe's summit with president obama that same month , after which abe addressed a joint meeting of congress , a first for a japanese prime minister .

the new guidelines deepen alliance cooperation in a way that more intricately intertwines u.s. and japanese security , making it difficult to avoid involvement in each other's military engagements .

the asymmetric arrangement of the u.s. - japan alliance has moved toward a more balanced security partnership in the 21 st century .

unlike 25 years ago , the japan self - defense forces ( sdf ; effectively , japan's military ) are now active in overseas missions , including efforts in the 2000s to support u.s. - led coalition operations in afghanistan and the reconstruction of iraq .

japanese military contributions to global operations like counter - piracy patrols relieve some of the burden on the u.s. military to manage diverse security challenges .

advances in sdf capabilities give japan a potent deterrent force that complements the capabilities of u.s. forces , for example in anti - submarine warfare .

due to the co - location of u.s. and japanese command facilities in recent years , coordination and communication have become more integrated .

the united states and japan have been steadily enhancing bilateral cooperation in many aspects of the alliance , such as ballistic missile defense , cybersecurity , and military use of space .

as japan sheds its self - imposed restrictions on the use of military force ( in particular the constraints on collective self - defense ) and the two countries implement their revised bilateral defense guidelines , the opportunities for the u.s. and japanese militaries to operate as a combined force will grow .

alongside these alliance improvements , japan continues to pay nearly $2 billion per year to defray the cost of stationing u.s. forces in japan .

in 2015 , japan and the united states agreed to maintain japan's host nation support at approximately the same level for the next five years .

the united states and japan face practical , policy , and strategic challenges to deepening their defense partnership .

at the broadest strategic level , the two allies share perceptions of the asia - pacific security environment , including on the threats of north korea's nuclear weapons program and some aspects of china's military modernization ; the value of advancing defense exercises and exchanges with south korea , australia , and india ; and the goal of developing stronger security partnerships with southeast asian countries , particularly the philippines and vietnam .

there are , however , divergences that could hamper further integration of the alliance .

the overlap in views of china is not complete .

japanese media and officials portray chinese military activities near japanese territory in hostile terms , whereas u.s. officials are not inclined to criticize china's actions that are considered in line with international laws and norms .

although u.s. defense officials are wary of china's increasingly assertive activities in the maritime domain , washington also is cognizant of entrapment risks ( based on its treaty commitment to defend japan ) and does not want to escalate the situation by provoking beijing .

the obama administration has been clear that it wants to work cooperatively with china on a number of global issues , including climate change and nuclear non - proliferation .

the united states also has much broader security interests than japan in every region of the world , which affects u.s. strategy in asia .

changes in the east asian security landscape have shaped japan's defense approach and apparatus .

north korea's belligerent rhetoric and repeated ballistic missile tests have heightened the sense of threat in japan .

china's military advances and increasingly bold maritime activities have also exacerbated japan's sense of vulnerability , particularly since confrontation over the disputed senkaku / diaoyu islets in the east china sea began to escalate in late 2010 .

aside from such threats , japan has also developed defense partnerships in the region , often working through the u.s. - japan alliance .

the strong ties and habits of cooperation between the american and japanese defense establishments complement existing and emerging security partnerships .

the april 2015 joint statement released by the u.s .

secretaries of state and defense and their japanese counterparts ( the so - called 2+2 meeting ) praised progress in developing trilateral and multilateral cooperation , specifically with australia , the republic of korea , and association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) countries .

the u.s. - japan alliance has been a vehicle for enhancing security ties with southeast asian countries , especially since maritime territorial disputes in the east and south china seas began to intensify in the late 2000s .

some analysts see these bilateral and multilateral links among u.s. allies and partners as beneficial to u.s. security interests by both enhancing deterrence and perhaps lessening the sense of direct rivalry with potential adversaries .

the two main mechanisms for u.s. - japan regional security cooperation are high - level trilateral dialogues and multilateral military exercises .

there is no comprehensive multilateral institution for managing security problems in the asia - pacific , although young forums such as the asean regional forum , the asean defense ministers meeting plus , and the east asia summit have shown potential in this regard .

therefore , the established trilateral dialogues between u.s. allies are an important mechanism for coordinating regional security activities .

training exercises that allow the militaries of asia - pacific nations to interact and cooperate are another means to improve trust and transparency .

the united states and japan have participated in multilateral exercises with australia , india , mongolia , the philippines , singapore , south korea , thailand , vietnam , and several other countries in recent years , indicating the breadth of these activities .

a complicating factor for u.s. defense officials is the dissonance between tokyo and seoul that thwarts robust trilateral defense cooperation .

japan - south korea relations were particularly poor from 2012 until 2015 .

although the two countries have begun to overcome some of their mutual antipathy , they lack formal security agreements to establish more effective defense cooperation .

without cooperation among its allies , the united states may find itself less able to respond to north korean nuclear and missile threats and to influence china's behavior .

although the u.s. "strategic rebalancing" to the asia - pacific region in many ways makes japan more central to u.s. foreign policy , the renewed attention to the region may also open up new defense partnerships that could displace elements of japan's strategic importance .

the united states has pursued new basing arrangements with countries in southeast asia that could host rotations of troops or other assets: singapore , the philippines , australia , and malaysia have , to varying degrees , allowed or indicated a willingness to provide expanded access to the united states , although the vast majority of u.s. military assets in asia will remain in japan and south korea for the foreseeable future .

the u.s. - japan alliance is built on a foundation of bilateral agreements that define the scope and form of security cooperation .

the 1960 mutual defense treaty is the bedrock of the alliance , covering the basic rights and responsibilities of each party , and the accompanying 1960 status of forces agreement governs the treatment of u.s. defense personnel stationed in japan .

the bilateral defense guidelines , first codified in 1978 and then updated in 1997 and 2015 , provide the policy guidance to direct alliance cooperation .

the guidelines outline how the u.s. and japanese militaries will interact in peacetime and in war as the basic parameters for defense cooperation based on a division of labor .

the u.s. - japan dialogue on the roles , missions , and capabilities ( rmc ) of the two militaries provides more concrete directives deriving from the policy guidelines .

within that policy framework of bilateral agreements , tokyo and washington chart the course for alliance cooperation at regular meetings of the cabinet - level security consultative committee ( scc ) .

composed of the u.s .

secretaries of defense and state and their japanese counterparts , and thus known as the "2+2" , the scc meets roughly annually and issues joint statements that reflect present alliance concerns and provide concrete guidance for the near term .

some scc meetings have been more far - reaching , elaborating on alliance priorities and common strategic objectives .

due to the legacy of the u.s. occupation and the island's key strategic location , okinawa hosts a disproportionate share of the u.s. military presence in japan .

about 40% of all facilities used by u.s .

forces japan ( usfj ) and half of usfj military personnel are located in the prefecture , which comprises less than 1% of japan's total land area .

the attitudes of native okinawans toward u.s. military bases are generally characterized as negative , reflecting a tumultuous history and complex relationships with "mainland" japan and with the united states .

because of these widespread concerns among okinawans , the sustainability of the u.s. military presence in okinawa remains a challenge for the alliance .

for more information and analysis , see crs report r42645 , the u.s. military presence in okinawa and the futenma base controversy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

in the last days of 2013 , the united states and japan cleared an important political hurdle in their long - delayed plan to relocate a major u.s. military base on the island of okinawa .

hirokazu nakaima , then - governor of okinawa , approved construction of an offshore landfill necessary to build the replacement facility .

this new facility , located on the shoreline of camp schwab in the sparsely populated henoko area of nago city , would replace the functions of marine corps air station ( mcas ) futenma , located in the center of a crowded town in southern okinawa .

the encroachment of residential areas around the futenma base over decades has raised the risks of a fatal aircraft accident , which could create a major backlash on okinawa and threaten to disrupt the alliance .

nakaima's approval of the landfill permit gave hope to washington and tokyo that , after decades of delay , they could consummate their agreement to return the land occupied by mcas futenma to local authorities , while retaining a similar level of military capability on okinawa .

a u.s. - japan joint planning document in april 2013 indicated that the new base at henoko would be completed no earlier than 2022 .

alongside the relocation of mcas futenma , the marine corps realignment plans calls for about 9,000 marines and their dependents to be transferred from okinawa to locations outside of japan: to guam , australia ( on a rotational basis ) , hawaii , and potentially the continental united states .

u.s. defense officials described the realignment as in line with their goal of making u.s. force posture in asia "more geographically distributed , operationally resilient , and politically sustainable. .

concern about the ballooning costs of construction on guam and uncertainty about the future u.s. force posture in the asia - pacific region led congress in 2011 to prohibit the department of defense ( dod ) from obligating authorized funds , as well as funds provided by the japanese government for military construction , to implement the planned realignment of marine corps forces .

the national defense authorization acts ( ndaas ) for fy2012 , fy2013 , and fy2014 sustained this freeze on realignment - related spending with certain small exceptions , until dod in 2014 provided more concrete plans for the marine corps footprint on guam .

the fy2015 ndaa allows dod to proceed with its planned military construction for the realignment on guam , including the expenditure of japanese government funds allocated for that purpose .

although challenges remain , especially those related to civilian infrastructure on guam , congress's removal of previous restrictions on military construction could facilitate the marine corps realignment and the reduction of the u.s. military presence on okinawa .

despite the decision by nakaima , most okinawans oppose the construction of a new u.s. base for a mix of political , environmental , and quality - of - life reasons .

politicians opposed to the futenma relocation have won nearly all recent elections and hold key positions: governor of okinawa , mayor of nago city , all four okinawan districts in the lower house of the diet , and the okinawan seat in the upper house .

in october 2015 , current okinawa governor takeshi onaga revoked the landfill permit issued by his predecessor , setting the stage for a protracted legal battle with the japanese central government .

observers believe that it is likely that the central government eventually will be able to override governor onaga's objections , but the administrative and legal processes could create significant delays for the project and dredge up doubts about the viability of the plan .

okinawan anti - base civic groups have ramped up their protest activities recently , and some groups may take extreme measures to prevent construction of the facility at henoko .

the abe administration , having invested significant time and money in gaining nakaima's consent , will likely need to invest additional political capital to ensure that the base construction proceeds without significant delays and without further alienating the okinawan public .

failure to implement the futenma relocation could solidify an impression among some american observers that the japanese political system struggles to follow through with difficult tasks .

on the other hand , the risk remains that heavy - handed actions by tokyo or washington could lead to more intense anti - base protests .

since the end of the cold war , japanese defense policy has become more assertive , flexible , and realistic as a result of the changing security environment , enabled by gradual shifts in public opinion .

although some policy changes were sudden and unexpected , the long - run direction of movement has consistently been toward a more capable sdf and deeper cooperation with the u.s. military .

some of the main causes of this evolution are a growing sense of insecurity among japanese elites ; the gradual erosion of anti - militarist norms ; positive experiences of sdf participation in international security and ha / dr missions ; strong , conservative political leaders focused on defense policies ; and mutual japanese and american desire to share the burden of maintaining regional security and stability .

the defense reforms initiated by the abe administration in 2013-2015 have encouraged japanese officials to be less cautious and more proactive in developing and carrying out japan's security policies .

during the cold war , japanese defense posture was based on resisting a soviet invasion from the north .

the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 removed the basic logic of this position , but japan's static defense posture was slow to evolve during the 1990s .

 ( see the appendix for historical background. ) .

the sdf acquired new missions such as u.n. peacekeeping operations ( pko ) and rear - area support for the united states in regional contingencies , but japanese strategic culture remained reactive and risk - averse .

it was not until 2010 that national defense policy moved beyond the "basic defense force" concept .

as part of its efforts to improve its own capabilities as well as to work more closely with u.s. forces , japan established a joint staff office in 2007 that puts all the ground , maritime , and air self - defense forces under a single command .

under the previous organization , a joint command was authorized only if operations required multiple service participation , which had never occurred in the history of the sdf .

the need for smoother coordination with the u.s. joint command was one of the primary reasons for adopting the new organization .

however , a 2016 study by csis found that japanese command and control mechanisms were insufficient for waging complex , high - intensity warfare alongside u.s. forces .

the 2010 national defense program guidelines ( ndpg ) signaled a definitive shift away from the cold war framework , which had called for strong bulwarks in the northern areas of japan , to a focus on the southwestern islands of the japanese archipelago , where japanese forces have encountered chinese military activities and incursions .

the document outlined a new "dynamic defense force" concept that emphasizes operational readiness and mobility to enhance deterrence .

the 2010 ndpg explicitly mentioned the need to advance cooperation with other countries , including south korea , australia , india , and southeast asian nations .

whereas the 2004 ndpg leaned toward a global perspective that viewed the security of japan and the region as linked with international stability , the 2010 guidelines shifted the focus back to the asia - pacific region .

the ndpg also explicitly identified china's military modernization and lack of transparency as concerns for the region .

japan's subsequent defense white papers have gone further in calling attention to potential military threats from china , prompting the chinese foreign ministry to accuse japan of "hyping the so - called china threat and creating regional tensions to mislead international opinion. .

building on the 2010 ndpg , the 2013 ndpg added jointness — operational cooperation among the air , naval , and ground forces — as a core element of the "dynamic joint defense force" approach .

the 2013 ndpg intensified the trend of the sdf toward more mobility and resilience .

japan will invest more in amphibious capabilities to defend its remote islands as well as in bmd to protect itself from missiles .

the sdf will seek to accelerate reforms to become more joint , strengthen isr ( intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ) , and develop more capabilities in the domains of outer space and cyberspace .

the sdf continues to bolster its force posture in japan's southwest island chain , notably with an additional asdf air wing on the main island of okinawa , a new radar base on yonaguni island , and plans for surface - to - surface and surface - to - air missile batteries at multiple sites .

the reaction to this more dynamic posture has been positive among many u.s. experts .

allocation of resources from ground defense to air and naval power projection assets more accurately reflects the nature of japan's security environment .

the transformation away from a passive defense posture augments the capabilities of the u.s. - japan alliance to manage regional and global security challenges .

other countries in the asia - pacific region that face potential confrontation with china over territorial disputes have largely welcomed the return of japan as a more active presence in regional security .

on the other hand , many south koreans have voiced concern over what some see as the "remilitarization" of japan .

japanese leaders have become concerned that china could attempt to act on its claim to the disputed senkaku / diaoyu islands by using nonmilitary agents , such as the china coast guard , to wrest control of the islets .

to address this type of "gray zone" contingency — meaning the use of force between a state of war and a state of peace — the united states and japan have developed more "seamless" alliance functions , and japan has boosted its own rapid response capabilities ( see next section ) .

one focus for bilateral cooperation has been improving isr in volatile areas during peacetime , to prevent an adversary from surprising u.s. and japanese leaders and achieving a fait accompli .

the alliance coordination mechanism , which was established through the new bilateral defense guidelines ( see " 2015 revision of bilateral defense guidelines " ) , provides an organization for the two allies to coordinate actions of their militaries using a whole - of - government approach without escalating a crisis to a state of war .

amphibious warfare ( projecting military force from the sea onto land ) has rapidly become a major emphasis of the sdf .

prior to the 2010s , amphibious capabilities were not considered important for defending japan and were negatively associated with offensive strategies .

the territorial dispute over the senkaku / diaoyu islets now presents a plausible scenario in which japan would want to retake its outlying islands from an occupying force: offensive tactics married to a defensive strategy .

the challenge of delivering disaster relief to devastated areas after the march 2011 earthquake and tsunami provided another motivation for developing these capabilities .

japan has therefore increased gsdf training exercises with the u.s. marine corps , as it begins to develop a marine corps - like function within the gsdf .

the gsdf is building up an amphibious rapid deployment brigade of 3,000 personnel to be the main response force for attacks on japan's remote islands .

japan also recognizes the need to improve inter - service jointness in order to carry out amphibious operations .

for several years , the sdf has sent warships , combat helicopters and fixed - wing aircaft , and thousands of infantry to the annual dawn blitz exercise held in california .

the newest msdf flat - top destroyer izumo reportedly can carry up to 14 helicopters , with 9 in operation at the same time .

in the near future , the sdf will acquire amphibious assault vehicles , v - 22 osprey tiltrotor aircraft , and other air - and sea - lift assets to boost mobile deployment capabilities .

japan has made strides in extending its defense policies to activity in outer space and cyberspace , but it lags far behind the united states in both domains .

the 2008 basic space law for the first time allowed japan to make use of outer space for military purposes , although japanese scientific and commercial endeavors had been developing space technology for decades .

japan has since launched imagery satellites with relatively low resolution while developing higher - resolution replacements .

the threat of north korean missiles has spurred japan to consider early warning satellites , though uavs may prove to be a more cost - effective solution .

in may 2013 , the united states and japan signed a bilateral agreement on space situational awareness to share information on space debris .

the revised bilateral guidelines create a framework for the two allies to cooperate on resilience of space assets .

japan has emphasized cooperation with the united states and taking a whole - of - government approach in its cybersecurity efforts .

the japanese cabinet secretariat in november 2014 established a cybersecurity strategic headquarters to take a central role in policy coordination and response to cybersecurity incidents , and the headquarters issued a national cybersecurity strategy in 2015 .

the united states and japan inaugurated a bilateral cybersecurity dialogue in may 2013 , led by the state department and the ministry of foreign affairs , in which the two sides can exchange information on cyberthreats and align international cyber policies .

the sdf created a cyber defense group in march 2014 with a budget of roughly $140 million and 100 dedicated officers .

analysts have hailed the new group as an important first step , but inadequate to the scale and sophistication of modern cyber challenges .

constitutional and legal barriers prevent the sdf cyber personnel from protecting civilian infrastructure networks , engaging in counterattacks , and recruiting "white hat" hackers from outside the government .

post - world war ii occupation following japan's defeat in world war ii , the allied powers , led by the united states , occupied the archipelago from 1945 to 1952 .

occupation officials initially intended to thoroughly demilitarize japan .

the japanese constitution , drafted by u.s .

occupation officials and adopted by the japanese legislature in 1947 , renounced the use of war in article 9 , stating that "land , sea , and air forces , as well as other war potential , will never be maintained. .

however , as the cold war confrontation with the soviet union grew , the goals of the occupation shifted to building japan up as a strategic bulwark against the perceived communist threat .

after the outbreak of the korean war in 1950 , u.s. officials pressed for the establishment of a japanese national paramilitary force , which in 1954 became the self - defense forces ( sdf ) .

debate about whether the existence of the sdf , which evolved in practice into a well - funded and well - equipped military , violates article 9 continues today .

japan regained its sovereignty in 1952 after the signing of the san francisco peace treaty , which officially ended the conflict and allocated compensation to allied victims of japanese war crimes .

bilateral alliance establishment during the cold war , the united states increasingly viewed japan as a strategically important ally to counter the soviet threat in the pacific .

a mutual security assistance pact signed in 1952 was replaced by the 1960 treaty of mutual cooperation and security , in which japan grants the u.s. military basing rights on its territory in return for a u.s. pledge to protect japan's security .

unlike other defense treaties with allies , this pledge is not mutual: japan is not obligated to defend the united states if it is attacked .

a military aid program during the 1950s provided equipment deemed to be necessary for japan's self - defense , and japan continued to expand the sdf and contribute more money to host nation support ( hns ) for u.s. forces .

under prime minister shigeru yoshida's leadership ( 1946-47 and 1948-1954 ) , japan followed u.s. leadership on foreign and security policies and focused on economic development .

the "yoshida doctrine" was controversial .

yoshida himself resisted u.s. officials' push for a full - scale japanese rearmament ( i.e. , the establishment of a full - fledged military in name and in fact ) .

in addition , many elements of japanese society rejected the arrangement .

for much of the 1950s , forces on the political right tried unsuccessfully to revise or even abrogate the constitution's article 9 and portions of the treaty .

when one of their number , prime minister nobusuke kishi , negotiated a revision to the treaty in 1960 , the political left mobilized opposition to the changes .

although kishi rammed the revisions through parliament , hundreds of thousands of protestors took to the streets in tokyo , causing the cancellation of a visit by president dwight eisenhower and the resignation of kishi and his government .

u.s. - japan defense relations again entered a period of uncertainty because of u.s. president richard nixon's so - called guam doctrine of 1969 ( which called on u.s. allies in asia to provide for their own defense ) , the normalization of relations between china and the united states , and the u.s. withdrawal from vietnam .

one major irritant was resolved when prime minister eisaku sato and nixon signed a joint communiqué that returned administrative control of the okinawa islands to japan in 1972 , although the united states continues to maintain large military bases on the territory .

the establishment of the bilateral security consultative committee in 1976 led to greater defense cooperation , including joint planning for response to an attack on japan .

post - cold war adjustments in the post - cold war period , japan was criticized by some in the international community for its failure to provide direct military assistance to the united nations coalition during the persian gulf war in 1990-1991 , despite its contribution of over $13 billion toward u.s. military costs and humanitarian assistance .

after japan's passage of a bill in 1991 to allow for its participation in u.n. peacekeeping operations , the sdf have been dispatched to cambodia , mozambique , east timor , and the golan heights .

tensions over north korea and the taiwan strait contributed to a revision of the defense guidelines in 1996-1997 by president bill clinton and prime minister ryutaro hashimoto that granted the u.s. military greater use of japanese installations in time of crisis and vaguely referred to a possible , limited japanese military role in "situations in areas surrounding japan. .

that was assumed to be referring to potential u.s. conflicts in the taiwan strait and the korean peninsula , although military officials insisted that the phrase was "situational" rather than geographic .

north korea's launch of a long - range taepodong missile over japan in 1998 galvanized political support for undertaking joint research with the united states on ballistic missile defense .

post - 9 / 11 changes u.s. policy toward east asia under the bush administration took a decidedly pro - japan approach from the outset .

several senior foreign policy advisors with extensive background in japan took their cues from the so - called armitage - nye report ( the lead authors were richard armitage and joseph nye ) , the final paper produced by a bipartisan study group before the 2000 u.s. presidential election .

the report called for a more equal partnership with japan and enhanced defense cooperation in a number of specific areas .

with this orientation in place , japan's response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , reinforced the notion of the u.s. - japan alliance as one of the central partnerships of u.s. foreign policy , particularly in asia .

under the leadership of prime minister junichiro koizumi , the japanese legislature passed legislation that allowed japan to dispatch refueling tankers to the indian ocean to support u.s. - led operations in afghanistan .

in february 2004 , japan sent over 600 military personnel to iraq to assist in reconstruction activities — the first time since world war ii that japan dispatched soldiers to a country where conflict was ongoing .

the ground troops were withdrawn in 2006 .

a japanese sdf air division remained until 2008 , when u.n. authorization for multinational forces in iraq expired .

after a period of rejuvenated defense ties in the first years of the george w. bush administration , expectations of a transformed alliance with a more forward - leaning defense posture from japan diminished .

koizumi's successors — shinzo abe , yasuo fukuda , and taro aso — each survived less than a year in office and struggled to govern effectively .

abe succeeded in upgrading the defense agency to a full - fledged ministry , but faltered on his pledges to create japanese versions of the national security council and to pass a permanent deployment law to allow the government to dispatch sdf troops without a u.n. resolution .

fukuda , elected in september 2007 , was considered a friend of the alliance , but more cautious in security outlook than his predecessors .

he also faced an empowered opposition party — the democratic party of japan ( dpj ) — that temporarily forced japan to end its naval deployment of refueling ships to support u.s. - led operations in afghanistan .

aso , who served as foreign minister in the abe cabinet , was largely unable to pursue a more active military role for japan due to his precarious political position .

in the final years of the decade , political paralysis and budgetary constraints in tokyo , japan's minimal progress in implementing base realignment agreements , japanese disappointment in bush's policy on north korea , and a series of smaller concerns over burden - sharing arrangements led to reduced cooperation and a general sense of unease about the partnership .

u.s. - japan relations under the obama and dpj administrations the obama administration came into power in 2009 indicating a policy of broad continuity in its relations with japan , although some japanese commentators initially fretted that washington's overtures to beijing would marginalize tokyo .

it was changes in leadership in tokyo , however , that destabilized the relationship for a period .

in the fall of 2009 , when the dpj came into power under yukio hatoyama's leadership , relations with washington got off to a rocky start because of differences over the relocation of the futenma marine base ( see "u.s. military presence in japan and futenma controversy" section above ) .

stalemate on the okinawa agreement had existed for several years under previous ldp governments , but the more public airing of the dispute raised concern that the alliance — long described by the united states as the "cornerstone of the u.s. asia - pacific strategy" — was eroding .

in addition , the dpj initially advocated a more asia - centric foreign policy , which some observers interpreted as a move away from the united states .

after months of intense deliberation with the united states and within his government , hatoyama eventually agreed to move ahead with the relocation .

however , the political controversy surrounding the futenma issue played a major role in his decision to resign in june 2010 .

the fall of hatoyama demonstrated to japanese leaders the political risks of crossing the united states on a key alliance issue .

his successor , prime minister naoto kan , looked to mend frayed relations and stated that his administration supported the agreement .

the overwhelming response to the march 2011 disaster in tohoku buoyed alliance relations .

by the time that yoshihiko noda , kan's successor , finished his term in december 2012 , american policymakers had regained confidence in tokyo's alliance management approach .

a series of alarming provocations from north korea and china's increased maritime assertiveness also played a role in reinforcing the sense that the u.s. - japan alliance remained relevant and essential .

