the energy information administration ( eia ) , in its october 2006 short - term energy and winter fuels outlook ( stewfo ) , provided encouraging news for residential natural gas consumers .

their 2006-2007 winter heating bills were projected to decline by an average of about $119 per household , or 13% , from 2005-2006 levels .

this anticipated decline in consumer costs is related to market conditions in 2006 that have been quite different from those observed a year ago .

this report analyzes the key factors affecting prices in the u.s. natural gas market , including consumption , production , reserves , and storage levels .

the current environment of declining prices is compared to last year , as well as near - term future projections that continue to show a tight market and high prices .

the u.s. natural gas market is a regional market , drawing supplies from domestic sources as well as imports , via pipeline , from canada .

in addition , a small part of domestic supply is imported in the form of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) which is part of a small , but growing , world market .

as a result of the regional nature of natural gas markets around the world , prices may differ across the various regions .

within the u.s. market , different groups of consumers pay different prices for natural gas .

residential , commercial , industrial , and electric power consumers are the largest groupings , with transportation uses the newest category .

cost of distribution , as well as scale of quantity purchased , determine price paid , although in some cases state regulatory commissions can determine some prices .

in general , residential consumers constitute the largest customer base ( over 62 million in 2004 ) , purchase the smallest quantities per customer , and pay the highest prices .

electric power generators consume large quantities , and pay the lowest per unit price .

historically , industrial consumers were the largest consumers of natural gas , although their aggregate consumption has declined in recent years .

on the supply side , in 2005 , domestic production provided about 83% of consumption , imports via pipeline from canada accounted for approximately 16% , and lng , mostly from trinidad , accounted for about 2% .

production represents a draw from the reserve base .

in the u.s. , the reserve base , measured by the reserve to production ratio , has been growing , increasing from 8.8 years in 1997 to 10.4 years in 2004 .

storage is an important component of natural gas supply because while production tends to be relatively constant throughout the year , consumption tends to peak during the winter heating season ( november through march ) as home heating use rises and tends to moderate in the other seasons .

for this reason , the industry injects gas into storage facilities to prepare for winter heating season demand peaks .

in recent years , the industry has established a target of over 3 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) of gas in storage for this purpose .

while price is an important determinant of consumption and production in the market at the aggregate level , the weather is perhaps even more important in consumption decisions by residential consumers .

the primary use of natural gas by residential consumers , home heating , tends to be quite price inelastic ; consequently , the onset of cold temperatures causes demand peaks largely independent of the level of prices .

analyses in this report are consistent with the eia base case in the stewfo , that consumers might expect to see lower natural gas prices and heating costs during the winter 2006-2007 heating season .

however , the eia's projection is dependent on conditions which may , or may not , materialize .

this section of the report analyzes risk factors in the 2006-2007 market outlook .

the eia stewfo's conclusion that residential consumers might expect to see reduced natural gas heating costs during the winter of 2006-2007 sees consumption rising , but price falling by a greater proportion .

indeed , some analysts see the price of natural gas already having peaked for the winter season .

the market fundamentals of consumption , production and storage reserves are likely to be consistent with a weakening market price .

however , a contributor to the overall reduced consumption in the market is falling industrial consumption .

because the natural gas price has been so volatile in recent years there is a chance that the stewfo has over or underestimated the natural gas price for the winter heating season .

