from a national perspective , the region's agriculture is dominated by louisiana's sugar canecrop which accounts for nearly one - third of the value of u.s. annual sugar cane production ( table5 ) .

poultry in alabama and mississippi , rice in louisiana , and cotton in mississippi also havenational significance .

however , several crops play a much bigger role at the state level .

broilersand eggs accounted for over 62% of alabama's agricultural output value in 2003 , while broilersrepresented a 42% share of mississippi's agricultural economy .

cotton's share of state agriculturaloutput value in 2003 was 15% in mississippi , 12% in louisiana , and 5% in alabama .

preliminary estimates by usda economists are that hurricane katrina contributed to $882million in total crop , livestock , and aquaculture ( 16 ) losses in the southeast .

 ( 17 ) ( estimates for hurricanerita are not yet available , but are expected to be significantly less than for katrina. ) .

usda reportsthat the greatest agricultural losses caused by katrina , in terms of value of production , were toaquaculture ( $151 million ) , sugarcane ( $50 million ) , and cotton ( $40 million ) .

other crops such assoybeans and rice were also prone to some wind damage .

the $882 million loss estimate does notinclude gulf state losses of timber ( which usda says could be in the billions of dollars dependingon its salvage value - - see the following section for more details ) , or losses of nursery andgreenhouse products and facilities in florida , for which a florida trade association projects $370million in structural damage and plant losses .

 ( 18 ) also , the loss of electricity , the shortage of fuel , andinfrastructure damage temporarily interrupted the flow of poultry , milk and other agriculturalproducts to markets .

for some crops , particularly sugarcane , the extent of losses will not be known until harvest.damage to the region's sugarcane crop initially appeared to be extensive because the high windsflattened the crop .

some analysts report that much of the crop that was downed by the storm wasnot destroyed and can still be harvested .

usda estimates that louisiana's sugarcane production willbe 9% below pre - hurricane estimates , which translates into an estimated processed value loss of $50million .

katrina also caused two louisiana sugar refineries to temporarily halt operations , whichexacerbated what was already a tight supply of sugar .

in response , usda increased available sugarsupplies by increasing the quantity of domestic sugar that may enter the market under the sugar pricesupport program .

 ( 19 ) according to usda , the largest cotton production areas ( east and west of the storm track ) were spared significant crop losses .

mississippi and alabama , which account for 10% and 3% ofexpected u.s. cotton production , respectively , experienced some damage .

cotton production isestimated by usda to be down 2.4% in alabama and 4.3% in mississippi following hurricanekatrina .

total cotton losses in the gulf region are expected to be about $40 million .

some of thedamage to the crop might be quality losses rather than production losses .

similarly , minor rice losseswere experienced , since the storm track was east of the major rice growing areas and most of thelouisiana rice acreage already had been harvested before katrina struck .

the corn and soybean crops were also affected by the hurricane , but the region normally accounts for less than 3% of national production of these two crops .

the most serious market effectsattributable to corn and soybeans are more transportation related ( as discussed above ) .

accordingto usda , estimated regional losses are $14 million for corn and $17 million for soybeans .

industry analysts also report that the gulf region's dairy industry experienced production andprocessing losses .

usda reports that 60,000 dairy cows were located in counties that experiencedhurricane - strength winds .

some of these cows were lost , but no estimates are available .

the region'sdairy industry was hampered by the loss of production caused by power outages in milking facilities,and the inability to transport milk because of damaged roads and bridges , as well as the loss ofrefrigeration and metropolitan retail dairy markets .

alabama , louisiana , and mississippi combinedaccount for less than 1% of u.s. milk production ; hence , market effects are expected to be limitedto the region .

usda also reports losses to cattle operations and broiler production in the three - state region.the region accounts for about 4% of national beef production , so national market effects areexpected to be minimal .

poultry is a significant enterprise in the region: alabama and mississippirank third and fifth , respectively , among all states in broiler production .

most of the broiler losseswere concentrated in mississippi where facilities were either damaged or without power for anextended period .

according to usda , an estimated 6 million chickens were killed and 2,400poultry barns were damaged in mississippi alone , and another 200,000 chickens were lost inalabama .

the broiler losses are valued by usda at approximately $15 million .

some analystsestimate that large area broiler losses could cause an increase in market broiler prices in the shortterm ( 1-2 months ) .

however , increased production elsewhere would eventually fill the gap so thatmarket effects would be minimized by the end of the year .

 ( 20 ) table 5 .

top 5 agricultural commodities: alabama , louisiana,and mississippi , 2003 source: u.s. department of agriculture's economic research service .

damage to forestry and wood products .

thegulf coast states are significantly forested and are major producers of lumber and plywood .

information on the effects of hurricane katrina on gulf coast forests is sketchy .

the mississippiforestry commission issued a news release estimating that 1.3 million acres of forest land in thestate had been damaged , with commercial timber valued at about $1.3 billion ; urban tree damage inmississippi was estimated at $1.1 billion .

 ( 21 ) the usda forest service estimated 19 billion board feet oftimber damaged on over 5 million acres in mississippi , alabama , and louisiana .

 ( 22 ) in addition to the damagesto wildlife habitat and other environmental services from the loss of forest cover , the dead anddamaged trees can become hazardous fuels for wildfires as well as a haven for forest insects anddiseases .

forestry assistance programs exist to help landowners , and can be used to help in therecovery of forest lands .

one particular program , emergency reforestation assistance , was enactedin the 1990 farm bill ( p.l .

101-624 ) to assist private landowners , primarily in south carolina , withreforestation following hurricane hugo that hit in 1989 .

the program has not been funded sincefy1993 , following hurricanes andrew ( fl and la ) and iniki ( hi ) .

 ( 23 ) other forestry assistanceprograms are generally available to help landowners and states with forestry activities and forestprotection , such as reducing wildfire and insect threats from trees damaged by the hurricane .

the impact of the hurricanes on wood products is less certain .

damages to structures hasprompted an urgent demand for plywood , for temporary repairs ; if plywood prices follow the patternthat ensued from hurricane andrew in 1993 , prices might have peaked at about the time of the eventin anticipation of the damage , and will fall back to more normal levels within a few weeks .

longer - term impacts are less clear .

rebuilding will increase the demand for additional woodproducts , although demand depends greatly on interest rates .

the dead and damaged trees mightprovide a significant boost to wood product supplies , as salvage and mill operations convert the treesto usable products .

however , salvage operations are hampered by the increasingly fragmentedownership of forest land and by rising fuel costs , and some mills may have been damaged by thehurricane .

the effect over the coming weeks and months is thus likely to be both greater woodproducts demand and greater wood products supply , and the net effect on wood product prices ( afterthe current urgent demand for plywood has passed ) is indeterminate .

following the damage inflicted by hurricanes katrina and rita on the gulf region's oil andnatural gas production , refining , and importing capability , energy prices - - gasoline , diesel fuel , andnatural gas - - rose sharply .

 ( 24 ) considerable uncertainty surrounds the longevity of recentenergy price rises , and the implications for u.s. agriculture hinge on their permanency .

fuel priceshave been trending higher over each of the past three years , and farmers were already likely to seerecord high fuel costs before the post - katrina runup in prices struck ( figure 5 ) .

in the near - term,it is likely that such strong energy price rises will significantly increase energy's share of totalproduction expenses and could significantly alter the farm income outlook for affected farmhouseholds and rural economies .

figure 5 .

monthly average u.s. fuel price .

during september 2005 , usda announced that it was initiating several activities to helpalleviate the grain transport congestion described below .

on september 7 , 2005 , usda announcedchanges to its marketing assistance loan program to help alleviate the urgency of marketing grainat distress - level prices .

 ( 28 ) usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) is implementingchanges to allow producers to obtain loans for "on - farm" storage on grain stored on the ground inaddition to grain bins and other normally approved structures .

this action was designed to alleviateshort - term logistical problems and support local cash prices above the distressed levels that haveresulted from the slowdown of barge traffic on the mississippi river .

on september 20 , 2005 , secretary of agriculture , mike johanns , announced that usda wastaking four additional steps to alleviate the grain transport congestion .

 ( 29 ) first , usda , actingthrough the ccc , was providing temporary incentives to facilitate the immediate movement of 140barges of damaged corn ( over 7 million bushels ) from new orleans to up - river locations foroff - loading .

once unloaded , the barges can return to duty moving new - crop commodities .

second,usda was providing incentives for alternative grain storage .

 ( 30 ) under this activity , theccc would provide special , one - time assistance to operators to help with the costs associated withstoring corn and wheat in alternative storage facilities .

up to 50 million bushels of corn or wheatcould be eligible for this activity .

third , usda was encouraging alternative shipping patternsthrough regions other than the central gulf by providing for a transportation differential incentiveon the movement of up to 200,000 metric tons of corn , wheat or soybeans .

fourth , for thoseproducers with farm - stored commodities under loan to usda whose loans mature at the end ofseptember and october and who would otherwise forfeit those commodities to usda , usda wouldallow such producers to buy back the grain at the posted county price .

normally , these producerswould be required to move the forfeited grain to commercial warehouses .

this offer is being madeon a state - by - state basis .

usda has at its disposal three major ongoing programs designed to help crop producersrecover from the financial effects of any natural disaster: federal crop insurance , non - insured assistance program ( nap ) payments , and emergency disaster loans .

all three of these programs have permanent authorization and available funding .

forbackground information on these and other farm disaster programs , see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

for the 2005 crop year , alabama , mississippi , and louisiana crop producers purchased justover $1 billion in crop insurance coverage , with nearly 70% of the value of coverage being forcotton , soybeans , and rice .

according to preliminary reports from usda , the three - state region hasrelatively high participation rates in the crop insurance program .

however , much of that coverageis at the catastrophic level , which provides an indemnity payment only on losses in excess of 50%of normal production .

for example , 90 to 95 percent of the cotton acreage in the three gulf statesis enrolled in the federal crop insurance program .

however , in louisiana and mississippi , just overone - half of that acreage is enrolled only at the catastrophic level .

for those producers who growa crop that is not eligible for crop insurance coverage , usda makes nap payments available forcatastrophic losses , as long as the producer signed up for coverage and paid an administrative feein advance .

agricultural producers in a county that has been declared a disaster area may be eligible forlow - interest emergency disaster ( em ) loans available through usda's farm service agency .

usdacurrently has authority to provide just over $150 million in em loans .

an eligible producer must bea family - sized farmer who suffered a minimum crop loss of 30% , and is unable to qualify for a loanfrom a commercial lender .

em loan funds may be used to help eligible farmers , ranchers , andaquaculture producers recover from production losses ( when the producer suffers a significant lossof an annual crop ) or from physical losses ( such as repairing or replacing damaged or destroyedstructures or equipment , or for the replanting of permanent crops such as orchards ) .

a qualifiedapplicant can then borrow up to 100% of actual production or physical losses ( not to exceed$500,000 ) at a below - market interest rate .

usda announced on september 8 , 2005 , that $20 million in emergency conservationprogram funding will be given to louisiana ( $12.45 million ) , mississippi ( $7.1 million ) , alabama ( $855,0000 ) and tennessee ( $25,000 ) to help these states clean up debris , and restore fences andconservation structures .

eligible participants can receive cost - share assistance of up to 75% of thecost to implement these practices .

since 1988 , congress frequently has supplemented the regularly funded disaster assistanceprograms with additional emergency aid .

funding for these programs generally are provided inemergency supplemental appropriations bills .

among these major ad - hoc farm disaster programsare ( 1 ) direct disaster payments , ( 2 ) livestock assistance , ( 3 ) tree assistance , and ( 4 ) emergencyconservation assistance .

most recently , the fy2005 military construction appropriations act ( p.l.108-324 ) contained supplemental funding to provide an estimated $3.5 billion in assistance for 2003and 2004 crop , livestock , and tree losses , primarily in response to ongoing drought in the west anda series of 2004 hurricanes that damaged or destroyed agricultural production in the southeast .

 ( formore information on the ad - hoc agricultural assistance that was provided in response to the 2004hurricanes , see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance . ) .

prior to hurricanes katrina and rita , portions of the midwest were experiencing significant2005 crop losses caused by a prolonged drought .

the combination of the midwest drought andlosses caused by the two hurricanes is expected to provide momentum for congress to consideremergency crop and livestock assistance for 2005 production losses some time this year .

severalbills have been introduced in the 109th congress that would provide supplemental agriculturalassistance , primarily in the form of crop disaster payments and livestock assistance .

to date , theseinclude bills ( h.r .

3809 , h.r .

3754 / s. 1692 , h.r .

3702 , s. 1636 ) that would provide disaster assistance to all regionsof the country that meet certain loss requirements , using similar payment formulas as in past years .

other bills ( h.r .

3958 and s. 1766 ) have been introduced that includeagricultural assistance as a part of a much larger package of assistance for recovery and relief fromthe effects of hurricane katrina in louisiana .

congressional leadership has not yet determined the specifics of any agricultural disasterassistance package , or what legislative vehicle might be used to authorize this assistance .

 ( 31 ) the most likely vehiclefor agricultural assistance is in the context of a third supplemental appropriations bill for hurricanekatrina recovery , which many expect will provide billions of dollars of assistance for rebuilding theinfrastructure of the affected region .

other possibilities include agricultural assistance being attachedto the pending fy2006 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

2744 ) which is currentlyin conference committee , or the agriculture committees potentially could report emergencyagricultural legislation to the floor for consideration .

