on september 26 , 2006 , president bush signed into law s. 2590 , the federal funding accountability and transparency act ( p.l .

109-282 ) .

according to supporters of the new law , p.l .

109-282 was an attempt to reduce "wasteful and unnecessary spending" by the federal government , including spending on funds earmarked for special projects .

to that end , the legislation required the office of management and budget ( omb ) to establish a publicly available , online database containing information about entities that are awarded federal grants , loans , contracts , and other forms of assistance .

using the database , supporters asserted , a citizen or watchdog group would be able to easily determine how much money was given to which organizations , and for what purposes .

the premise of the new law was that by making the details of federal spending available to the public , government officials would be less likely to fund projects that might be perceived as wasteful .

supporters of the legislation also suggested that the new database would give citizens the opportunity to better understand how the government distributes funds and enable the public to become more involved in the discussion of federal spending priorities .

three of the primary categories of federal expenditures and obligations to be included in the database — federal grants , loans , and contracts — represent a significant element of federal spending .

according to the most recently published consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) , federal agencies award over $880 billion in those three categories of financial assistance alone: $470 billion in grants , $381 billion in contracts , and $29 billion in direct loans .

omb launched the database , usaspending.gov , on december 13 , 2007 .

while the new database has been praised as a step toward a worthy objective — enhancing the transparency of government expenditures — government officials and members of the public have expressed concern about the quality of the data it provides , and about the cost of enhancing and expanding data collection efforts .

this report initially discusses the background of s. 2590 , noting in particular how it compared to similar legislation in the house of representatives .

it then discusses the federal funding accountability and transparency act's provisions , noting what types of assistance are to be part of the new database , the primary sources of the data , and deadlines for implementation .

finally , the report identifies and discusses issues that might affect the act's implementation , and that therefore might prove to be areas for future congressional oversight .

senator tom coburn , along with three cosponsors , introduced s. 2590 on april 6 , 2006 .

on august 2 , 2006 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs unanimously reported s. 2590 , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

that same day , the committee's chair , senator susan collins , and its ranking member , senator joseph lieberman , requested that the bill be brought to the floor for a unanimous consent vote before the august recess commenced .

this motion was blocked by an unnamed senator , which delayed action on the bill until after the recess .

on september 7 , all holds were lifted and the senate passed s. 2590 by unanimous consent .

the house approved s. 2590 , as passed by the senate , by voice vote on september 13 .

later that same day both chambers agreed to s.con.res .

114 , making enrollment corrections to s. 2590 .

as noted previously , the president signed the bill into law on september 26 , 2006 .

s. 2590 received extensive bipartisan support at each stage of the legislative process .

in the senate , the bill was introduced with bipartisan sponsors , voted unanimously out of committee , and passed by unanimous consent .

the legislation was ultimately cosponsored by 47 senators , including majority leader bill frist and minority leader harry reid .

in the house , s. 2590 was passed by voice vote under suspension of the rules , with members of both parties speaking in support of the senate bill and none speaking against it .

the white house did not issue a statement of administrative policy on s. 2590 , but president bush did express his support in a press release distributed the same day the bill was enrolled , making it apparent he would sign the measure once he received it .

according to senator coburn , s. 2590 was endorsed by over 150 organizations with a wide range of political leanings .

the senator's list of supporters included representatives of private enterprise , such as the u.s. chamber of commerce ; unions , like the american federation of state , county , and municipal employees ; media groups , such as the american society of newspaper editors ; and government watchdog organizations , like omb watch .

as evidence of the unusual alliance in support of s. 2590 , the list indicated that both people for the ethical treatment of animals ( peta ) and gun owners of america supported the bill , as did both the national gay and lesbian task force and the traditional values coalition .

the database required in the act was to be implemented in two phases .

by january 1 , 2008 , the new database was required to provide information on entities that were awarded funds directly from the federal government .

entities covered in the first phase of the database include corporations , associations , partnerships , sole proprietorships , limited liability companies , limited liability partnerships , states , and localities .

by january 1 , 2009 , the database must include information on subgrantees and subcontractors that receive federal funds through a primary award recipient .

the act excluded individual recipients of federal assistance , and organizations with less than $300,000 in total income were not required to report on subawards .

consistent with the objective of providing to the public comprehensive information on federal financial assistance , virtually all categories of awards will ultimately be covered by the database , including grants , contracts , subgrants , subcontracts , loans , cooperative agreements , delivery orders , task orders , and purchase orders .

two special provisions addressed particular types of transactions: individual transactions of less than $25,000 are exempt , and credit card transactions will not be included until october 1 , 2008 .

to achieve greater transparency , the act required the database to provide the following information about each federal award: name of entity receiving award amount of award type of award ( eg , grant , loan , contract ) agency funding award a north american industry classification system ( naics ) code for contracts or a catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number for grants and loans program source award title that describes the purpose of the funding location of recipient city , state , congressional district , and country in which award performance primarily takes place unique identifier for entity receiving award and of the parent entity of recipient , if one exists any other information specified by omb s. 2590 's sponsors , mindful of the criticism that government databases are often difficult for non - experts to use , included language that required omb to ensure the database is accessible through a "searchable website. .

the act thus required that the website permit users to ( 1 ) conduct a search of federal funding by any of the data elements listed above , and ( 2 ) determine the total amount of federal funding awarded to an entity by fiscal year .

in addition , the act stipulated that the website must provide information in a downloadable format , and that agencies must post new information to the website within 30 days of making an award .

the legislation also required the new website to allow the public the opportunity to provide input on the site and recommend improvements .

three major financial assistance databases were identified in the act as likely sources of information for the new website — the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) , the federal assistance award data system ( faads ) , and grants.gov .

according to the provisions in s. 2590 as initially passed by the house and senate , a user must be able to access information from all three databases in a single search .

the bill was explicit on this point ; it was not acceptable merely to provide links to these or other databases , because that would force users to search for information at different websites .

the "single search" provision of s. 2590 was modified by s. con res .

114 , allowing grants and contracts to be searched separately on the new public website .

s.con.res .

114 also added another reporting requirement: the government accountability office is to provide congress with a compliance report on p.l .

109-282 no later than 2010 .

as previously noted , the act did not require information on subcontractors and subgrantees to be included in the database until january 1 , 2009 .

the delay reflected the fact that information on subrecipients was not collected consistently across federal agencies and programs .

to address existing gaps in the data on subawards , the act required omb to implement a pilot program that tested the feasibility of having primary recipients provide information on their subgrantees and subcontractors .

there was a provision in the legislation that allowed federal award recipients and subrecipients to be reimbursed for the costs associated with collecting and reporting data on subrecipients .

the act also specified that any requirements for collecting data on subawards made by state and local governments under block and formula grants be cost - effective .

according to cbo , no unfunded mandate would be placed on recipients or subrecipients for complying with the act .

the act also required omb to submit an annual report to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform .

the report must include data on public usage of the website , an assessment of the reporting burden on federal award and subaward recipients , and an explanation of any extension of the subaward reporting deadline .

the act also required omb to post a copy of the report on the web .

on december 13 , 2007 , omb launched the ffata - mandated website , usaspending.gov .

the website , as required by the ffata , allows users to search for detailed information on grants , contracts , loans , and other forms of assistance .

the data , however , are not complete and some observers question their accuracy .

the possible cost to improve the data quality is unclear .

also unclear is the possible cost to collect information that might not currently be available , such as data on subcontractors and subgrantees , which must be available to the public through the website by january 1 , 2009 .

the ability of users to identify earmarks through usaspending.gov also appears to be limited .

as noted previously , the underlying logic of the federal funding accountability and transparency act is that , by providing citizens with information on federal assistance awards through an online database , government officials will be less likely to fund earmarks and arguably "wasteful" projects .

to put this argument succinctly: greater transparency will yield greater accountability .

most observers agree that in order for a public database of federal awards to provide maximum transparency , it must encompass as broad a range of financial assistance categories as possible .

the ffata database would presumably provide substantial transparency , since it covers all forms of federal financial assistance , including contracts .

arguably , the database would also provide transparency by phasing in information on subcontractors and subgrantees , thus allowing the public to track the flow of federal funds down to the level of the ultimate recipient .

although the creation of the database might require more time or money than some estimates suggest , president bush , the deputy director of omb , and senator coburn have all indicated they will provide support and oversight during implementation .

in remarks prior to signing the legislation , president bush said the act was an "important step" that "empowers the american taxpayer" with information that can be used to "demand greater fiscal discipline" from both the executive and legislative branches of government .

the president also linked the act to a broader agenda of increasing accountability in federal spending , including earmark reform and the line - item veto .

president bush's comments suggest that the administration is committed to the act and might be prepared to provide the resources needed to implement the database with complete and accurate information , even if the costs exceed omb's current expectations .

the administration's commitment might also be reflected in omb's guidance that required agencies to develop and implement data quality improvement plans .

the original sponsor of s. 2590 , senator coburn , was also quoted as saying that "there will be oversight to make sure we're making progress" implementing the database in accordance with the legislation .

finally , the new law might direct attention to increased transparency on the revenue side of federal fiscal operations .

in the senate report accompanying s. 2590 , the additional views of senators coburn and lautenburg included the statement that , "transparency in government decision - making should not be limited to simply spending ; it should be extended ... to the tax code. .

this sentiment was echoed by senator obama , who said during floor debate on the bill that "greater transparency of targeted tax benefits" was another step in improving government accountability and performance .

given this objective , legislation seeking to increase transparency in the tax code might be supported by some of the same government officials and advocacy groups that supported s. 2590 .

