policy makers are concerned about the wealth of u.s. families because of the relationship between wealth and economic well - being .

wealth is a store of future income that serves a critical economic security function .

in times of economic hardship , such as unemployment , illness , or divorce , wealth is an additional source of income to help pay expenses and bills .

for older individuals , wealth is an important source of retirement income .

in addition , wealth is a significant factor influencing the strength of economy - wide consumer spending , which in turn sets the pace of economy - wide recovery and job creation .

moreover , deliberations by congress on such issues as taxation , education , housing , and entitlements could have implications for the accumulation of wealth by families .

to help inform these policy debates , this report analyzes data from 1989 to 2013 of the survey of consumer finances ( scf ) on the trend in the level and concentration of wealth across families .

the report subsequently examines the roles of financial assets and home ownership in wealth accumulation .

it concludes with a review of explanations for the accumulation and distribution of wealth across families .

in addition to accumulating wealth through saving of current income , those who own assets may see their wealth grow or shrink due to rising or falling asset prices .

the distribution of such assets as stocks and homes has implications for who benefits from asset appreciation and who is harmed by asset depreciation .

researchers often use the distribution of income as a starting point for understanding the accumulation and distribution of wealth .

higher income families are generally better positioned to set more aside , and thus accumulate greater wealth , than those at the lower end of the income distribution .

as shown in table 2 , four of every five families in the top 10% of the income distribution saved in 2013 compared with one of every three families in the bottom 20% of the income distribution .

despite income and wealth generally increasing in tandem , wealth is more concentrated than income .

the ratio of the mean to median is an indicator of the degree of concentration in a distribution because , as previously mentioned , the mean can be greatly affected by a few high - value observations .

evidence from the 2013 scf indicates that families' mean income was 1.9 times more than median income whereas families' mean net worth was 6.6 times more than median net worth — almost 3.5 times the mean to median income ratio .

the larger mean - to - median ratio reflects the survey result that wealth is more concentrated than income among families at the upper end of the respective distributions .

analysts have sought explanations for the greater concentration of wealth than income across families .

a common explanation is that as individuals' incomes rise during their working lives they save ( accumulate wealth ) for their retirement years .

upon retirement , income falls and so does saving as retirees draw down wealth to maintain living standards .

however , empirical studies have estimated that saving for retirement cannot completely explain people's saving behavior and the higher concentration of wealth than income .

researchers added to their statistical model of savings behavior a variable for unpredictable events ( eg , job loss and divorce ) that , like retirement , could reduce an individual's standard of living .

they estimated that saving for so - called precautionary reasons contributes to but does not fully explain a distribution of wealth that is more concentrated than the distribution of income .

as a result , analysts have sought other explanatory variables .

entrepreneurship is one such factor .

although business owners ( the self - employed or entrepreneurs ) are a small proportion of the population , the group comprises a much larger share of the wealthiest families — more than one - half of the top 1% of the wealth distribution .

researchers estimated that entrepreneurs are more motivated than others to save because they encounter difficulty borrowing funds to start or expand firms .

in other words , those who want to start their own businesses have learned they typically need to fund it from their own savings .

another contributory factor may be the desire of wealthier families to bequeath assets to their children .

analysts estimated that this desire prompts wealthy families to save at a high rate and helps to explain why families in the upper end of the wealth distribution even in old age do not consume all their assets .

researchers further suggest that bequests take the form not only of financial capital ( i.e. , assets ) , but also of human capital ( i.e. , years of education ) .

wealthy parents may be able to pass on greater earnings abilities to their children because wealthier families are less affected by educational borrowing constraints than families further down the wealth distribution .

in other words , wealthy parents can more easily finance their children's post - secondary education compared with parents who have amassed less savings , increasing the probability that children of the wealthy will earn more , save more , and accumulate more wealth .

