the epa has identified and promulgated national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) under the clean air act ( caa ) for six principal pollutants classified by the agency as "criteria pollutants": particulate matter ( pm ) , ozone ( o 3 , a key measure of smog ) , nitrogen dioxide ( no 2 , or , inclusively , nitrogen oxides , nox ) , sulfur oxides ( sox , or , specifically , so 2 ) , carbon monoxide ( co ) , and lead ( pb ) .

on october 17 , 2006 , the epa published its revisions to the naaqs for particulates to provide protection against potential health effects associated with short - and long - term exposure to particulate matter ( including chronic respiratory disease and premature mortality ) .

the epa's newly promulgated particulates naaqs modify the standards established in 1987 that focused on particles smaller than 10 microns ( pm 10 , or coarse particles ) and standards for "fine" particles smaller than 2.5 microns ( pm 2.5 ) introduced for the first time with the promulgation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs .

the 2006 revisions to the particulates naaqs are the culmination of the epa's most recent statutorily required periodic review , based on its evaluation and analysis of more than 2,000 scientific studies available between 1997 and 2002 , and on determinations made by the administrator .

prior to this , the most recent changes to any naaqs , a strengthening of the particulate matter and ozone standards , were promulgated jointly in 1997 .

the epa's most recently completed review of the particulates naaqs and of the scientific criteria for setting the standards was initiated not long after the 1997 promulgation .

the 2006 particulates naaqs are expected to continue to generate national interest and debate , and possibly oversight in congress , as did the previous changes to the particulates standards promulgated in 1997 .

while the new 2006 particulates naaqs generally tightened the air quality standards for particulate matter , the action has caused considerable controversy , including concerns that the standards are outside the range recommended by both epa staff and by the scientific advisory panel ( clean air scientific advisory committee , or casac ) established by the clean air act ( caa ) .

conversely , some continue to contend that available data do not support the need for stricter standards or , in some cases , the standards as promulgated in 1997 .

in december 2006 , 13 states and the district of columbia petitioned the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia ( d.c. ) circuit to review the new 2006 particulates naaqs .

in addition , several groups representing various industry and agriculture interests ( including coal , iron , steel , and corn refiners , oilseed processors , farmers , and cattle and pork producers ) , as well as environmental and public health organizations , also filed petitions to the d.c .

circuit challenging the new 2006 naaqs .

briefs from petitioners , epa , and supporters were filed with the court by march 7 , 2008 , but the date for oral argument had not yet been scheduled as of the updating of this report .

epa anticipates a decision in late 2008 .

the completion of the 2006 pm naaqs review was followed by an epa announcement , on december 7 , 2006 , that it would modify the process for setting and reviewing naaqs .

among other changes , the casac would no longer have a role in approving the policy staff paper with its recommendations to the administrator .

casac would be relegated to commenting on the policy paper after it appears in the federal register , during a public comment period .

the senate environment and public works committee included the epa's changes to the naaqs review process among the topics it considered february 6 , 2007 , in a hearing on "oversight of recent epa decisions. .

seven democratic members of the committee wrote epa administrator johnson on december 21 , 2006 , to express their strong opposition to the changes and to ask him to "abandon" them .

in order to better understand epa's actions , this report provides an analysis of the agency's final 2006 revisions to the particulates naaqs , and the estimated costs and benefits of the new standards and of more stringent alternatives analyzed .

the report concludes by highlighting concerns and issues raised regarding the revisions to the particulates standards , including those of the science advisory committee ( casac ) , and actions in congress .

establishing naaqs does not directly limit emissions ; rather , it represents the epa administrator's formal judgment regarding the level of ambient pollution that will protect public health with an adequate margin of safety .

under sections 108-109 of the caa , congress mandated that the epa set national ambient ( outdoor ) air quality standards for pollutants whose emissions "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health ( primary standards ) or welfare ( secondary ) " and "the presence of which in the ambient air results from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources. .

the statute further requires that every five years epa review the latest scientific studies and either reaffirm or modify previously established naaqs .

the caa is quite specific about certain steps for establishing and reviewing naaqs , particularly with regard to the preparation of a "criteria document" that summarizes the scientific information and resulting criteria that the epa administrator will use to determine the final standard and the procedural process for promulgating the standard .

the act also established the clean air scientific advisory committee to review criteria and standards , and to advise the administrator .

the casac augments its own resources by creating a review panel of scientists with expertise specific to the pollutant in question .

the pm review panel consisted of 22 national experts , primarily academics and independent researchers .

in addition to the caa requirements , the epa has chosen to add the preparation of a "staff paper" that summarizes the criteria document and lays out policy options .

traditionally , the casac has also formally reviewed the epa staff paper .

the epa's most recent review found that the scientific evidence since 1997 reinforced the associations between exposure to particulates and numerous cardiovascular and respiratory health problems , including aggravated asthma , chronic bronchitis , reduced lung function , irregular heartbeat , nonfatal heart attacks , and premature death .

the casac found that the numerous epidemiological studies epa reviewed "have shown statistically significant associations between the concentrations of ambient air pm 2.5 and pm 10 ( including levels that are lower than the 1997 particulates naaqs ) and excess mortality and morbidity. .

further , the epa concluded , and most of the casac panel concurred , that the scientific evidence supported modifying the particulates standards .

the primary naaqs for both pm 2.5 and pm 10 include an annual and a daily ( 24-hour ) limit .

to attain the annual standard , the three - year average of the weighted annual arithmetic mean pm concentration at each monitor within an area must not exceed the maximum limit set by the agency .

the 24-hour standards are a concentration - based percentile form , indicating the percentage of the time that a monitoring station can exceed the standard .

for example , a 98 th percentile 24-hour standard indicates that a monitoring station can exceed the standard 2% of the days during the year .

as modified and published in the october 17 , 2006 , federal register notice , the primary pm 2.5 and pm 10 standards are as follows: pm 2.5 : strengthens the daily ( 24-hour ) standard , which currently allows no more than 65 micrograms per cubic meter ( µg / m 3 ) , by setting a new limit of 35 µg / m 3 , based on the three - year average of the 98 th percentile of 24-hour pm 2.5 concentrations ; retains the annual standard at 15 µg / m 3 .

pm 10 : retains the daily ( 24-hour ) standard at 150 µg / m 3 but changes from the 99 th percentile to no more than one exceedance per year on average over three years ; eliminates the annual maximum concentration ( 50 µg / m 3 ) standard for pm 10 .

for pm 2.5 and pm 10 , the secondary ( welfare ) naaqs are the same as the primary standards .

table 1 below provides a comparison of the newly revised primary naaqs with those previously promulgated for both pm 2.5 and pm 10 .

epa's final revisions to the standards for fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) are the same as the agency had proposed in january 2006 .

however , the final 2006 epa revisions to the pm 2.5 naaqs , while tightening the standards , are not as stringent as those recommended by the casac and by the epa staff .

with regard to coarse particulates , the epa had proposed replacing the current particle size indicator of pm 10 with a range of 10 to 2.5 micrometers ( pm 10-2.5 ) , referred to as inhalable ( or thoracic ) coarse particles , and setting a pm 10-2.5 daily standard of 70 µg / m 3 rather than the current pm 10 daily standard of 150 µg / m 3 .

the proposal also included narrowing the focus of the pm 10-2.5 standard to "urban and industrial" sources and excluding particles typical to rural areas , including "windblown dust and soils and particulates generated by agricultural and mining sources. .

the range of alternative standards considered and proposed and issues associated with the epa's final decisions are discussed later in this report .

promulgation of naaqs sets in motion a process under which the states and the epa first identify geographic nonattainment areas , those areas failing to comply with the naaqs based on monitoring and analysis of relevant air quality data .

the 2006 tightening of the pm 2.5 standards is expected to increase the number of areas ( typically defined by counties or portions of counties ) in nonattainment .

epa expects to finalize the nonattainment designations ( based on 2005-2007 monitoring data ) for the new 2006 pm naaqs by the end of 2008 with an effective date of april 2009 .

following formal designation , the states have three years ( until april 2012 ) to submit state implementation plans ( sips ) , which identify specific regulations and emission control requirements that will bring an area into compliance .

the epa is not requiring new nonattainment designations for pm 10 and it does not anticipate any significant incremental cost impacts of this action .

a discussion of the potential benefits and cost impacts associated with implementation of the new particulates naaqs follows .

as discussed above , in setting and revising the naaqs , the caa directs the epa administrator to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety .

this language has been interpreted , both by the agency and by the courts , as requiring standards based on a review of the health impacts , without consideration of the costs , technological feasibility , or other non - health criteria .

this being the case , costs and benefits were not to play a central role in setting the particulates naaqs .

costs and feasibility are generally taken into account in naaqs implementation ( a process that is primarily a state responsibility ) .

nevertheless , the epa released a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) on october 6 , 2006 , to meet its obligations under executive order 12866 and in compliance with guidance from the white house office of management and budget .

the ria only analyzed the benefits and costs of implementing the pm 2.5 naaqs .

citing time , data , and modeling limitations , the epa did not analyze the benefits and costs of retaining the pm 10 standard .

the epa emphasized that the october 2006 ria differs from typical rias in that it does not analyze the regulatory impact of an action and that it is primarily for illustrative purposes .

the basis for the benefits calculations are reductions in ambient concentrations of pm 2.5 resulting from a reasonable , but speculative , array of cost - effective state implementation strategies selected by the epa for purposes of analysis .

the analysis does not model the specific actions that each state will undertake in implementing the new pm 2.5 naaqs .

the epa includes a detailed discussion of the limitations and uncertainties associated with the analyses .

congress and a wide variety of stakeholders have closely followed the development of the new 2006 particulates naaqs since epa's review began nearly 10 years ago .

during the 109 th congress the senate committee on environment and public works and the committee's subcommittee on clean air , climate change , and nuclear safety held hearings regarding implementation and review of the particulates naaqs .

well before the epa formally proposed revising the particulates naaqs , stakeholders were providing evidence and arguments at public hearings and other forums for their preferred recommendations .

in general , business and industry oppose more stringent standards , and public health and environmental interest groups advocate tighter standards .

the epa received thousands of comments during various stages of development of the particulates criteria document and in response to drafts of the epa particulates staff paper .

the agency reported receiving more than 120,000 comments in response to the january 2006 particulates naaqs proposal .

the administrator's proposed and final decisions represent the first time in casac's nearly 30-year history that the promulgated standards fall outside of the range of the scientific panel's recommendations .

in letters dated march 21 , 2006 , and september 29 , 2006 , the casac raised its concerns and objections regarding both pm 10 and pm 2.5 proposed standards .

the administrator is not required by statute to follow casac's recommendations ; the act ( in section 307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ) requires only that the administrator set forth any pertinent findings , recommendations , and comments by casac and the national academy of sciences , and , if his proposal differs in an important respect from any of their recommendations , provide an explanation of the reasons for such differences .

courts , in reviewing epa regulations , also generally defer to the administrator's judgment on scientific matters , focusing more on issues of procedure , jurisdiction , and standing .

nevertheless , casac's detailed objections to the administrator's decisions and its description of the process as having failed to meet statutory and procedural requirements could play a role litigation challenging the standards .

at the time of its january 2006 proposal , the agency solicited comment regarding its supporting analysis and a variety of alternative particulates naaqs .

in addition to soliciting written comments , the epa held public hearings in early march 2006 in philadelphia , chicago , and san francisco .

as presented in its rationale for the final standards throughout the preamble of the final rule , in some cases the epa has revised elements of its proposal based on certain comments ; in other cases the epa lays out its reasoning for disagreeing .

epa's final modifications to the existing particulates naaqs have sparked interest and conflicting concerns among a diverse array of stakeholders and in congress .

the following sections highlight several areas of interest .

the epa's october 17 , 2006 , promulgation of the final modifications to the existing particulates naaqs following completion of its statutorily required review has sparked interest and conflicting concerns among a diverse array of stakeholders , and in congress .

tightening the particulates naaqs will result in more areas classified as nonattainment and needing to implement new controls on particulate matter .

states and local governments will be required to develop and implement new plans for addressing emissions in those areas that do not meet the new standards .

a stricter standard means increased costs for the transportation and industrial sectors most likely to be affected by particulate matter controls , including utilities , refineries , and the trucking industry .

in terms of public health , a stricter standard is estimated to result in fewer adverse health effects for the general population and particularly sensitive populations , such as children , asthmatics , and the elderly .

because of health and cost implications , naaqs decisions have been the source of significant concern to some in congress for quite some time .

the evolution and development of the particulates naaqs , in particular , have been the subject of extensive oversight .

when the 1997 particulates naaqs were promulgated , congress held 28 days of hearings on the epa rule .

congress enacted legislation specifying deadlines for implementation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs , funding for monitoring and research of potential health effects , and the coordination of the particulates ( and ozone ) standard with other air quality regulations .

in december 2006 , several states and industry , agriculture , business , environmental , and public health groups petitioned the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit to review the new 2006 particulates naaqs .

the epa's previous review and establishment of particulates naaqs were the subject of litigation and challenges , including a supreme court decision in 2001 .

the epa's 1997 promulgation of standards for both coarse and fine particulate matter prompted critics to charge the epa with overregulation and spurred environmental groups to claim that the epa had not gone far enough .

more than 100 plaintiffs petitioned the court to overturn the standard .

several elements of the epa's most recent action , including the level of stringency of the new 2006 particulates naaqs , the objections of the casac , the agency's decision not to modify the particle size indicator for coarse particulates , and not excluding rural sources from the coarse standard as proposed have already generated debate and controversy .

thus , the final form of the current efforts to revise pm naaqs may not be known for some time .

