the department of justice ( doj ) was created in june 1870 , with the attorney general as its head .

since its establishment , doj has expanded to include 40 agencies .

the united states attorneys office prosecutes offenders and represents the federal government in court .

the major investigative agencies — the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) — prevent and deter crime and arrest offenders .

the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) provides protection to the federal judiciary , apprehends fugitives , and detains people in federal custody .

the bureau of prisons ( bop ) provides confinement and supervision for convicted federal offenders .

the litigating divisions in doj ( the criminal division , the civil division , the anti - trust division , the tax division , and the civil right division ) enforce federal criminal and civil laws .

the office of justice programs ( ojp ) , the community oriented policing services ( cops ) office , and the office of violence against women ( ovw ) , provide grant funds to state , local , and tribal governments for crime prevention and intervention programs as well as funding for criminal justice system improvement programs .

this report focuses on select doj grant programs administered through ojp and cops .

in 1984 , congress created ojp by passing the justice assistance act of 1984 .

the assistant attorney general ( aag ) oversees ojp , which has approximately 700 employees .

ojp is the main agency within doj that awards grants to states , local governments , and nonprofit organizations to help develop the country's capacity to prevent and control crime , improve states' criminal justice systems , increase knowledge about crime , and assist victims of crime .

ojp is overseen and managed by the aag .

the aag coordinates the efforts of ojp's five bureaus and two program offices to ensure that ojp's mission is met .

ojp's five bureaus are the bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , the national institute of justice ( nij ) , the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) , the bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , and the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) .

ojp's two program offices are the community capacity development office ( ccdo ) , and the sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ( smart ) office .

the cops program was created by title i of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( the '94 crime act ) .

the mission of the cops program is to advance community policing in all jurisdictions across the united states .

the cops program awards grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies throughout the united states so they can hire and train law enforcement officers to participate in community policing , purchase and deploy new crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test new and innovative policing strategies .

this section discusses the following doj grant programs: weed and seed , the drug court discretionary grant program , the prisoner re - entry initiative , the president's dna initiative , the debbie smith dna backlog grant program , the kirk bloodsworth post - conviction dna testing program , the paul coverdell grant program , assistance to indian tribes ( indian country prison grants , tribal courts grant program , indian country alcohol and crime demonstration program ) , and tribal law enforcement assistance .

this report does not discuss any other discretionary grant programs administered by ojp and cops , nor does it discuss the justice assistance grant program ( jag ) , any grant program administered by the office on violence against women ( ovw ) , any grant program administered by the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) , or ojp and cops grant programs that have traditionally received funding through earmarks .

see the appendix for a list of crs products that have a more extensive discussion of some of these other grant programs .

for years , some have questioned the effectiveness of doj grant programs and have called for program evaluations .

the administration responded by requiring federal agencies to submit strategic and annual performance plans and report on program performance .

as a result , doj now requires grantees to collect and report output and outcome measurement data .

in addition to collecting output and outcome measures , doj has also conducted evaluations of some of its programs .

the government accountability office ( gao ) assessed six evaluations of five drug courts and found mixed results .

nij funded a national evaluation of eight weed and seed sites in the united states .

as congress continues to make critical decisions on the amount and type of anti - crime assistance funding for state , local and tribal governments , the effectiveness of these programs is likely to continue to be an issue .

since 2000 , doj oig has identified grant management as one of doj's top ten management challenges .

doj oig lists grant management as a management challenge because ( 1 ) oig reviews continue to find that many grantees do not submit financial and progress reports ; ( 2 ) numerous deficiencies continue to be found in the cops office's monitoring of grantee activities ; ( 3 ) audits found that grants were not regularly awarded in a timely manner and grantees were slow to spend funds ; and ( 4 ) more than 375 audits of cops grants have resulted in significant dollar - related findings .

a series of reports from gao and doj oig raise concerns about whether ojp and cops grants are being monitored effectively .

a 2003 oig audit of ojp and cops grant programs found ( 1 ) a structural overlap between the cops office and ojp ; ( 2 ) an overlap in grant programs between the cops office and ojp ; ( 3 ) a lack of on - line grant application processing in the cops office ; ( 4 ) an overlap in ojp's organization structure ; and ( 5 ) inefficiencies in ojp's automated grant management systems .

a 2004 report found that the weed and seed grant program experienced continued problems with effective grant monitoring , including problems with grantees not submitting progress reports in a timely manner , grant managers not documenting site visits , not ensuring that policy regarding the documentation of significant qualification and funding decisions was followed , and outcome performance measures to track progress towards program outcomes were not developed .

a 2005 report found that nij did not enforce the independent external investigation certification requirement as imposed by the justice for all act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-405 ) .

another 2005 report found that ojp , cops , and ovw were not effectively monitoring grants awarded to tribal governments .

according to doj's inspector general , ojp , cops , and ovw did not ensure that tribal grantees submitted the reports necessary to assess grant implementation and achievement of grant objectives and did not effectively monitor utilization of grant funds .

congress attempted to address some of these issues when it passed the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-162 ) .

the act created an office of audit , assessment , and management in ojp .

the office of audit , assessment , and management is responsible for ensuring that ojp grants are subjected to performance audits and that grants are in compliance with doj standards .

the act also codified ccdo and assigned it the responsibility of providing training to actual and prospective grantees about the requirements for doj grant programs .

crs report rs22070 , juvenile justice: overview of legislative history and funding trends , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33947 , juvenile justice: legislative history and current legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32579 , victims of crime compensation and assistance: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32247 , dna testing for law enforcement: legislative issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs22416 , edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant program: legislative and funding history , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33308 , community oriented policing services ( cops ) : background , legislation , and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33431 , immigration: frequently asked questions on the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30871 , violence against women act: history and federal funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

