administering justice to juvenile offenders has largely been the domain of the states , and as a result of this the laws that pertain to juvenile offenders can vary widely from state to state .

there is no federal juvenile justice system .

although the federal government does not play a direct role in administering juvenile justice , in the 1960s , the federal government began establishing federal juvenile justice agencies and grant programs in order to influence the states' juvenile justice systems .

the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) of 1974 created many of the federal entities and grant programs that continue to operate today , including the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) and the state formula grants program .

over the ensuing decades , the jjdpa has been modified a number of times , broadening the mandate of the agencies it created and adding to the grant programs it established .

this report analyzes the current federal legislation that influences the state juvenile justice systems .

although the report provides some background information on the evolution of juvenile justice in the united states , the main focus of the report is the major federal legislation that impacts state juvenile justice systems , including the jjdpa .

as the major provisions of the jjdpa expired in fy2007 and fy2008 , several issues pertaining to its reauthorization may be of concern to congress , including , but not limited to , the following: should the core mandates associated with the state formula grants be expanded or modified ? .

are the current grant programs effective ? .

is there adequate oversight over states' use of federal grant funding ? .

is there sufficient coordination occurring at the federal level ? .

should the federal approach to juvenile justice focus on rehabilitation , accountability , or both philosophies ? .

the original jjdpa and its major revisions through the end of the 109 th congress , when it was most recently reauthorized , are addressed in appendix a and appendix b .

juvenile justice in the united states has been predominantly the province of the states and their localities .

the first juvenile court in america was founded in 1899 in cook county , illinois .

twenty - five years later , all but two states had enacted legislation establishing a separate juvenile court system for young offenders .

the mission of these juvenile courts was to attempt to turn young delinquents into productive adults rather than merely punishing them for their crimes .

this led to marked procedural and substantive differences between the adult and juvenile court systems in the states , including a focus on the offenders and not the offenses , and on rehabilitation instead of punishment .

the federal government began to play a role in the states' juvenile justice systems in the 1960s and 1970s .

in the juvenile delinquency and youth offenses control act ( p.l .

87-274 ) , congress provided funds for state and local governments , through the department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) , to conduct demonstration projects to research improved methods for preventing and controlling crime committed by juveniles .

in 1968 , congress passed additional legislation to provide direct assistance to state and local governments and to train juvenile justice personnel .

to receive funding , states were required to designate a single agency to take the lead in improving delinquency prevention and control programs .

also in 1968 , congress for the first time placed juvenile justice grant authority within the purview of the department of justice ( doj ) .

despite these congressional efforts to provide assistance to the states as they attempted to rein in juvenile crime , juvenile arrests for violent crimes increased by 216% between 1960 and 1974 .

this increase in juvenile violent crime outstripped the growth in the juvenile population ; the under - 18 population grew from 47 million in 1950 to 70 million in 1970 — an increase of only 49% .

it seemed apparent that the technical assistance and financial aid that congress had provided the states was not enough to address the growing problem of juvenile crime , and many commentators maintained that there was a need for a distinct federal entity to manage the federal government's response to juvenile delinquency .

in 1974 , congress addressed the issue by passing the first comprehensive piece of juvenile justice legislation , the jjdpa .

the jjdpa created a number of grant programs and established a new federal agency within doj — ojjdp — to oversee these grant programs and to coordinate the federal government - wide response to juvenile delinquency .

in the 1980s , many states responded to the public perception that juvenile crime was increasing by passing more punitive laws for juvenile offenders .

some of these laws removed certain types of juvenile crimes from the juvenile court system altogether , mandating that they be handled by the adult criminal system instead .

other laws instituted mandatory sentences for juvenile offenders convicted of certain crimes .

this movement toward punishing juveniles and away from working to rehabilitate them accelerated in the 1990s , with all but three states passing laws that modified or removed traditional juvenile court confidentiality agreements , all but five states passing laws easing the transfer of juveniles into the adult criminal justice system , and a majority of states passing laws expanding sentencing options for juveniles .

during this period , more punitive measures were incorporated into the accepted federal funding streams for juvenile justice programs through a series of revisions to the jjdpa .

these revisions are described in appendix a and appendix b .

the jjdpa was first passed by congress in 1974 and was most recently reauthorized in 2002 by the 21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act .

authorization for its main provisions expired in fy2007 and fy2008 .

this section analyzes the jjdpa as it stands today .

by 1974 , strong momentum had developed in the public , academic , and governmental arenas toward the idea that the juvenile justice system needed to focus on preventing juvenile delinquency , deinstitutionalizing youth already in the system , and keeping juvenile offenders separate from adult offenders .

congress responded to this growing consensus by passing the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act of 1974 .

the jjdpa had three main components: it created a set of institutions within the federal government that were dedicated to coordinating and administering federal juvenile justice efforts ; it established grant programs to assist the states with setting up and running their juvenile justice systems ; and it promulgated core mandates that states had to adhere to in order to be eligible to receive certain grant funding .

although the jjdpa has been amended several times over the past 40 years , it continues to feature the same three components .

as it was passed in 1974 , the jjdpa focused the federal government's efforts largely on preventing juvenile delinquency and on rehabilitating juvenile offenders .

subsequent revisions to the act placed emphasis on influencing states to expand the use of sanctions and accountability measures through some existing grant programs , as well as adding new grant programs to the act's purview .

the latest reauthorization of the jjdpa , enacted by p.l .

107-273 , made several changes to the act , including consolidating various separate grant programs and modifying the language of some of the core mandates .

appendix a details the original jjdpa ; appendix b details the jjdpa's major subsequent revisions and includes a summary of the specific changes enacted by its last reauthorization .

the juvenile accountability block grant ( jabg ) program was originally created by the fy1998 doj appropriations act ( p.l .

105-119 ) and was appropriated each subsequent fiscal year .

however , the jabg program was codified by the 21 st century department of justice reauthorization act ( p.l .

107-273 ) in subtitle a of title ii of the act .

as such it falls outside the scope of the jjdpa , but nevertheless comprises a significant component of the federal government's approach to juvenile justice .

the jabg program authorizes the attorney general to make grants to states and units of local government to strengthen their juvenile justice systems and foster accountability within their juvenile populations .

the program focuses resources on holding juveniles accountable for their actions and building up the juvenile justice system in the states .

it also essentially signifies the high - water mark of the federal government's movement away from an emphasis on rehabilitating juveniles and toward the idea that juveniles need to be punished for their crimes ; indeed , the only core mandate of the jabg program is that states must begin to implement a system of graduated sanctions in order to be eligible for funding .

as originally codified , the jabg program authorized funding for 16 accountability - based purpose areas , including , but not limited to , implementing graduated sanctions ; building or operating juvenile correction or detention facilities ; hiring juvenile court officers , including judges , probation officers , and special advocates ; and hiring additional juvenile prosecutors .

the act also authorized a separate tribal grant program within the jabg appropriation to fund accountability - based measures aimed at strengthening the tribal juvenile justice systems .

the jabg program was last authorized in 2006 by p.l .

109-162 , which added a purpose area to the original 16 areas and authorized jabg at $350 million a year through fy2009 .

the program is currently unauthorized , and last received appropriations in fy2013 .

the administration has nonetheless continued to request funding for this program annually .

congress may choose to consider the jjdpa's reauthorization because its major provisions expired at the end of fy2007 and fy2008 .

similarly , the jabg expired at the end of fy2009 , and congress may also consider its reauthorization .

as congress debates reauthorizing funding for juvenile justice programs , it faces the same issues that have revolved around the juvenile justice system for more than 30 years: what is the appropriate federal role in an arena that has predominantly been the province of the states ? .

what is the appropriate federal response to juvenile violence and juvenile crime ? .

should federal efforts to influence the states' juvenile justice systems focus on the rehabilitation of juvenile offenders , on holding juvenile offenders accountable for their actions , or some combination of both ? .

are the grant programs as currently comprised the best way to support juvenile justice efforts in the states ? .

the following section provides a more detailed examination of these potential issues .

as previously noted , the fundamental tension within the juvenile justice system over the past 40 years has been the relationship between rehabilitating juveniles and holding them accountable for their actions .

to some extent , this is an arbitrary distinction in that the system has included both rehabilitative and accountability based programs .

nevertheless , over the years the juvenile justice system trended away from rehabilitation .

instead , it increasingly incorporated measures that emphasize holding juveniles accountable for their actions .

for example , during the 1990s , 47 states and the district of columbia enacted laws that made their juvenile justice systems more punitive .

as a result , juvenile justice can be conceptualized as a continuum that stretches philosophically from the rehabilitative idea that juveniles are wayward youth who can be taught to mend their ways and become contributing members of society to the accountability end of the spectrum which holds that juveniles must be taught to take responsibility for their actions through punishment ( often in the form of graduated sanctions ) .

the federal juvenile justice system can thus be viewed as a pendulum that swings between these two poles ; for some time , it was swinging away from rehabilitation and toward accountability through the addition of graduated sanctions to the jjdpa's findings and the requirement that states implement graduated sanctions in order to be eligible for jabg funding .

congress may consider whether the federal government , through its grant programs , should be focusing on rehabilitating juveniles , holding them accountable for their actions , or some combination of both of these philosophies .

as mentioned , authorization for the jabg expired at the end of fy2009 , and it has not received funding since fy2013 .

as the jabg program was seen as favoring the accountability end of the spectrum , some may question whether the juvenile justice pendulum is now swinging back toward the rehabilitation end .

the federal government has attempted to influence the states' juvenile justice systems through the core mandates that states must comply with in order to be eligible for jjdpa state formula grant funding .

in essence , the federal government has used grant funding as a carrot to effectuate changes in the way that states house and treat their juvenile offenders .

the last modification of a core mandate occurred with the jjdpa's last reauthorization in 2002 , when the disproportionate minority contact language was modified to preclude ojjdp from using numerical benchmarks in its implementation .

a possible issue for congress to consider is whether to modify or expand the existing core mandates .

proponents of expanding the core mandates could point to the fact that the mandates have been effective in inducing states to promulgate detention standards that focus on minimizing the contact between juvenile offenders and adults and in deinstitutionalizing status offenses .

opponents of expanding the mandates , however , could point to the relative ineffectiveness of the disproportionate minority contact mandate ; most states continue to detain minorities at a higher rate than their percentage of the state's juvenile population and the language has been weakened over the years to ensure that ojjdp does not require states to meet quotas in order to adhere to the mandate .

should congress choose to expand the core mandates , policy options could include requiring states to ensure that their delinquency prevention programs are based on solid scientific evidence such as randomized control trials , requiring states to show the effectiveness of their programs aimed at reducing the disproportionate minority contact of offenders in the juvenile justice system or requiring that states take measurable steps to reduce this disparity , expanding the number and quality of programs available for female juveniles , or requiring states to implement mental health and substance abuse screening and treatment for juveniles .

since the jjdpa was reauthorized in 2002 , there appears to have been some disparity between the authorizing legislation and the structure of the appropriations for some juvenile justice grant programs .

as previously noted , this last reauthorization eliminated a number of small grant programs and consolidated most of their purpose areas into the juvenile delinquency prevention block grant .

however , the annual appropriation for ojjdp continues to follow the previous structure , and funds have been appropriated in each subsequent fiscal year for some of the grant programs that were repealed in 2002 .

the current disconnect between the authorization and the appropriation could present a challenge for ojjdp .

given this inconsistency , ojjdp employees must spend some percentage of their time reconciling the differences between the authorization and the appropriation ; this may not represent the best investment of ojjdp staff time .

additionally , because the eligibility requirements and funding mechanisms of the old grant programs and the new block grant program are different , this disparity between the authorization and the appropriation likely represents a challenge to the states and units of local government as they apply for funding .

a potential issue for congress as it reauthorizes the jjdpa includes whether the juvenile delinquency prevention block grant should be implemented as it was authorized , whether it should be modified , or whether it should be broken up again into its component grant programs to better reflect what has been occurring with the appropriation .

the current grant programs within the jjdpa overlap in a variety of ways .

the state formula grant and the delinquency prevention block grant programs , for example , both feature a wide array of purpose areas elucidated in legislative language that are largely similar .

for example , both grant programs include purpose areas for counseling , mentoring , and training programs ; community based programs and services ; after school programs ; education programs ; programs that expand the use of probation officers ; substance and drug abuse prevention programs ; mental health services ; gang - involvement prevention programs ; and coordinating local service delivery among the different agencies involved .

additionally , the delinquency prevention block grant , the challenge grants , and the title v incentive grants for local delinquency prevention programs all include language allowing ojjdp to provide funding for additional programs not included in the specific purpose areas identified .

a potential issue for congress could include whether the current overlap within the juvenile justice grant programs is appropriate .

possible policy options could include altering the current grant programs to target funding for specific activities in each grant program or consolidating the different grant programs into one large program .

the creation of new grant programs could be an alternative to modifying or consolidating the existing grant programs .

creating grant programs that are tailored to specific activities ( eg , gang - prevention , restorative justice , mentoring , mental health treatment , etc. ) .

could provide dedicated funding streams to activities that may not otherwise receive funding if they must compete for funding in a broader grant program .

however , there are limited federal resources in the juvenile justice arena , and these resources have decreased over the past several years .

adding grant programs without also increasing funding may take resources away from the current programs .

a possible issue for congress involves whether the existing grant programs are adequate , whether the existing grant programs should be modified , or whether new grant programs should be enacted .

the juvenile population comes into contact with a wide variety of federal programs overseen by a number of different agencies .

under current law , the administrator of ojjdp has a broad mandate to coordinate the federal government's overall response to juvenile offenders and juvenile delinquency prevention , including federal programs that focus on prevention , diversion , training , treatment , rehabilitation , evaluation , research , and improvement of the states' juvenile justice systems .

additionally , the coordinating council was established to help the various agencies involved in dealing with and providing treatment for juveniles better coordinate their efforts .

some overlap exists within the federal government concerning programs that offer services for juveniles .

for example , a growing body of evidence points to the relationship between child abuse or other forms of mistreatment and juvenile delinquency or other delinquent behavior such as youth violence .

this has led to a duplication of efforts within many federal agencies and what may sometimes be a considerable overlap in the funding opportunities available to states and local entities .

an example of this overlap is the body of federal funding available for youth violence prevention .

there are a multitude of federal programs throughout the government that deal with youth violence's causes , its effects , and its ramifications .

the amount of coordination that is occurring between the departments on these issues remains an open question .

in debating the current state of federal juvenile justice grant programs and the potential reauthorization of the jjdpa , there have been questions surrounding the oversight of these programs .

specifically , questions involve accountability of grantees receiving funding , adequacy of existing regulations and guidance , and strength of the current compliance monitoring process .

some have questioned whether the jjdpa has sufficient metrics in place for ojjdp to effectively monitor states' compliance with the state formula grants four core mandates .

of these four mandates , many view the "disproportionate minority contact," or dmc , requirement as the most challenging and difficult - to - monitor mandate .

according to this mandate , states are required to show that they are implementing juvenile delinquency prevention programs designed to reduce — without establishing or requiring numerical standards or quotas — the disproportionate number of minorities confined within their juvenile justice systems .

ojjdp has given guidance to states on how to identify and comply with the dmc requirement .

however , some have suggested that the dmc core mandate be strengthened to include a requirement that states make measurable progress toward reducing racial and ethnic disparities in their juvenile justice systems .

if policymakers evaluate that ojjdp is not adequately enforcing the dmc core requirement , they may debate whether to exercise additional oversight over ojjdp's enforcement of the requirement or whether to amend the dmc requirement itself .

there have also been concerns that ojjdp may not adequately enforce states' adherence to the jjdpa's core requirements as a foundation for receiving state formula grant funding .

there are a number of factors that might contribute to this .

for instance , states may not fully report non - compliance to ojjdp , ojjdp's compliance monitoring process may not have the capacity to accurately detect noncompliance , or ojjdp may not enforce the core requirements as a basis for states receiving funding .

should congress take up the reauthorization of the jjdpa , policymakers may debate whether or how to amend the act to ensure transparency and states' compliance with the core mandates as a condition of receiving funding .

appendix a .

the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) of 1974 the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) was first passed by congress in 1974 and was most recently reauthorized in 2002 by the 21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act .

its provisions are currently authorized through fy2007 .

this appendix will analyze the original jjdpa .

the original jjdpa had three main components: it created a set of institutions within the federal government that were dedicated to coordinating and administering federal juvenile justice efforts ; it established grant programs to assist the states with setting up and running their juvenile justice systems ; and it promulgated core mandates that states had to adhere to in order to be eligible to receive grant funding .

as it was passed in 1974 , the jjdpa focused largely on preventing juvenile delinquency and on rehabilitating juvenile offenders .

federal government entities established the jjdpa established a range of federal government entities charged with overseeing the federal government's juvenile justice efforts that continue to exist today .

in addition to establishing the first federal agency dedicated to the promulgation of juvenile justice , the act established a series of institutions aimed at increasing the federal government's coordination of juvenile delinquency programs and of programs that affect juveniles generally .

the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) title ii , part a of the original jjdpa established ojjdp within doj's law enforcement assistance administration ( leaa ) as the new clearing house for federal juvenile justice efforts .

the act established the office of the assistant administrator of ojjdp , who is charged with overseeing the office and coordinating the federal government - wide juvenile justice efforts under the direction of the administrator of the leaa .

the act endowed the administrator with a series of powers , including the authority to require other federal entities with juvenile delinquency programs to submit information and reports to ojjdp , and charged the new entity with administering the programs that were created by the act .

the act also directed the administrator to implement the overall policy and develop the objectives and priorities for all federal juvenile delinquency activities as well as "all activities relating to prevention , diversion , training , treatment , rehabilitation , evaluation , research , and improvement of the juvenile justice system of the united states. .

the leaa administrator , acting through the ojjdp assistant administrator , was thus given a broad mandate to oversee and coordinate not just the new agency's activities but all federal activities relating to the treatment of juveniles .

ojjdp was required to present congress with an annual report of its activities and of the federal government's overall juvenile delinquency programs .

coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( coordinating council ) the act established an independent organization known as the coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention to coordinate the federal government's juvenile delinquency programs .

the coordinating council was to be comprised of representatives from a broad range of federal agencies who "exercise significant decision making authority in the federal agency involved," including the attorney general , secretary of health , education , and welfare , the secretary of labor , director of the special action office for drug abuse prevention , secretary of housing and urban development , or their respective designees .

additionally , the coordinating council was to include the assistant administrator of ojjdp and the deputy assistant administrator of the national institute for juvenile justice and delinquency prevention .

the coordinating council was to meet a minimum of six times per year and was to report its activities as part of ojjdp's annual report .

advisory committee on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( advisory committee ) the act established an advisory committee composed of 21 individuals who were to be appointed by the president to serve in an advisory capacity .

these individuals were to be experts in the fields of juvenile delinquency prevention or treatment ; juvenile justice administration ; or community based programs and private voluntary organizations .

the majority of the advisory committee was to be drawn from the private sector and at least one - third of the members were to be younger than 26 at the time of their appointment .

the members were to serve without compensation and to meet no less than four times a year .

the advisory committee was charged with making recommendations to the administrator of ojjdp concerning the planning , policies , priorities , operations , and management of all juvenile delinquency programs within the federal government .

the national institute for juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( national institute ) the act created the national institute to coordinate the collection , preparation , and dissemination of data regarding the treatment and control of juvenile offenders .

the national institute was charged with serving as a clearing house for all information relating to juvenile delinquency and with conducting and encouraging research on juvenile delinquency .

the national institute was also charged with training juvenile justice practitioners from every level of government and the private sector who were connected with the treatment and control of juvenile offenders .

the national institute was endowed with the power to request other federal agencies to supply the data and statistics that were necessary for its mission , and to reimburse these agencies for the expenses associated with these requests .

federal grant programs for juvenile justice in addition to creating entities charged with overseeing and developing the juvenile delinquency prevention programs within the federal government , the jjdpa created two main grant programs that were aimed at helping states build up and manage their juvenile justice systems and prevent juvenile delinquency .

additionally , the jjdpa created a grant program aimed at helping states handle runaway youth .

formula grant program the first federal grant program established by the jjdpa was a formula grant program for states and local governments .

this formula grant program was broadly aimed at helping states improve their juvenile justice systems by providing funding that could be used to assist in the planning , establishing , operating , coordinating , and evaluating of juvenile delinquency programs .

funding under this grant program was to be allocated to states based on their relative populations of people under the age of 18 , and no state was to receive less than $200,000 .

to receive funding under this grant program , the states were required to submit plans for how they were going to disburse the funding .

the state plans were to describe a series of steps that states were to take in order to be eligible for funding , including the creation of juvenile justice entities within the state systems .

states were required to pass along two - thirds of the funding to local government programs , unless granted a waiver by the administrator , and 75% of the funds expended by the states were to be "used for advanced techniques in developing , maintaining , and expanding programs and services designed to prevent juvenile delinquency , to divert juveniles from the juvenile justice system , and to provide community based alternatives to juvenile detention and correctional facilities. .

in addition to these restrictions on how the money was to be spent , the jjdpa established two core mandates that states had to adhere to in order to receive funding .

the first of these mandates required states to ensure that juveniles who had committed offenses that would not be crimes if they were committed by an adult ( known as status offenses ) not be placed in juvenile detention or correctional facilities .

this has become known as the deinstitutionalization of status offenders .

the second mandate required states to ensure that juveniles were not detained or confined in any institution in which they would have regular contact with adults in the criminal justice system .

prevention and treatment programs grant the act authorized the administrator to make grants to and enter into contracts with public and private agencies , organizations , institutions , and individuals that focused on delinquency prevention and treatment .

the act authorized the administrator to enter into these grants and contracts to , among other things , develop and implement new approaches and methods for juvenile delinquency programs ; develop and maintain community based alternatives to institutionalization ; develop and implement programs that diverted juveniles from the traditional correctional system ; improve the delivery of services to delinquents and to at - risk youth ; and implement programs aimed at keeping students in school .

demonstration programs grant the jjdpa also created a discretionary grant program aimed at supporting "innovative approaches to youth development and the prevention and treatment of delinquent behavior. .

grants under this program could be awarded to any state or local government agency , as well as nonprofit organizations , and were to last one year .

the overarching goal of the program was to foster innovation in youth development .

appendix b .

subsequent revisions to the jjdpa between 1974 and 2001 , there were a number of laws enacted that modified the jjdpa in some manner .

this appendix will outline the main changes that were made to the jjdpa over the past three decades .

the juvenile justice amendments of 1980 ( p.l .

96-509 ) in 1980 , congress made three major changes to the jjdpa and reauthorized the act through fy1984 .

one of the major changes enacted by p.l .

96-509 was the streamlining of the juvenile justice apparatus within doj ; whereas the jjdpa placed ojjdp underneath the law enforcement assistance administration ( leaa ) and gave the leaa administrator authority over the agency , under the new act's provisions the administrator of ojjdp reported directly to the attorney general .

in essence , this gave ojjdp a measure of independence and removed the filter between the administrator of ojjdp and the attorney general .

despite this , however , ojjdp remained administratively within leaa .

another major change made to the jjpda was the creation of a new core mandate that states were to adhere to in order to receive funding under the formula grant program: the removal of juveniles from adult jails and lockups .

p.l .

96-509 also began the process of shifting the jjdpa's focus away from rehabilitation and towards sanctions , including language that called for ojjdp to focus additional attention on the problem of juveniles committing serious crimes by paying special attention to sentencing and adding resources to the juvenile court system .

the act also made a series of minor modifications to the coordinating council , the advisory committee , and the national institute aimed at increasing the coordination of federal juvenile justice efforts and at including the perspective of juveniles into the process .

among the changes made to the jjpda , the act allowed 7.5% of ojjdp's overall appropriation to be used for the concentration of federal juvenile delinquency efforts , and it added the director of the bureau of prisons , the commissioner of the bureau of indian affairs , the commissioner for the administration for children , youth , and families , and the director of the youth development bureau to the coordinating council .

the act directed the advisory committee to include at least five individuals younger than 24 years of age , at least two of whom should have been or continue to be under the jurisdiction of the juvenile justice system , and to contact and seek regular input from juveniles currently under the jurisdiction of the juvenile justice system .

the main alteration made by the act was the new requirement that states stop detaining or confining juveniles in any jail or lockup for adults in order to be eligible for the state formula grant .

the act did , however , allow for the temporary detention of juveniles accused of serious crimes in such facilities where no existing acceptable alternative placement was possible , subject to the promulgation of regulations by the administrator .

failure to achieve compliance with this mandate within five years would terminate a state's ability to receive funding unless the administrator determined that the state was in substantial compliance with the requirements .

substantial compliance was defined as a state's achieving the removal of not less than 75% of juveniles from adult jails and lockups , and making an unequivocal commitment to achieving full compliance within two additional years .

the act also expanded the scope of the prevention and treatment programs grant to include programs that were aimed at removing juveniles from adult jails and lockups , and provided that at least 5% of the funding available under this grant program be allocated to the virgin islands , guam , american samoa , the trust territory of the pacific islands , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands .

the juvenile justice , runaway youth , and missing children's act amendments of 1984 act ( p.l .

98-473 ) p.l .

98-473 reauthorized the jjdpa through fy1988 and formally elevated ojjdp to a stand - alone office within doj under the general authority of the attorney general .

another major change made to the jjdpa by this act was the expansion of the prevention and treatment programs grant program .

the act dedicated 15% to 25% of the overall funding for state formula grants to this program , and expanded the number of purpose areas that this discretionary grant could be used for , including , but not limited to , community based alternatives to detention ; diversion mechanisms including restitution and reconciliation projects ; advocacy activities aimed at improving services ; programs that strengthen families ; prevention and treatment programs ; developing a national education program aimed at reducing juvenile delinquency ; developing programs aimed at fostering youth employment ; and developing programs aimed at keeping youths in school .

at least 30% of the funding available under this program was to be apportioned to private nonprofit agencies and institutions .

the amendments to the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-690 ) in 1988 , congress reauthorized the jjdpa through fy1992 .

among other things , the act required ojjdp to publish a comprehensive plan of the activities it would undertake each year in the federal register .

it also required ojjdp to prepare an annual report each fiscal year providing a detailed summary and analysis of the national trends in juvenile justice , including the numbers and types of offenses with which juveniles were being charged ; the rate at which juveniles were being taken into custody ; the extent to which states were complying with their state plan requirements ; and ojjdp and the coordinating council's activities .

the act also required states , as part of their plans , to include information on their efforts to end the disproportionate confinement of minority youth in their detention systems , and it raised the minimum funding allocations available for states under the formula grant program .

the act also directed ojjdp to include technical assistance as a purpose area for each of its grant programs and for the national institute .

the act modified the prevention and treatment programs grant program by deleting language inserted by p.l .

98-473 that required 15% to 25% of the formula grant funding be allocated to this program and by expanding the number and types of considerations required to approve applications for funding .

gang prevention grant p.l .

100-690 also established a new grant program under part d of title ii of the jjdpa aimed at funding prevention and treatment programs for juvenile gang members .

the new discretionary grant program authorized the administrator to make grants to public and private agencies and organizations .

the new grant program identified 10 broad purpose areas aimed at reducing the numbers of juveniles joining gangs and providing treatment for juveniles convicted of gang - related criminal activities .

the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention amendments act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-586 ) p.l .

102-586 reauthorized the jjdpa through fy1996 .

the main change enacted by this act was the elevation of disproportionate minority confinement to core mandate status .

states that were not in compliance with this requirement within three years of the act's passage would no longer be eligible for formula grant funding .

however , states that had shown "substantial compliance" with the requirement would be eligible for funding for two additional years .

the act created a number of new grant programs within title ii of the jjdpa , including grants for community - based gang intervention , for state challenge activities , for juvenile victims of child abuse , and for mentoring .

the act also added a new title v to the jjdpa establishing a new program , the incentive grants for local delinquency prevention program .

the act also modified the composition of the coordinating council .

in addition to the leaders ( or their designated representatives ) of the various federal agencies with a stake in the juvenile justice system , the coordinating council was to include nine individuals working in the field of juvenile justice who were not federal employees .

they were to be appointed without regard to political affiliation .

three members were to be appointed by the president , three by the speaker of the house , and three by the majority leader of the senate .

following is a description of the various grant programs that were implemented by the 1992 revision to the jjdpa .

community based gang intervention grant the act slightly modified the discretionary gang prevention grant authorized within part d of title ii of the jjdpa by p.l .

100-690 , renaming it the gang - free schools and communities grant .

the act also created a new grant program , the community - based gang intervention grant .

the new grant program authorized the administrator to make grants to public and private nonprofit agencies , organizations , and institutions to reduce the participation of juveniles in gangs by engaging the community .

the grant allowed funding to be provided for coordinating mechanisms such as regional task - forces , as well as for a variety of prevention and accountability measures .

for example , on the accountability side the grant authorized funding for graduated sanctions , including the expanded use of a wide variety of interventions such as probation , mediation , restitution , community service , intensive supervision , electronic monitoring , and bootcamps , among others .

on the prevention side the program authorized funding for , among other things: treatment for juvenile gang members ; prevention and treatment services for substance abuse by juveniles ; and services to prevent juveniles from coming into contact with the juvenile justice system again as a result of gang - related activity .

state challenge activities grant the act created another new grant program under part e of title ii of the jjdpa , the state challenge activities grant ( challenge grant ) .

the challenge grant program allowed the administrator to designate up to 10% of a state's formula grant for this new grant program .

the act defined a challenge activity as a program that is aimed at , among other things , developing policies to provide services for juveniles in the juvenile justice system ; increasing community - based alternatives to detention ; developing programs that replaced traditional training schools with secure settings ; developing programs that prohibited gender bias within the state's juvenile justice system and ensured that female juveniles had access to a full range of services , including treatment for physical or sexual assault and education in parenting ; and increasing aftercare services for juveniles coming out of placement .

juvenile victims of child abuse grant the act created a third new grant program under part f of title ii of the jjdpa for juvenile victims of child abuse .

this program enabled the administrator to enter into grants with public agencies and private nonprofit organizations to provide treatment for juvenile offenders who are victims of child abuse and neglect ; provide transitional services , including individual , group , and family counseling ; and carry out research on juvenile child abuse issues associated with these grants .

juvenile mentoring grant the act created a fourth new grant program under part g of title ii of the jjdpa for juvenile mentoring programs .

these grants could be awarded to local educational agencies ( in partnership with public or private agencies ) to establish and support mentoring programs .

mentoring programs eligible for funding included programs designed to link at - risk youth with responsible adults ; promote personal and social responsibility ; increase educational participation ; discourage the use of drugs and violence ; discourage participation in gangs ; and encourage participation in community service and other community activities .

grant funding could not be used to directly compensate mentors ( apart from reimbursement for incidental expenses ) or support litigation of any kind , among other things .

boot camp grants the act created a fifth new grant program under part h of title ii of the jjdpa to fund the establishment of up to 10 military - style boot camps in one or more states .

these boot camps were to provide highly regimented schedules involving discipline , physical training , work , and drill , and to include educational and counseling services .

states receiving funding under this program would be required to provide for post - release supervision and after - care services for the juveniles participating in their boot camps .

incentive grants for local delinquency prevention programs ( incentive grants ) the act created a new title v within the jjdpa for incentive grants aimed at creating delinquency prevention programs at the local level .

the grants would be allocated by state and passed along by each state's advisory group ( as created under the state plan stipulations ) to local government entities .

funding could be used to provide recreation services , tutoring and remedial education , job skills , mental health services , substance abuse services , leadership development services , and programs that teach juveniles accountability for their actions .

states were required to provide a 50% match for the grants and be in compliance with the core mandates in title ii in order to receive funding under this program .

the 21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-273 ) p.l .

107-273 in 2002 represents the last major revision to the jjdpa .

the act reauthorized ojjdp , which had remained unauthorized since fy1997 but which had been appropriated annually , through fy2007 .

the act also made some significant revisions to the jjdpa , most notably repealing all of the new grant programs in title ii created by p.l .

102-586 and consolidating their purpose areas within the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention block grant .

among other things , the act amended the state plans section of the jjdpa and modified the disproportionate minority confinement core mandate provision .

the revision to the core mandate directed the states to address the problem of disproportionate minority confinement , but stated that the states were not required to meet numerical quotas or standards in order to receive formula grant funding .

the act also mandated that states enact policies requiring that individuals who work with both juveniles and adults in detention facilities be certified and trained to work with juveniles .

in addition , the act added a number of additional stipulations to the state plans , including , among other things , that states notify appropriate public agencies within 24 hours of a child's apprehension for a status offense ; that states specify up to 5% of their formula grant funding for incentive grants to reduce probation officer case loads ; and that states establish systems and policies to incorporate child protective services records into juvenile case files and to ensure that child welfare records are available to the court .

if states failed to comply with any of the four core mandates they would have their formula grant funding reduced by not less than 20% for each mandate with which they were not in compliance .

additionally , states would be ineligible to receive any formula funding unless they agreed to spend 50% of the funding they received on achieving compliance with whichever core mandate they were non - compliant with , unless the administrator determined that the state had achieved substantial compliance with the mandate .

juvenile delinquency prevention block grant perhaps the major structural change enacted by p.l .

107-273 was the elimination of the series of grant programs that had been created within title ii of the jjdpa: the gang - free schools and communities grant ; the community based gang intervention grant ; the states challenge activities grant ; the juvenile victims of child abuse grant ; the juvenile mentoring grant ; and the boot camps grant .

in their stead , the act created a juvenile delinquency prevention block grant aimed at funding programs that reduced juvenile delinquency that incorporated most of the general purpose areas that had been eligible for funding under the previous grant programs .

included under this broad umbrella were 25 purpose areas that run the gamut of juvenile delinquency prevention , including , but not limited to , treatment programs ; counseling programs ; educational programs ; programs that expanded the use of probation officers ; community - based programs ; drug - prevention programs ; and gang - prevention programs .

