two major u.s. trade remedies , each set out in title vii of the tariff act of 1930 , are antidumping ( ad ) law , which combats the sale of imported goods at less than their fair market value , and countervailing duty ( cvd ) law , which is aimed at offsetting foreign government subsidization of imported items .

if dumped or subsidized imports are found to cause material injury , or threat , to a domestic industry , and the dumping margin or the net subsidy is not de minimis , antidumping or countervailing duties will be imposed .

both remedies are available when goods are imported from competitor countries that have free market policies .

since 1984 , however , only ad law had been applied to goods from nonmarket or other "transitional" economies .

with the continued economic growth of some of these economies , such as china and vietnam , pressure has increased on the u.s. government to utilize both domestic trade remedies more aggressively against unfair imports from these countries .

this report ( 1 ) discusses the application of antidumping and countervailing duty law to the goods of nonmarket economy ( nme ) countries , including the decision of the department of commerce ( doc ) in 2007 to change its long - standing policy and apply cvd law to such goods ; ( 2 ) reviews china's successful case in the world trade organization challenging the u.s. application of cvds to chinese products and the status of u.s. compliance efforts in the case ; ( 3 ) examines the december 2011 decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit in gpx int'l tire corp. v. un i ted states holding that the u.s. cvd law does not authorize doc to apply cvds to nme country goods ; ( 4 ) summarizes the subsequently enacted p.l .

112-99 , signed march 13 , 2012 , a statute authorizing doc to apply cvds to such products ; and ( 5 ) notes recent developments in the gpx litigation .

in most cases involving goods from nme countries , parties pursuing trade remedies have sought both antidumping and countervailing duty orders on the imports in question .

as discussed earlier , because china and vietnam are designated as nonmarket economy ( nme ) countries for purposes of antidumping investigations , a provision of u.s. law permits doc to use a "surrogate country" methodology to determine the fair market or "normal" value of products imported from them .

assuming that an nme product is subsidized and the domestic sales price reflects the subsidy , the "surrogate country" methodology generally produces a higher normal value for the item than would result if the actual sale price in the nme country were used .

article vi:5 of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) states that an imported product may not be "subject to both anti - dumping and countervailing duties to compensate for the same situation of dumping or export subsidization. .

to determine the dumping margin , the export or constructed export price of an item is compared to the normal value of the item — that is , the price of the item in the home market .

under section 772 ( c ) and ( d ) of the tariff act of 1930 , doc is required to make certain adjustments to the export price or constructed export price , including increasing it by "the amount of any countervailing duty imposed on the subject merchandise … to offset an export subsidy. .

no provision of antidumping law expressly provides for an upward adjustment of antidumping duties for a domestic subsidy — that is , a government subsidy that is not tied to exportation but that may nonetheless benefit exported merchandise .

referencing article vi:5 of the gatt , the commerce department described the differential treatment of export and domestic subsidies as follows: domestic subsidies presumably lower the price of the subject merchandise both in the home and the u.s. markets , and therefore have no effect on the measurement of any dumping that might also occur .

export subsidies , by contrast , benefit only exported merchandise .

accordingly , an export subsidy brings about a lower u.s. price , which could be ascribed to either dumping or export subsidization , as well as the potential for double remedies .

imposing both an export - subsidy cvd and an ad duty , calculated with no adjustment for that cvd , would impose a double remedy specifically prohibited by article vi ¶5 of the gatt .

thus , the only reasonable explanation for congress' decision to provide for the … [addition to] u.s. prices of export - subsidy cvds is protection against double remedies .

the commerce department later expanded on the statutory distinction in this way: the treatment of cvds that arise out of domestic subsidies contrasts with the statutory treatment of cvds that relate to export subsidies .

the reason for the difference in treatment is that export subsidies are assumed to increase dumping margins by lowering the export price , but not the domestic price in the exporting country .

consequently , collecting both a cvd on an export subsidy and also the increase in the dumping margin resulting from that subsidy would constitute a double remedy for the export subsidy .

adding the cvd to the initial u.s. price lowers the margin by the amount the subsidy is presumed to have increased it , thereby preventing a double - remedy .

on the other hand , domestic subsidies are assumed not to affect dumping margins , because they lower prices in both the u.s. market and the domestic market of the exporting country equally .

as a result , there is no need for an adjustment to prevent a double remedy .

thus , in the most general germs , the statute stands for the proposition that dumping margins should not be calculated so as to double - collect cvds .

while the situation described may hold true with regard to ad investigations involving goods of market economy countries , it may not necessarily do so in ad investigations involving nme products where the surrogate country methodology is used to establish normal value of the merchandise in question and where a cvd order is imposed to remedy a domestic subsidy on the same merchandise .

the u.s. court of international trade explained the distinction in gpx int'l tire corp. v. united states , the 2009 decision involving cvds on chinese imports discussed later in this report: here , the export price is not being compared with the price of the good in the prc in which case both sides of the comparison would be equally affected , but rather , export price , however it is affected by the subsidy , is compared with the presumptively subsidy - free constructed normal value .

without some type of adjustment for this , the imposition of ad duties could very well result in a double remedy .

as explained in more detail below , the issue of double counting ( or double remedies ) arose not only in the court decision referenced above , but also in china's successful wto challenge of several u.s. cvd orders on chinese products , each case posing limitations on the ability of doc to impose cvds on nme imports .

the administration did not change its policy of treating china and vietnam as nonmarket economy countries as a result of the gpx decision and instead sought legislation authorizing the commerce department to impose cvds on nme products with regard to existing cvd orders as well as pending and future cvd investigations .

legislation to respond to the gpx decision was introduced on february 29 , 2012 , and was quickly enacted by both houses .

h.r .

4105 ( camp ) passed the house on march 6 and the senate on march 7 .

the legislation was signed by the president march 13 , 2012 , and designated p.l .

112-99 .

important considerations in the proposal were not only its temporal scope , but also whether it needed to deal with double counting of subsidization , the issue that arose in china's wto case and that was also the focus of the u.s. court of international trade in its gpx rulings .

the new statute generally authorizes the application of cvds to nme products ; makes this authority effective as of november 20 , 2006 ; and prospectively amends antidumping law to provide a mechanism for the department to address double counting in simultaneous ad and cvd investigations .

as discussed earlier , section 701 ( a ) of the tariff act of 1930 directs that countervailing duties be imposed on imported merchandise if ( 1 ) doc determines that the "government of a country" or "any public entity within the territory of a country" is subsidizing the imports into the united states and ( 2 ) the u.s. international trade commission determines that the subsidized imports cause material injury or threat to a domestic industry .

the new law amends section 701 to add a new subsection providing that merchandise imported , or sold for importation , into the united states from a nonmarket economy ( nme ) country is covered by section 701 ( a ) .

the statute does not require doc to impose cvds on nme merchandise , however , if it cannot identify and measure government subsidies in an nme country "because the economy of the country is essentially comprised of a single entity. .

these provisions apply to all cvd proceedings initiated by the commerce department on or after november 20 , 2006 ; all resulting actions by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) ; and all civil actions , criminal proceedings and other federal court proceedings relating to the initiated cvd proceedings or resulting customs and border patrol actions .

the statute also creates authorities and requirements aimed at addressing the double counting of domestic subsidization that occurs when simultaneous antidumping and cvd orders are imposed on the same nme merchandise and subsidization is captured both by the cvd and the dumping margin based on the higher normal value determined by use of surrogate country methodology .

section 2 amends u.s. antidumping law , as codified at 19 u.s.c .

section 1677f - 1 , to direct the commerce department to reduce an antidumping duty imposed on nme merchandise calculated by using surrogate - based normal value if the department determines that ( 1 ) a countervailable domestic subsidy "has been provided" with respect to the merchandise at issue ; ( 2 ) the subsidy "has been shown" to have reduced the average price of imports of that merchandise "during the relevant period" ; and ( 3 ) doc can "reasonably estimate" the extent to which the countervailable domestic subsidy , in combination with the use of surrogate country methodology to determine normal value , has increased the weighted average dumping margin for the merchandise .

the duty is to be reduced by the amount of increase in the dumping margin estimated by doc .

the bill also provides that the reduction in the antidumping duty may not exceed the portion of the cvd rate attributable to the countervailable subsidy that is provided with respect to the merchandise at issue and that meets the three above - stated conditions .

the double counting provision applies to ( 1 ) all cvd proceedings initiated on or after the date of enactment ( march 13 , 2012 ) and ( 2 ) all section 129 dumping determinations , that is , new doc dumping determinations issued under section 129 of the uruguay round agreements act , to comply with wto decisions , issued on or after enactment .

application to section 129 dumping determinations would be subject to section 129 ( c ) , which provides that such any such determination applies to unliquidated entries of goods , that is , entries for which final duties have not been assessed , that enter the united states , or are withdrawn from warehouse , on or after the date that ustr directs doc to implement the determination .

the double counting provision does not apply to trade remedy investigations initiated between november 20 , 2006 , and march 13 , 2012 .

shortly after the gpx legislation was introduced , the u.s. government , meeting a march 5 , 2012 , deadline imposed by the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( cafc ) , petitioned the cafc for a rehearing of the case en banc , that is , a hearing by the full court .

while the government had focused on chevron - related arguments in its filing , the enactment of legislation modified the questions before the court .

the day after the new law was signed , the cafc requested the gpx litigants to submit arguments on the effect of p.l .

112-99 on further proceedings in the case .

the united states asked that the appellate decision be vacated , arguing that it was not final and had been superseded by the new law , and that the case be remanded to the u.s. court of international trade for further proceedings in light of the new statute .

importers argued that the november 20 , 2006 , effective date for the new cvd authority was unconstitutionally retroactive and that the court should affirm its earlier decision .

on may 9 , 2012 , the cafc , while not vacating its decision as requested by the government , granted the petitions for a rehearing and remanded the gpx decision to the u.s. court of international trade ( uscit ) to address constitutional issues stemming from the different effective dates in the new statute .

in response to the cafc's earlier directive , appellee importers had contended that the new legislation was unconstitutional because , in the words of the court , ( 1 ) it attempts to prescribe a rule of decision for this case after our decision in gpx was rendered ; and ( 2 ) it improperly creates a special rule applicable only to this case ( or perhaps a few others ) due to the different effective dates in the two provisions ; it thus recreates a situation in which both antidumping and countervailing duties may be imposed , without providing a mechanism to account for potential double counting .

the court dispensed with the separation - of - powers question raised by the first argument , ruling that , because the gpx litigation was still pending on appeal when the legislation was enacted and therefore the court had not yet issued its mandate , congress was not attempting to undo the final judgment of an article iii court , a legislative action prohibited under plaut v. spendthrift farm , inc .

the court treated the second issue differently , however , considering it "a question of first impression as to which we have received only cursory briefing" and agreeing with the government that "'[t]o the extent that appellees … argue that the new law is unconstitutional , such an argument should be decided by the trial court in the first instance.' .

the court also ordered that its mandate would issue on may 16 , 2012 .

on remand , the uscit upheld the constitutionality of p.l .

112-99 and remanded a number of issues to doc .

gpx challenged the constitutionality of p.l .

112-99 on three grounds .

first , gpx claimed that the statute violated the proscription against ex post facto laws contained in article i , section 9 of the constitution because it applied retroactively to investigations initiated on or after november 6 , 2006 .

the uscit rejected gpx's argument that by making the cvd retroactive , the statute imposed an ex post facto law , because the ex post facto clause prohibits retroactive application of penal laws only ; it does not prohibit retrospective application of remedial laws .

the court concluded that trade remedy laws are remedial in nature , and therefore , p.l .

112-99 falls outside the proscription of the ex post facto clause .

second , gpx challenged the statute on due process grounds , arguing that the retroactive application of the cvd unconstitutionally "alter[ed] legitimate expectations of the level of duties that would be imposed on their imports" and violated the due process guarantee of the fifth amendment .

the court applied rational basis scrutiny , the least rigorous level of review , and upheld the statute .

the court employed a four - part test from nachman corp. v. pension ben .

guar .

corp. , to determine whether the statute's retroactivity was rational .

under the nachman test , courts examine: "the reliance interests of affected parties , the extent to which impaired private interests were previously subject to regulatory controls , the equities of imposing the burdens , and the statutory provisions that moderate the impact of the burdens. .

the court first determined that gpx had failed to identify a "vested right with which [ p.l .

112-99 ] interferes," noting that there is no right to import and that when trade remedies apply , importers have no certainty as to the final duty that that will apply .

therefore , gpx could not demonstrate that it had a vested property right in any particular rate .

considering the second factor , the court stated that "the area of trade is a highly regulated field in which duties are calculated … based on imprecise and retrospective trade remedy laws. .

the court noted that gpx had notice that china's status as a nme was uncertain at the time of the imports and that it is particularly difficult to predict duty rates , leading the court to conclude that "[a]s plaintiffs continued to enter merchandise , the only certainty was that there would be litigation. .

considering the third factor , the balance of the burdens , the court accepted the government's assertion that congress acted "based on the legitimate state interest of protecting u.s. industry from unfair trade practices while also ensuring the finality of existing cvd orders. .

the court did not explicitly consider the final nachman factor but ultimately concluded that congress did not act irrationally .

finally , gpx claimed that p.l .

112-99 violated constitutional guarantees of equal protection by employing a standard that allowed double remedies on nme products subject to trade remedy investigations initiated between november 6 , 2006 and march 13 , 2012 while employing a standard that protects against double remedies on nme products subject to trade remedy investigations initiated after march 13 , 2012 .

the court once again applied rational basis review and upheld the differential treatment , concluding that it was rationally related to the government's interest in the finality of the cvd investigations initiated between november 6 , 2006 , and march 13 , 2012 .

having concluded that p.l .

112-99 was constitutional , the court proceeded to review doc's methodology for determining the cvds .

the court remanded a number of issues to the department for reconsideration .

first , the uscit remanded to commerce the issue of whether a subsidy to a company acquired by gpx was extinguished by the terms on which gpx acquired the company .

second , the court remanded to commerce the issue of whether the company acquired by gpx received subsidized loans .

