a multitude of factors can affect the timing of federal project delivery .

factors that may contribute to delays in a federal project include changes in the planning and design process , changes in funding priorities , construction complexities , local controversy or community opposition to a project , and compliance with myriad local , state , tribal or federal laws .

with regard to the latter , certain federal actions such as highway construction projects and permitting for mining operations , cattle grazing , forest thinning , and energy development projects may trigger compliance with literally dozens of statutory and regulatory requirements .

these , in turn , may require the participation or input of possibly dozens of local , state , tribal , or federal agencies .

in recent years , the time it takes to comply with various environmental laws has been the subject of public scrutiny and debate in congress .

one law that has been the subject of particular scrutiny has been the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321-4347 ) .

signed into law by president nixon on january 1 , 1970 , nepa declared a national policy to protect the environment and created a council on environmental quality ( ceq ) in the executive office of the president .

to implement the national policy , nepa requires that environmental factors be considered when federal agencies make decisions and that a detailed statement of environmental impacts be prepared for all major federal actions significantly affecting the human environment .

the "detailed statement" referenced in the law is now known as an environmental impact statement ( eis ) .

ceq regulations for implementing nepa , among other provisions , introduced additional levels of environmental review — those for environmental assessments ( eas ) and categorical exclusions .

generally , eas are prepared to determine whether the impacts of a federal action will be "significant" under nepa .

an action is categorically excluded from the requirement to prepare an eis or an ea if it is of a type or in a category known to have no significant environmental impacts .

 ( for more detail on these requirements , see the discussion regarding " the nepa process " in the following section of this report ; also see crs report rs20621 , overview of national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requirements , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33152 , the national environmental policy act: background and implementation , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the preparation of eiss is probably the best - known requirement of nepa .

however , projects requiring an eis represent a small fraction of all federal actions .

for example , from 1986 to 2006 , an average of 255 final eiss were filed with epa each year .

by comparison , in 1997 , ceq reported that federal agencies estimated that approximately 50,000 eas were prepared annually .

determining the total number of federal actions subject to nepa is difficult , as most agencies track only the number of actions requiring an eis .

one agency that tracks all its projects is the department of transportation's ( dot ) federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

in 2005 , fhwa reported that just over 84% of all highway projects were classified as categorical exclusions ( representing just over 81.5% of fhwa project funding ) , 9% required an ea ( 5.5% of project funding ) , and approximately 7% required an eis ( 13% of project funding ) .

although they may be small in number compared with all federal actions , projects requiring an eis often include those with the greatest impacts and highest stakeholder interest .

stakeholders such as state and local project sponsors and industry representatives with an interest in the implementation of federal actions charge that meeting nepa's environmental review requirements is sometimes done inefficiently and can be overly time - consuming .

such critics charge that the law creates a complicated array of regulations and logistical delays that stall agency action .

environmental organizations look at the nepa process as an essential tool to help agencies plan and manage federal actions in a responsible way by requiring policymakers and project sponsors to consider the environmental implications of their actions before decisions are made .

they also view the nepa process as an important mechanism to provide the public with an opportunity to be involved in agency planning efforts .

they argue that expediting what is supposed to be a deliberative process is not necessarily in the best interest of the public or the environment .

further , they argue that blaming the environmental compliance process for project delays is misplaced .

they contend that if federal projects are , in fact , delayed by the nepa process , it is because agencies required to participate in the process are overburdened and insufficiently funded , staffed , or equipped to meet the demand .

as a result of the debate between stakeholders regarding nepa's implementation , numerous administrative and legislative actions have been proposed to expedite compliance with nepa .

the activities associated with such proposals are often collectively referred to as streamlining .

no regulatory or legislative definition of streamlining exists .

it is defined differently by different stakeholders or agencies for different classes of projects .

however , the term is often used to describe a process or procedures intended to accelerate decision making , especially when the input of multiple federal , state , tribal , or local agencies is required to comply with multiple environmental laws , regulations , or executive orders .

for example , fhwa may propose a highway construction project that affects wetlands that are home to an endangered species .

within the context of conducting a review of the environmental impacts of the project under nepa , fhwa may also be required to demonstrate compliance with elements of the clean water act and the endangered species act .

as a result , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers , and the department of the interior's fish and wildlife service would have statutory obligations to participate in the proposed project .

these agencies , with potentially conflicting missions ( eg , protecting endangered species or sensitive wetlands versus building a highway ) , are then required to work together to review various aspects of fhwa's proposed project .

streamlining efforts may be implemented with the intent of expediting the requirement of having these agencies work together .

many of the issues leading to a call for streamlining , as well as challenges to implementing such actions , are summed up in the following excerpt from a report issued by the national conference of state legislatures: regulators often lack guidance on how to successfully integrate the complicated requirements of state and federal environmental laws and regulations... .

depending on the complexity of the issue and the priority given the issue by decision makers , decisions can be slow in coming , thus delaying progress .

another barrier is the fact that individual regulators tend to be experts in only one set of laws and regulations .

this tends to create some resistance to proposals that coordinate or integrate the provisions of different laws .

regulators tend to be cautious about integrating the requirements of different laws unless they can define all possible regulatory and technical impacts .

this statement recognizes that barriers to efficient decision making arise not from nepa alone , but from the challenges of integrating compliance with a multitude of laws and regulations that may apply to a given federal action .

recently , there have been numerous legislative and administrative streamlining activities , including the following: the enactment of legislation that alters individual agency nepa procedures ; administrative changes in individual agency nepa procedures ; and the creation of nepa "task forces," established by ceq and congress , to study the nepa process or expedite implementation of certain types of projects .

the process of complying with and documenting compliance with all environmental statutes , regulations , executive orders , and court decisions potentially applicable to a federal project is complicated .

even those projects with no or minor environmental impacts must demonstrate that potential impacts to certain types of resources ( i.e. , public parkland , historic sites , wetlands , threatened or endangered species and their habitat , or property in minority neighborhoods ) have been considered and that compliance with applicable requirements is documented .

the perception that compliance with environmental requirements results in extensive delays and additional costs to the successful delivery of federal projects can be magnified when compliance with multiple environmental laws and regulations is required ( as would likely be the case with large , complex federal projects ) .

ceq provides oversight and guidance to federal agencies , but it does not enforce its regulations .

the ceq regulations were meant to be generic in nature , with individual agencies formulating procedures applicable to their own projects .

this approach was taken due to the very different nature of projects and environmental impacts of the various federal agencies .

due to the nature of nepa implementation , determining the time it takes to prepare nepa documentation , assessing the nature of delays related to nepa , and finding remedies to those delays may be more appropriately accomplished agency by agency .

streamlining proposals have generated a great deal of controversy among interested stakeholders ( agency representatives , industry groups , environmental organizations , and others ) .

most stakeholders agree that the process for complying with environmental requirements applicable to complex federal projects could be implemented more efficiently .

however , there is disagreement on exactly how streamlining best can be or should be accomplished .

stakeholders , such as industry representatives who would like to see their projects implemented more quickly , often feel that the authority of lead agencies must be strengthened to reduce delays caused by potential disagreements among agencies and that hard deadlines must be set and enforced .

environmental groups are concerned that by speeding up the compliance process and reducing emphasis on concerns of "non - lead" agencies , streamlining will have the result of weakening environmental protections .

this debate is likely to continue if additional streamlining methods are proposed by agencies implementing their own nepa procedures .

the degree to which additional streamlining provisions will be included in legislation enacted by the 110 th congress is unclear .

listed by federal agency , the following websites and crs products provide additional information ( available as of december 6 , 2007 ) regarding environmental compliance issues and agency streamlining activities .

usda forest service nepa web page http: / / www.fs.fed.us / emc / nepa / .

crs report rl33792 , federal lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) : issues for the 110th congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

department of energy's office of nepa compliance and policy web page http: / / www.eh.doe.gov / nepa / .

crs report rl32873 , key environmental issues in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 , h.r .

6 ) , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

department of the interior , office of environmental policy and compliance , natural resources management team ( nepa information ) , web page http: / / www.doi.gov / oepc / nrm.html .

crs report rl33792 , federal lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) : issues for the 110th congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl32244 , grazing regulations: changes by the bureau of land management , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32315 , oil and gas exploration and development on public lands , by [author name scrubbed] .

fhwa's "nepa project development" web page http: / / www.environment.fhwa.dot.gov / projdev / index.asp .

fhwa's "relevant safetea - lu provisions" web page http: / / www.environment.fhwa.dot.gov / integ / related.asp .

crs report rl33057 , surface transportation reauthorization: environmental issues and legislative provisions in safetea - lu ( h.r .

3 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

