this report discusses reauthorization of the promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) program ( and amendments to related programs ) in the 109 th congress , as enacted by p.l .

109-288 .

it also provides information on pssf funding .

it concludes with a number of appendices .

the first of these shows ( in table form ) selected provisions in prior law compared with provisions in reauthorization legislation considered in the 109 th congress , as well as the final provisions enacted in p.l .

109-288 .

other appendices provide a legislative history of the pssf program , discuss certain policy issues related to the program , and offer an overview of federal programs providing funding for purposes related to those of the pssf program .

the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) extended funding authorization for the promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) program ( title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) for five years ( fy2007-fy2011 ) .

the program primarily provides formula grants to states , territories , and tribes for provision of four broad categories of services to children and families: community - based family support , family preservation , time - limited reunification , and adoption promotion and support .

p.l .

109-288 increased the amount of funds that will be made available to tribes for these purposes and also provides that no less than $40 million of funds provided for the program annually ( through fy2011 ) are to be set - aside for competitive grants to eligible regional partnerships to address child welfare issues raised by parent / caretaker abuse of methamphetamine ( or other substances ) and for formula grants to states to support monthly caseworker visits to children in foster care .

in addition , as under prior law , a part of the total funding provided for the pssf program is reserved for certain grants under the court improvement program ( cip , section 438 of the social security act ) .

these cip grants are distributed by formula to each eligible highest state court and are for those courts to assess and make improvements to their handling of child welfare cases .

finally , funds are also set aside for evaluation , research , and technical assistance related to the pssf program .

p.l .

109-288 provides that a portion of those set - aside funds must be used to provide evaluations , research and technical assistance related to monthly caseworker visits and grants to improve the outcomes of children affected by parent / caretaker abuse of methamphetamine or other substances .

the promoting safe and stable families program was initially created as a program of "family preservation and support services" by the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

that program was reauthorized , expanded , and given its current name by the adoption and safe families act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-89 ) .

subsequently , congress passed the promoting safe and stable families amendments of 2001 ( p.l .

107-133 ) , which reauthorized the program through fy2006 .

more recently , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) increased the authorization for mandatory pssf appropriations by $40 million for fy2006 and , separately , appropriated funding ( $20 million for each of fy2006-fy2010 ) for two new kinds of grants under the court improvement program .

the senate finance and house ways and means committees have exercised jurisdiction over the program and both committees held hearings related to reauthorization of this program during 2006 .

in addition to reauthorizing the promoting safe and stable families program and extending certain court improvement program grants , p.l .

109-288 made significant amendments to the child welfare services program ( title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ) .

that program provides formula grants to states for a wide range of services to children and families and was first authorized in 1935 by the original social security act .

under prior law , that program had an "indefinite" or "no - year" funding authorization .

p.l .

109-288 set the program's funding authorization to expire with fy2011 ( placing it on the same reauthorization calendar as the pssf program ) and made other changes related to the program's purposes , how funds may be used under the program and what states are required to do in order to receive these funds .

finally , p.l .

109-288 extended funding authorization for the mentoring children of prisoners program ( section 439 of the social security act ) , which provides funds to eligible entities to support mentoring services for children of prisoners .

in addition to extending the program's funding authorization for these site - based , competitive grants , p.l .

109-288 authorized a demonstration project to test the effectiveness of using vouchers to deliver these services more broadly .

as enacted , the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( s. 3525 , p.l .

109-288 ) incorporates language approved in two earlier versions of s. 3525 .

the following discussion describes provisions of the enacted legislation .

 ( for a table comparing selected provisions from each of the predecessor bills along with prior law and current law , see appendix a . ) .

as noted above , p.l .

109-288 appropriated $40 million in additional fy2006 funding for the promoting safe and stable families , which brought the total fy2006 program funding to $434 million .

under the revised continuing appropriation act , 2006 , ( p.l .

110-5 ) , the pssf program is expected to receive this same level of funding in fy2007 .

this section discusses mandatory and discretionary funding authorizations under the program , outlines statutory distribution requirements as amended by p.l .

109-288 ( see table 2 ) , shows total program funding by purpose since the program's inception ( see table 3 ) , and provides funding levels by state for recent years ( see table 4 ) .

the pssf program is authorized to receive total funding of $545 million annually through a combination of mandatory and discretionary authorization levels .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) raised the mandatory funding authorized for the pssf program from $305 million to $345 million and the five - year cost of this increased mandatory funding was "scored" or "paid for" in that law .

p.l .

109-288 extended the mandatory funding authorization of $345 million for the pssf through each of fy2007-fy2011 .

p.l .

109-288 also continues the prior law discretionary funding authorization in the pssf program of $200 million .

the authorization of discretionary funds , at this level , was first made for fy2002 but congress has never provided more than $99 million in any one year under this discretionary authorization .

in fy2006 and fy2007 , congress provided $89 million in discretionary funding .

the statute entitles eligible states to receive a portion of the fixed mandatory funding amount , as well as a portion of any discretionary funds that may be appropriated to provide certain child and family services .

before the funds are allocated to states , however , the statute provides that certain pssf funds are to be reserved for specific purposes .

p.l .

109-288 amended those set - aside provisions by requiring that $40 million of the program's mandatory funds must be reserved in each of fy2006-fy2011 to support increased frequency and better quality of caseworker visits to children in foster care and to improve the outcomes of children affected by parents or caretakers' abuse of methamphetamine or another substance .

 ( table 1 above shows the split of these funds by year. ) .

it also increased pssf funding to tribes by ( as discussed earlier ) establishing a 3% set - aside of both mandatory and any discretionary funds appropriated .

finally , the law also stipulates that hhs must use a portion of the funds reserved to it for research , evaluation and technical assistance to study or support improved quality and quantity of caseworker visits to foster children ( $1 million annually ) and to study or support grants to improve outcomes for children affected by methamphetamine abuse or other substance abuse ( $1 million annually ) .

table 2 outlines the pssf funding distribution requirements by purpose , as amended by p.l .

109-288 .

 table 3 , below , shows annual funding for the pssf program , by purpose and since its inception .

all of the court funding shown in this table is derived from a set - aside of pssf appropriations .

as noted earlier , increased funding for courts was provided in the deficit reduction act , p.l .

109-171 .

however , this money was separately appropriated and is not shown here as a part of pssf funding .

 ( the cip as revised by p.l .

109-171 is discussed in more detail in a separate report .

see crs report rl33350 , child welfare: the court improvement program , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

 table 4 shows actual awards of pssf funds by state for fy2005 and fy2006 , and allotment of these funds by state for fy2007 .

funds for the four authorized categories of child and family services are allotted to states based on their relative share of children ( individuals under age 18 ) receiving food stamps .

data used to make this determination are derived from the most current three years of available food stamps data .

as described earlier , beginning with fy2006 , p.l .

109-288 annually targets $40 million in pssf funding for specified purposes .

for fy2006 all of this money was distributed to state or territories by formula and may only be used to support monthly caseworker visits of children in foster care .

 ( because these funds were not made available until the very end of the fiscal year , p.l .

109-288 provides that states may have through fy2009 to expend these funds. ) .

for fy2007 all of the targeted funds must be distributed via competitive grants for services or activities to improve the outcomes of children affected by parent / caretaker abuse of methamphetamine or another substance .

appendix a .

selected provisions of the child and family services act of 2006 as compared to prior law and to earlier versions of the bill ( section references in prior law column are to the social security act , as amended prior to enactment of p.l .

109-288 ) appendix b .

legislative history of the promoting safe and stable families program at least since the creation of the current federal child welfare program structure by the adoption assistance and child welfare act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-272 ) , congress has remained consistently concerned about the number of children in foster care and the lack of stability and permanence in their lives .

during the 1990s , congress created a new program ( p.l .

103-66 ) , now called the promoting safe and stable families program , which responded to some of those concerns .

by the end of the 1980s , there were widespread concerns about a rapidly growing foster care caseload ( believed to be spurred by the spread of crack cocaine use ) and a belief that too few preventive services were resulting in too many children being unnecessarily placed in foster care .

at the same time , a number of states , often with the support of private foundations , had begun to offer a model of family preservation services that provided families with short - term , intensive services ; early research suggested these services would significantly reduce the number of children unnecessarily placed in foster care .

in this climate , congress began discussions about increasing federal support for preventive services , including intensive family preservation .

several years of legislative efforts lead initially to a 1992 agreement between the house and senate on new capped entitlement funding for 1 ) "innovative services" to children and families ( eg , family preservation services ) ; 2 ) substance abuse prevention and treatment ; and 3 ) respite care .

the agreement would have entitled states to their share of $165 million for these purposes in fy1993 rising to $575 million in fy1998 , and for every succeeding year , the fy1998 amount adjusted by an inflation factor .

the legislation provided specific allotment of the total funds for each purpose — with the largest share reserved for innovative services ( conference agreement to accompany h.r .

11 , 102 nd cong. , h.rept .

102-1034 ) .

although this legislation was approved by both the senate and the house , as part of an omnibus package , the revenue act of 1992 , it was vetoed by president george h. w. bush ( for reasons unrelated to the child welfare provisions ) and so did not become law .

original enactment one year later , however , child welfare advocates succeeded in including new entitlement funding for family preservation and support services in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) which created subpart 2 of title iv - b of the social security act .

proposed by the clinton administration , the 1993 legislation drew much of its inspiration from the earlier legislative work but made several notable changes .

among those , it included less entitlement funding and deleted specific allotment of funds for substance abuse prevention and treatment and respite care ( both of which could nonetheless be funded out of the program that was approved ) .

as enacted , the family preservation and support services provisions of p.l .

103-66 entitled states to receive a certain portion of federal funds ( rising from $60 million in fy1994 to no less than $255 million by fy1998 ) to enable states and territories "to develop and establish , or expand , and to operate a program of family preservation services and community - based family support services. .

one percent of the funds was to be reserved for support of tribal child and family services , and each state was to be allotted these new funds based on its relative share of children in the nation who receive food stamps .

to receive their full formula allocation states were required to maintain at least their fy1992 level of funding for these services and to support no less than 25% of the state's total family preservation and family support services program with non - federal funding .

finally , the new law also provided that funds were to be set aside annually to allow state highest courts to assess their need for improvements to their handling of child welfare cases ( $5 million for such grants in fy1995 and $10 million for each of fy1996-fy1998 ) and , separately , to allow hhs to evaluate programs carried out under the new subpart or others designed to achieve the same purposes and to support research , training and technical assistance related to the program ( $2 million in fy1994 and $6 million in each of fy1995-fy1998 ) .

asfa amendments congress returned to child welfare issues when it passed the 1997 adoption and safe families act ( asfa , p.l .

105-89 ) .

that legislation sought to make a child's safety the primary concern in all child welfare decisions and also to move foster children to a permanent family more quickly .

with an eye toward children's development and their concept of time , members of congress were concerned that states maintained a goal of family reunification long after it was apparent that such a goal was inappropriate ( or in cases where reunification might in fact jeopardize the child's safety ) .

they were also troubled by reports that the number of adoptions out of foster care had remained virtually unchanged for years while the number of children in care had risen dramatically .

asfa renamed title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act , the promoting safe and stable families program .

in addition , as one part of asfa's multiple amendments related to the safety of children , congress added a requirement that the safety of children be the "paramount concern" in administering and conducting service programs under the pssf program .

as a part of its focus on expediting decisions around finding a permanent home for children in foster care ( and encouraging adoption as one method of doing this ) , congress defined two additional service categories for which states were required to use "significant portions" of their pssf funding — time - limited family reunification services and adoption promotion and support .

finally , congress set annual increases in the mandatory funding authorized for the program , raising it from $275 million in fy1999 to $305 million in fy2001 .

 ( congress also continued the annual set - asides from these funds for tribal child and family services , court improvements , and program evaluation , research , training , and technical assistance. ) .

the time limit for the new category of reunification services was set at within 15 months of a child's removal from his / her home .

this is consistent with a separate asfa - added requirement , which provides that states must initiate termination of parental rights ( tpr ) proceedings for any child who has been in foster care for 15 of the past 22 months ( unless the state can show good cause why it should not do this ) .

a child's adoption cannot be completed without termination of parental rights and courts are generally reluctant to grant tpr in cases where the family has not first been offered needed reunification services .

thus the new "time - limited reunification" funding category sought to ensure that asfa's efforts to expedite permanency were not defeated by a lack of available or provided services .

likewise , the addition of the adoption promotion and support services category was consistent with other asfa amendments that encouraged adoption as a way of attaining permanent family for children .

2001 amendments program reauthorization language introduced in 2001 largely mirrored language suggested by the bush administration and initially sought to raise the annual mandatory funding level of the program to $505 million .

however , congress subsequently changed this provision ( and the administration also changed its budget request ) to instead authorize discretionary funds above the prior mandatory funding level .

as enacted , the promoting safe and stable families amendments of 2001 ( p.l .

107-133 ) authorized $200 million in discretionary funding for the program in each of fy2002-fy2006 and maintained the prior authorized mandatory funding level ( $305 million ) through fy2006 .

p.l .

107-133 further provided that a state was entitled to its share of any discretionary funds appropriated in the same manner ( i.e. , based on its relative share of children receiving food stamps ) as was the case with mandatory funding .

additionally , it provided that , out of any discretionary funds appropriated ( and in addition to the pre - existing set - asides of mandatory funds for these same purposes ) , 2% must be set aside for tribal child and family services , 3.3% for court improvement and 3.3% for research , evaluation , training and technical assistance .

p.l .

107-133 added four findings to the statute and provided four program objectives ( each linked to one of the four service categories funded by the program ) .

it amended the definition of family preservation services ( to include funding of infant "safe haven" programs ) and the definition of family support services ( to explicitly include funding of services that "strengthen parental relationships and promote healthy marriages" ) ; provided for re - allotment of any unused program funds ; moved the statutory authorization language for the court improvement program ( previously freestanding ) into the social security act ; and provided that in implementing changes identified by an assessment , courts could use cip funds to ensure children's safety , well - being and permanence ( in accordance with standards established in asfa ) and to implement a corrective action plan identified as needed via a federal conformity review of the child welfare agency .

finally , it established research priorities and specified the kinds of technical assistance hhs may offer to tribes , territories and states regarding implementing the promoting safe and stable families program and required the department to report to congress biennially ( beginning not later than april 2003 ) on the evaluations , research and technical assistance funded with money set - aside for this purpose from the pssf .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 as enacted in february 2006 , the deficit reduction act ( p.l .

109-171 ) increased the fy2006 mandatory funding authorization for the pssf program , for fy2006 only , to $345 million .

separately p.l .

109-171 also amended the court improvement program , which had been entirely funded as a set - aside from the pssf funding .

these amendments provide for two new kinds of court improvement program grants , which are related to improved training and , separately , timely achievement of safety , permanence and well - being for children ; the law appropriated $20 million for each of fy2006-fy2010 ( total of $100 million ) to make these grants .

these funds are independent of pssf funding , and are in addition to the funds already set - aside from the pssf for assessing and improving court performance in child welfare proceedings .

the promoting safe and stable families and court improvement provisions of the deficit reduction act were incorporated into the legislation during the conference negotiations and had not been previously acted on by the senate or the house .

however , changes to the court improvement program are consistent with recommendations made in a may 2004 report by the pew commission on children in foster care and legislation introduced in the senate ( s. 1679 ) and house ( h.r .

3758 ) sought to make similar or related court improvement changes .

the child and family services improvement act as enacted in september 2006 , the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) extends the funding authorization of the pssf program for five years ( fy2007-fy2011 ) and annually targets the use of $40 million in new funds for the program for two purposes: to support monthly caseworker visits and to improve outcomes for children affected by their parent / caretaker's abuse of methamphetamine or another substance .

hhs is required to use some of the research , evaluation and technical assistance funds it is provided under pssf to evaluate or otherwise support those newly authorized pssf activities .

in addition , the law requires states to report on their actual — as opposed to simply planned — use of pssf ( and child welfare services ) funds and both increases the pssf set aside for tribal child and family services , and allows access to these funds for more tribes .

appendix c. selected policy issues the following section was developed prior to the reauthorization of the pssf in 2006 to discuss the definition of service categories under the pssf program , findings related to the effectiveness of these services , as well as requirements related to planning and reporting child and family services .

the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) did not amend the definition of services under the pssf program , although it does require states to report information on the actual as opposed to planned spending of pssf funds .

further it requires hhs to use some of its research set - aside to support research , evaluation , and technical assistance related to two new purposes for which some pssf funds are targeted: improving the quality and quantity of caseworker visits of children in foster care and providing services and activities to improve the outcomes of children affected by parent / caretaker's abuse of methamphetamine ( or another ) substance .

service categories defined states are required to spend significant portions of their pssf funding on each of four service categories: family support , family preservation , time - limited family reunification , and adoption promotion and support services .

the statute ( section 431 of the social security act ) defines these service categories at some length .

family support — community - based services to promote the safety and well - being of children and families designed to increase the strength and stability of families ( including adoptive , foster , and extended families ) , to increase parents' confidence and competence in their parenting abilities , to afford children a safe , stable and supportive family environment , to strengthen parental relationships and promote healthy marriages , and otherwise to enhance child development .

family preservation — services for children and families designed to help families ( including adoptive and extended families ) at risk or in crisis , including service programs designed to help children safely return to families from which they have been removed ; or be placed for adoption or with a legal guardian ( or , if adoption or legal guardianship is determined not to be safe and appropriate for the child , in some other planned , permanent living arrangement ) ; pre - placement preventive services programs , such as intensive family preservation programs , designed to help children at risk of foster care placement remain safely with their families ; service programs designed to provide follow - up care for families to whom a child has been returned after a foster care placement ; respite care of children to provide temporary relief of parents and other caregivers ( including foster parents ) ; services designed to improve parenting skills ( by reinforcing parents' confidence in their strengths , and helping them to identify where improvement is needed and to obtain assistance in improving those skills ) with respect to matters such as child development , family budgeting coping with stress , health , and nutrition ; and infant safe haven programs to provide a way for a parent to safely relinquish a newborn infant at a safe haven designated pursuant to a state law .

time - limited family reunification — services and activities provided to a child that is removed from his / her home and placed in foster care , and to the parents or primary caregiver of such a child , in order to facilitate the reunification of the child safely , appropriately and within a timely fashion , but only during the 15-month period that begins on the date that the child is considered to have entered foster care: individual , group , and family counseling ; inpatient , residential , or outpatient substance abuse services ; mental health services ; assistance to address domestic violence ; services designed to provide temporary child care and therapeutic services for families , including crisis nurseries ; transportation to or from any of the services and activities described .

adoption promotion and support — services and activities designed to encourage more adoptions out of the foster care system , when adoptions promote the best interests of children , including such activities as pre - and post - adoptive services and activities designed to expedite the adoption process and support adoptive families .

service category overlap even a relatively quick reading of these definitions reveals that in many cases they define a mission rather than provide a list of specific activities that are expected to achieve this mission .

further , the pssf service categories have similar and , in some cases , even identical missions .

at the same time , while the service categories can be understood as having overlapping missions or even , in certain cases as subsets of each other , each of the pssf services categories have different target populations and , as the legislative history shows , they were created by congress to meet separate if related goals .

family support services have the broadest target population and , in philosophy , aim to bolster the functioning of any family in a given community .

family preservation services are generally understood to serve a far narrower group of families — those where children are at imminent risk of removal to foster care , meaning in most cases that a child has already experienced abuse or neglect ( and including some families where a child has been removed to foster care and reunification efforts are underway ) .

federal child welfare funding for family support and family preservation services was instituted at a time when congress was particularly concerned about the burgeoning foster care caseload .

the services were intended to prevent the need for foster care placement , whenever possible and the new funding for these services was the centerpiece of the child welfare legislation in which they were enacted ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

time - limited reunification services may be understood as a subset of family preservation services and are explicitly meant to serve the needs of children and families who have been separated for 15 months or less ( because the child is placed in foster care ) .

adoption promotion and support services aim to encourage families seeking to adopt from foster care and to support those who have done so .

such services might also be understood as a subset of family support services , or in the case of adoptive families in crisis , as a family preservation service .

federal funding for these services was not the central creation of the adoption and safe families act ( asfa , p.l .

105-89 ) .

rather , congress increased pssf funding to some extent and required states to spend money on time - limited reunification and adoption promotion and support to augment asfa's central goals of promoting safety and permanency for children .

at the time , congress remained deeply concerned about the size of the foster care caseload , but asfa helped shift the focus of this concern from policies primarily intended to prevent entries into foster care to policies that sought to safely expedite exits from care .

state planned spending by category federal statute , as interpreted in hhs policy , requires states to spend at least 20% of their pssf funds on each of the four service categories .

collectively states reported that they intended to spend their fy2002 pssf funds as follows — 29% for family support , 30% for family preservation , 21% for time - limited reunification , and 20% for adoption promotion and support .

given that family support and family preservation have received dedicated funding the longest and that their service goals ( and target populations ) are more expansive , program evaluators note that the two newest services categories — time - limited family reunification and adoption promotion and support — have become "well - established in the continuum of pssf - funded services. .

at the same time , because states may choose to include the same given activity in more than one service category , this spreading of resources across categories could ideally mean that states have a full range of child and family services available to those who are not yet in need of extensive child welfare services , those who need such services to ensure that children and their parents can safely live together ( rather than be separated via foster care placement ) , those for whom the services are needed to ensure a short foster care stay and permit early reunification , and those for whom the services support successful creation and functioning of permanent adoptive families .

effectiveness of services congress required hhs to evaluate the effectiveness of programs funded under title iv - b , subpart 2 as part of its initial approval of funding for family preservation and family support services in the early 1990s .

hhs used those funds to support three large - scale evaluations .

one looked at overall implementation issues for the program , a second looked at the effectiveness of two particular models of family preservation services ( both providing relatively intensive casework ) , and the third looked at the effectiveness of a very wide range of family support services .

 ( findings from these evaluations are discussed below. ) .

no similar large - scale evaluations of time - limited reunification services or of adoption promotion and support services have been made .

however , these services may in part be subsets of some kinds of family preservation and family support programs .

further , congress amended the statutory language on evaluations in 2001 ( p.l .

107-133 ) to include specific research priorities .

among these are "promising program models in the [pssf] service categories ... particularly time - limited reunification services and post - adoption services. .

as noted earlier , the 2006 amendments ( p.l .

109-288 ) require hhs to use some of its set - aside funds to fund research , evaluation and technical assistance related to supporting improved quality and quantity of caseworker visits of foster children ( $1 million annually ) and to providing services or activities to improve the outcome of children affected by their parents' ( or other caretakers' ) abuse of methamphetamine or other substance .

intensive family preservation services when congress began discussion of funding these services in the early 1990s , a great deal of optimism existed about the ability of intensive family preservation services to cost - effectively reduce the number of placements in foster care .

since that time , multiple program evaluations have not shown that intensive family preservation services lower placement risk for the children and families they serve ( when compared to children and families receiving standard in - home casework services ) .

in addition , both children and families who received standard in - home casework services and those receiving intensive family preservation services were found to have similar ( relatively low ) levels of maltreatment recurrence ( after initiation of the services ) and to exhibit similar levels of family functioning .

in other words , receipt of intensive family preservation services did not reduce out - of - home placement or maltreatment recurrence , and did not improve family functioning beyond what normal casework services achieved .

these evaluations did not compare — nor were they designed to compare — the placement outcomes for families receiving no services versus outcomes for those who received services ; and they should not be understood as proof that the families served did not benefit from or need the services .

instead the evaluations were designed to test whether a particular manner of delivering the same kinds of caseworker activities ( eg , anything from help paying a utility bill to counseling about effective and appropriate child discipline ) could produce better outcomes for children and families .

the most - scrutinized intensive family preservation services delivery model ( homebuilders ) provides that services must be initiated quickly ( within 72 hours of a "crisis" that precipitated imminent child removal ) , that they must be intensive ( caseworkers are to be assigned no more than two families to work with , must be available to those families 24 hours a day , seven days a week , and are expected to swiftly offer any or all of a full range of material and clinical aids needed ) , and they are to be of short duration ( 4-6 weeks ) .

as these characteristics suggest , the target population for the delivery of services via the homebuilders model is families where children are at imminent risk of removal .

this is especially critical to the model's theory of effectiveness , which rests on an aspect of "crisis theory" and posits that a family in crisis is at a juncture where it is particularly amenable to change .

in practice , and for a variety of reasons , providing intensive family preservation services to families and children who are "imminent risk of foster care removal" has proven difficult .

in the four - site study contracted by hhs and jointly conducted by westat , the chapin hall center for children and james bell associates , the evaluators found that even though special precautions were taken to ensure only families at imminent risk were studied , very small percentages of the "control group children" — those are children who were randomly assigned to receive regular caseworker services rather than intensive family preservation services — were actually placed in foster care within 30 days of their assignment to the study .

the share of control group children who were not placed in foster care during this time period ranged from 89% to 95% .

this was very similar to the share of experimental group children not placed in foster care during the first 30 days after their assignment to the study ( 89% to 99% ) .

given that targeting intensive family preservation services on children at imminent risk for removal has been a problem for most or all of the evaluations of this service delivery model , and that for the multi - site hhs study the evaluators developed special tools meant to ensure only families most at risk were included in the study , researchers suggest that optimal targeting may never be achieved .

these evaluators also questioned whether many families coming into contact with child welfare services — and referred to family preservation services — understand themselves to be at a crisis point .

noting that the lives of families served "are often full of difficulties — externally imposed and internally generated" they suggest that the imminent removal of a child might simply be understood as part of a set of ongoing problems rather than as a crisis .

for families with chronic problems , they suggest , a short term dose of services — no matter how intense — would be unlikely to resolve all or many of the chronic concerns .

noting that the intensive family preservation services provided did not harm families , the evaluators also made it clear that services for many families whose children are not in foster care are still needed .

however , given the heterogeneity of the child welfare needs of these families ( child behavioral problems , child abuse , child neglect , suspected child abuse or neglect , etc .

 ) , they suggest that a single service delivery model providing access to relatively general services is unlikely to work for everyone .

what next for family preservation services ? .

the federal statute does not provide that a specific family preservation services delivery model must be used by states and hhs explicitly declined to do this when it issued program regulations .

in addition , the discouraging evaluation data on intensive family preservation services is not new ( some suggestions of the current findings were available even as the program was being federally implemented in the middle 1990s ) .

states then have had ample time to adjust or otherwise change their models of service delivery , although much remains to be learned about what the most effective services and delivery of those services might be .

researchers have suggested more study of the effectiveness of specific caseworker activities , more effective and more selectively delivered parent training classes ( which are a staple service in both preservation and reunification cases ) and different service delivery models , or activities on behalf of specific subgroups of child welfare clients ( eg , young mothers or families with substance abuse concerns ) are needed .

need for in - home services apart from the specific way in - home services are delivered to families , there remains an apparent need for services to families in which children have not been removed from their homes but have been maltreated in those homes .

of the estimated 872,000 children found to be victims of child maltreatment in fy2004 , a little more than 40% received in - home services ( following the investigation that confirmed their maltreatment ) , an additional 19% were removed to foster care while the remaining 41% of these child victims continued to live at home and received no post - investigation services of any kind .

while some of the children may not have been served because their parents refused assistance offered ( unlike removal to foster care , parents generally must voluntarily participate in services offered to intact families ) , researchers also note that there may not be enough of the kind of services needed or there may be long waiting lists for the services .

beyond the substantial number of children and families arguably in need of services who do not receive them , a case - level analysis of findings in the initial child and family services review ( cfsr ) shows that states were less successful in meeting the needs of children and families served in their own homes , than those with children in foster care .

this analysis found that in the on - site review of cases , in - home cases were significantly more likely than foster care cases to receive an "area needing improvement" rating for a number of key indicators related to ensuring the well - being of children and families .

these items in which in - home cases were significantly more likely to receive this rating than foster care cases include those related to assessing child and family needs and providing needed services ; involving children / families in case planning ; adequate face - to - face worker visits with children ; and ensuring that children receive services to meet their educational , mental health and physical health needs .

in - home cases were also significantly more likely to be rated lower on the safety item related to reducing risk of harm to children served than were foster care cases .

this same study also reported on "common challenges" to better state performance and while these may apply to either foster care or in - home cases , a number are directly related to the indicators listed above and for which the on - site case reviews revealed specific weakness for in - home cases .

common challenges associated with those indicators and identified for many states , include the agency doesn't consistently provide sufficient services to address risk of harm to children , particularly in the in - home services cases ; the agency doesn't consistently monitor families to assess service participation and change in risk factors to protect children in their homes and prevent removal ; the agency doesn't consistently provide appropriate services to meet the identified needs of children and parents ; fathers , mothers , and children ( age appropriate ) are not sufficiently involved in case planning ; the frequency of face - to - face contacts between workers and children isn't consistently sufficient to ensure children's safety and well being ; the agency is not consistent in providing services to meet children's identified education - related needs ; the number of dentists / doctors in the state willing to accept medicaid is not sufficient to meet the need ; there is a lack of mental health services for children ; and the agency doesn't consistently conduct mental health assessments .

in sum , while children in foster care are much discussed as the barometer of states' child welfare performance , states' in - home case loads are generally more sizeable than their foster care caseloads and the data suggest that not all families are receiving needed services , nor are those receiving services having their needs fully met .

family support services where family preservation services may be requested once a family has come to the attention of the child welfare agency ( eg , child maltreatment allegation and / or finding made ) , family support services seek to reach families that have not reached that threshold .

the central object of these services is to ensure a child never experiences abuse or neglect and to improve the functioning of parents on behalf of their children .

typically these services have been provided by community agencies or groups — rather than by the state or local public child welfare agency — and the "target family group" is much broader than those typically served by the child welfare agency .

although family support services may be described ( and implemented ) as intended for families "at - risk" of child abuse or neglect , in theory they are designed to benefit any family in a particular community or neighborhood .

overall , families that receive family support services ( such as parent training or child development classes ) would seem much more likely to seek out ( or volunteer ) for the service as opposed to families that may be offered these same services ( or may be ordered by the court to participate in them ) for family preservation .

study design citing the vast range of programs that might fall under the "family support" rubric , the abt associates researchers who conducted the hhs - funded study opted to conduct a "meta - analysis" of program success .

this evaluation technique required the researchers to identify previously conducted studies of a range of family support programs and to organize the data collected in these studies in such a way that they could generate findings across these studies .

for the family support studies , the researchers coded information from 665 studies ( representing 260 different family support programs ) that were conducted after 1965 in canada , the united states or great britain .

kinds of programs evaluated to be included in the meta - analysis , a study needed to evaluate a program that provided services intended to improve child outcomes by strengthening the capacity of parents to support their children's development .

accordingly , nearly all the programs included in the meta - analysis had goals of improved parenting ( 98% ) and child development ( 91% ) .

most services were delivered in the family home ( 62% ) but other settings ( in descending order of frequency ) included hospital or clinic , school , community center , university - college , and public or private agency .

home visits were a primary service delivery mode , followed , in descending order of frequency , by parent meetings / classes / groups , parent - child classes / groups and group early education for children .

most programs ( 87% ) used at least some staff with a degree and formal training .

finally , although the original family support programs were neighborhood - based and available to all in the community , many programs targeted specific populations .

about 88% of the family support programs included in the meta - analysis targeted families believed to be at certain environmental risk ( eg , poverty , risk of abuse or neglect , teen parenthood ) , those with certain biological risks ( eg , low - birth weight baby , developmental delay , behavior problems ) or a combination of these populations .

most services were available to families for less than one year and families received relatively small amounts of service ( measured in number of hours per month ) .

findings overall , the meta - analysis showed that family support programs have small but consistent and ( statistically ) significant positive effects in children's cognitive development and their social and emotional development .

programs that had larger positive effects on children's cognitive outcomes were those that focused on children with special needs ( either biological or developmental ) , or provided early childhood education directly to children , or provided parents with opportunities for peer support .

programs that used home visiting as a primary service had less effect on children's cognitive outcomes .

although on an overall basis , child safety was not otherwise shown to be meaningfully affected , programs that targeted teen parents with young children and combined case management with parent - child activities were more effective in protecting children from accidental injury , abuse or neglect .

finally , family support programs were not shown to have a meaningful effect on children's health and physical development .

with regard to parent / family outcomes , the study showed that overall family support programs have small but consistent and statistically significant positive effects in parenting attitudes and knowledge , parenting behavior , and family functioning .

programs that used professional staff to help parents to be effective adults , and that provide opportunities for parents to meet in support groups , were more effective in producing positive outcomes for parents .

the programs that had greatest effect on parents' attitudes towards and knowledge of child - rearing and child development were those that work with special needs children and provided opportunities for peer support .

the meta - analysis found no or little meaningful effect of family support programs on parent mental health , nor on family economic self - sufficiency .

other services in contrast to the large scale family preservation and family support studies , hhs has recently directed the pssf evaluation funds towards generally smaller scale projects that look at one kind of service or program design ( often at a single site ) .

in recent years projects funded include those related to strengthening and promoting healthy marriage , the meaning of termination of parental rights for older foster children , fathers involvement in permanency planning and child welfare casework , early head start services provided to child welfare families , interventions for substance abusing parents , post - adoption services , and adoption promotion efforts , intensive family reunification efforts , and provision of crisis nursery / respite care service .

research and / or evaluation is ongoing for most of these projects .

planning and reporting the 1993 law ( p.l .

103-66 ) establishing funding for child and family services under title iv - b , subpart 2 , both encouraged and required states to engage in planning how these services would be delivered .

the law requires states to consult with "appropriate public and nonprofit private agencies" with experience in administering services to children and families and to ( jointly with hhs ) prepare a five - year plan , which establishes the goals the state intends to accomplish and describes the methods that will be used to measure progress toward accomplishing those goals .

it further requires states to annually review and report on progress toward achieving these goals and to make any necessary adjustments to the plan that reflect changed circumstances .

states must continually be engaged in this planning and review process .

that is , every five years the state must establish a new five - year plan and begin annual progress reviews and reports of that plan .

beyond these requirements , the 1993 legislation encouraged states to take planning seriously by permitting each state to use up to $1 million of its first year grant ( fy1994 ) for planning purposes and providing that this spending on planning did not need to be matched with state spending .

the policy guidance and subsequent regulations from hhs further encouraged and required this extensive planning .

as ultimately implemented by hhs , the regulation consolidated a number of child welfare program planning requirements into a single child and family services plan .

states submit this single five - year plan ( the most recent was due in june 2004 for the period fy2005-fy2009 ) , and annual progress reports .

in addition to the requirements related to the pssf programs , this plan must include the assurances required for receipt of funds for child welfare services ( title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ) , basic state grants ( section 106 of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ) , and the chafee foster care independence program and related education and training vouchers ( both in section 477 of the social security act ) .

also , as part of the annual progress report , states must estimate their total child welfare spending for the upcoming fiscal year , across the full continuum of services and noting amounts used from all federal funding streams ( as well as state and local funding ) .

finally , hhs permits states to use their pssf funds for these planning purposes without having those funds count towards the limit on use of pssf funds which is set at 10% .

both the notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) and the final rule for implementing title iv - b , subpart 2 emphasized the importance of collaborating broadly when creating this plan to ensure the full continuum of child and family services was considered and planned for and to leverage as many resources as possible for the program's purposes .

studying the implementation of the program , james bell associates found that most states engaged in extensive planning and that the focus on collaboration meant increased community and consumer involvement .

initially , over the 14 states where implementation case studies were conducted , most ( 8 ) developed a state - level collaborative body that made the decisions about how pssf funds would be used ; that is to say the locus of decision making was outside the state child welfare agency .

in part , this no doubt stems from the inclusion of family support on an equal basis with family preservation in the statute .

where family preservation has a long history of child welfare agency implementation , family support was ( and remains ) outside the traditional child welfare agency purview .

following passage of asfa ( p.l. , 105-89 ) and the addition of two new service categories ( time - limited family reunification and adoption promotion and support ) — both of which were much more closely aligned with traditional child welfare programs — the locus of decision - making shifted back toward the state child welfare agency in the majority of the case study sites .

limited information on current program since the bell study , which as one part of its implementation study made an analysis of the annual progress reports submitted by states for fy1999-fy2002 , there has been no comparable study of state spending plans .

that analysis showed that most states were spreading their pssf funding across all four categories .

at the same time , that report noted that the overlap in service categories — because family support and family preservation might fund the same service ( but presumably for a different population ) and because the newest service categories ( time - limited reunification and adoption promotion and support ) could be understood as subsets of the initial service categories of family support and family preservation — it was not easy to accurately report spending in the statutorily defined categories .

in addition , the consolidated planning and lack of a single plan format made it hard to consistently track how funds were being spent across the states .

the researchers suggested that how funds were used ( or planned to be used ) might better be understood based on where the service was delivered ( in the home , child welfare office , school , community center , clinic , etc. ) .

and / or who the service was targeted on ( families in process of reunification , families with recently reported abuse or neglect , teenage parents , parents of children with problem behavior , etc. ) .

the report did track the planned use of pssf funds for 17 specific kinds of activities between fy1999-fy2002 .

these included home visiting and family centers , information and referral , recreation , basic needs , employment services , health services , child care , prevention services , parent support , parent skills training , mentoring , respite care , domestic violence , drug / alcohol assessment / treatment , counseling / mental health services , "family preservation" ( more narrowly defined than the statute ) , time - limited family reunification and adoption promotion and support .

although the researchers had increasing difficulty in linking pssf funding to specific activities ( due to consolidation of program planning and reporting ) , they noted especially large drops in the number of states reporting that they planned to use these funds for child care ( decreased from 21 states in fy1999 to 5 for fy2002 ) , parent support and skills training ( decreased from 27 states to 11 states and from 33 states to 12 respectively ) and "family preservation" ( decreased from 34 states to 19 states ) .

reporting requirements the pssf reporting requirements are , for the most part , a subset of the planning requirements .

states must send their five - year plans to hhs and as a part of their annual progress review and report , are required to provide separate descriptions of the family preservation , family support , time - limited family reunification and adoption promotion and support services they intend to provide under the plan in the upcoming year ; the populations to be served ; and the geographic areas where the services will be available .

just prior to the 2006 amendments ( p.l 109-288 ) , these plans were sent to hhs regional offices of the administration for children and families ( acf ) , rather than to the central washington , d.c. office ) , and while they are required to be made available to the public , they were for the most part , not produced in any standard format and were not necessarily easy to compare or collect .

further all of the reporting requirements were prospective — providing information on what a state plans to do with its money rather than what it has actually done with the money .

p.l .

109-288 amended the reporting requirements so that certain parts of the report must now include information on how the state actually spent pssf ( and child welfare services ) funds as well as continuing to provide information on planned spending .

in addition , the law requires hhs to annually compile this information in a report for congress .

appendix d. selected federal programs with related purposes some other federal programs share purposes similar to those of the promoting safe and stable families program .

community - based child abuse prevention ( cbcap ) authorized by title ii of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) the community - based child abuse prevention ( cbcap ) program provides funds to each state ( including the district of columbia ) , territories , and tribes to support community - based services to prevent child maltreatment .

the program purposes most closely match the category of pssf services described as "family support. .

however , funds under this program are not available for direct use by the state child welfare agency but must be sent to community - based groups that provide family support and family resource services .

funds are distributed by formula to a lead state agency ( which may or may not be the state child welfare agency ) ; the lead agency is responsible for ensuring coordination of services and for distributing funds to community - based groups that provide ( or can refer families to ) core family resource and support services .

the statute describes these core services to , among other things , include — parent education , mutual support and self help ; voluntary home visiting ; and respite care .

other services , which cbcap local grantees may provide access to include referrals to counseling for adoption ( for those seeking to adopt or to relinquish a child for adoption ) ; child care , early childhood development and intervention services ; referrals to services and supports to meet special needs of families with children with disabilities ; referrals to job readiness services ; referrals to educational services ; life management skills training ; and others .

like title i of capta , the senate health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) and the house education and labor committees have generally exercised jurisdiction over this program .

it was most recently amended and re - authorized in 2003 ( p.l .

108-36 ) .

that legislation raised the program's authorization level to $80 million for fy2004 , and such sums as necessary for each of fy2005-fy2008 .

however , the program has never received more than the $43 million that was appropriated for it in fy2005 .

for fy2006 the program received $42 million and ( under p.l .

110-5 ) it is expected to receive the same sum in fy2007 .

child welfare services authorized by title iv - b , subpart 1 , child welfare services is the oldest federal program supporting state child welfare activities and was first authorized as part of the original 1935 social security act .

p.l .

109-288 made a number of changes to this program and by changing its funding authorization from indefinite ( no year limit ) to the same schedule as the pssf program ( funding authorization will expire with fy2011 ) , appears to promote somewhat closer alignment of the programs .

child welfare services funds are distributed to states ( including the district of columbia ) , territories , and tribes .

the funds may be used to support a broad range of services to children and families , which are intended to protect children who have been abused or neglected or are at risk of maltreatment and may take various forms , ranging from counseling and other supports for parents ( intended to improve child well - being , prevent child abuse and neglect and preserve a family ) , to removal of the children from their homes and provision of services to parents to enable safe and appropriate return of children to their own homes .

when efforts to reunite are not appropriate or do not succeed , child welfare services may include termination of parental rights , placement of the children for adoption , and provision of post adoption services .

states may use child welfare services , generally , for a wider range of activities than are permitted under pssf and a 2003 general accounting office ( gao ) study found that despite considerable overlap in the purposes , states used the bulk of their child welfare services and pssf grants to fund significantly different activities .

for instance , while states reported spending both child welfare services and pssf funds to support family support / prevention , family preservation , family reunification , and adoption support and preservation services , they reported using just 11% of their child welfare services funds for these purposes compared to 82% of their pssf funds .

states expended the largest share of child welfare funds ( 71% ) for child welfare worker salaries , administration and management , child protective services , and foster care maintenance payments .

 ( pssf expenditures for those purposes equaled just 8% of state pssf spending. ) .

the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee have exercised jurisdiction over child welfare services .

since 1990 , the program has had a discretionary funding authorization level of $325 million , but it has never received more than $295 million in a given year .

for fy2006 the program is funded at $287 million and under p.l .

110-5 it is expected to receive the same level of funding in fy2007 .

other child welfare and related programs several additional child welfare programs primarily support research or demonstration projects related to adoption , as well as to services to help certain families at special risk of child abuse or neglect .

each of these programs is funded by discretionary appropriations and any appropriated funds are distributed on a competitive basis to eligible entities .

these programs include adoption opportunities , abandoned infants assistance and adoption awareness .

funding authorization for the adoption opportunities ( fy2007 funding — $27 million ) and abandoned infants assistance act ( fy2007 funding — $12 million ) was extended through fy2008 by p.l .

108-36 ( handled in the senate help and house education and workforce committee ) .

funding authorization for the adoption awareness programs ( which were included in the public health services act ) expired with fy2005 but the programs nonetheless received fy2007 funding of $13 million .

the house energy and commerce and senate help committees handled the 2000 legislation that created adoption awareness program authority .

additional programs that support primarily the family support goals of pssf include early head start , head start , and the healthy start initiative .

like family support programs in general , the populations served by these programs are much broader than those generally served by the child welfare population and these programs are not further described here .

some non - dedicated federal funding used for pssf purposes many states also make use of federal funding streams that are not specifically or exclusively provided for child welfare purposes but for which federal law includes certain child welfare activities as purposes or permissible uses of funds .

measured by state use of the funds for child welfare purposes , the largest of these are the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the social services block grant ( ssbg ) and medicaid .

an urban institute survey of state fy2002 spending on child welfare found that in that year state child welfare agencies spent about $4.7 billion from these federal funding streams of which some 28% ( $1.3 .

billion ) $1.3 billion was used to support prevention activities ( eg , prevent teen - age pregnancy , prevent drug use , prevent child abuse ) , family reunification efforts , and in - home support , as well as child protective , services ( screening and investigating reported child maltreatment ) .

while state child welfare agencies have in recent years had access to considerable tanf , ssbg and medicaid funds , because these funds are not appropriated solely for child welfare agencies they cannot necessarily count on their continued availability .

instead , their access to these federal funds is generally conditioned on the funding decisions made by others in the state ( eg , discretion about how funds are used may rest with the state legislature or in a different state executive agency ) and may further be limited by federal legislative and administrative changes to these programs .

for instance , the current administration continues to seek new limits on state use of certain medicaid services for a range of purposes , including child welfare .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) enacted certain language intended to clarify how states may use medicaid funds for targeted case management ( tcm ) on behalf of children in foster care .

further , the ability of state child welfare agencies to use tanf funds may be affected by increased work requirements included in the deficit reduction act ( which are expected to necessitate greater state spending of tanf on job related costs such as training and child care ) .

finally , congress has greatly reduced the amount of funding for ssbg , which includes among its five primary purposes: "preventing or remedying neglect , abuse , or exploitation of children and adults unable to protect their own interests , or preserving , rehabilitating or reuniting families. .

annual funding for ssbg stood at $2.8 billion when the congress enacted new child welfare services funding ( now called the promoting safe and stable families program ) in 1993 .

in 1996 , however , p.l .

104-193 reduced the ssbg entitlement cap and funding has since declined to $1.7 billion annually .

