economic and trade reforms begun in 1979 have helped transform china into one of the world's biggest and fastest - growing economies .

china's economic growth and trade liberalization , including comprehensive trade commitments made upon its entry to the world trade organization ( wto ) in 2001 , have led to a sharp expansion in u.s. - china commercial ties .

yet , bilateral trade relations have become increasingly strained in recent years over a number of issues , including china's mixed record on implementing its wto obligations ; infringement of u.s. intellectual property ( such as through cyber - theft of u.s. trade secrets and forced technology requirements placed on foreign firms ) ; increased use of industrial policies to promote and protect domestic chinese firms ; extensive trade and foreign investment restrictions ; lack of transparency in trade rules and regulations ; distortionary economic policies that have led to overcapacity in several industries ; and its large merchandise trade surplus with the united states .

china's economic and trade conditions , policies , and acts have a significant impact on the u.s. economy as whole as well as specific u.s. sectors and thus are of concern to congress .

this report provides an overview of u.s. - china commercial ties , identifies major issues of contention , describes the trump administration's trade policies toward china , and reviews possible outcomes .

u.s. - china commercial ties are complex and have become increasingly contentious , due largely to china's incomplete transition to a free market economy .

the trump administration has indicated its intent to take a harder line on trade policy towards china ( and other countries ) .

the most significant action it has taken to date has been the initiation of a section 301 case against china's policies on intellectual property rights , which could result in several rounds of tit - for - tat trade sanctions and retaliation .

a july 25 joint statement by the united states and european union , said that the two sides would "work closely together with like - minded partners to reform the wto and to address unfair trading practices , including intellectual property theft , forced technology transfer , industrial subsidies , distortions created by state owned enterprises , and overcapacity. .

 ( this appears to have been largely aimed at china ) .

on july 6 , the trump administration raised tariffs by 25% on $34 billion worth of imports from china .

on the same day , china announced it would retaliate against a comparable level of u.s. products .

in response to china's tariff increases , the united states trade representative ( ustr ) on july 10 , threatened to increase tariffs by 10% on $200 billion worth of chinese products .

on march 8 , 2018 , the trump administration announced that it would impose additional imports tariffs on steel ( by 25% ) and aluminum ( 10% ) , based on "national security" justifications under the 1962 trade act , as amended .

on april 2 , china raised duties ( by 15% to 25% ) on about $3 billion worth of imports frim from the united states , largely targeting agricultural products .

u.s. - china trade rose rapidly after the two nations reestablished diplomatic relations in january 1979 , signed a bilateral trade agreement in july 1979 , and provided mutual most - favored - nation ( mfn ) treatment , beginning in 1980 .

in that year ( which was shortly after china's economic reforms began ) , total u.s. - china trade ( exports plus imports ) was approximately $4 billion .

china ranked as the united states' 24 th - largest trading partner , 16 th - largest export market , and 36 th - largest source of imports .

in 2017 , total u.s. merchandise trade with china was $636 billion , making china the united states' largest trading partner ( see table 1 ) .

investment plays a large and growing role in u.s. - china commercial ties .

china's investment in u.s. assets can be broken down into several categories , including holdings of u.s. securities , foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , and other non - bond investments .

the department of the treasury defines foreign holdings of u.s. securities as "u.s. securities owned by foreign residents ( including banks and other institutions ) , except where the owner has a direct investment relationship with the u.s. issuer of the securities. .

u.s. statutes define fdi as "the ownership or control , directly or indirectly , by one foreign resident of 10% or more of the voting securities of an incorporated u.s. business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated u.s. business enterprise , including a branch. .

the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) is the main u.s. government agency that collects and reports data on fdi flows to and from the united states , which is done on a balance of payment basis .

china has also invested in a number of u.s. companies , projects , and various ventures that do not meet the u.s. definition of fdi , and thus , are not reflected in bea's data .

for many years , the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves ( fers ) has been a major driver of china's overseas investment .

china's fers result from: ( 1 ) large annual trade surpluses and fdi inflows ; ( 2 ) intervention by the chinese government to halt or slow the value of its currency , the renminbi ( rmb ) ; and ( 3 ) restrictions on capital outflows by private chinese citizens .

rather than holding foreign currencies , such as u.s. dollars which would earn no interest , the chinese government has invested much of those reserves abroad .

for many years , much of that investment has gone into u.s. treasury securities .

although they generate low returns , such securities are generally viewed globally as a relatively safe investment because they are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government and are liquid ( eg , easily sold ) , albeit generating relatively small rates of returns .

more recently , the chinese government has diversified its investments in order to obtain higher returns , such as by encouraging its firms ( especially soes ) to invest overseas to become more globally competitive , as well as to help china gain access to raw materials ( such as oil ) , food , and technology .

as a result , chinese annual fdi outflows have grown significantly in recent years , rising from $21 billion in 2006 to $183 billion in 2016 , making china the second - largest source of annual global fdi outflows .

u.s. investment in china has largely been in the form of fdi flows ( due in part to chinese restrictions on portfolio investment ) .

initially , most u.s. fdi flows ( especially after china began to open up its economy in 1979 ) likely went toward export - oriented manufacturing to take advantage of china's relatively low wages .

in more recent years , as china's economy has rapidly grown , a larger share of u.s. fdi in china has gone to tap into the country's booming domestic demand for goods and services .

however , many u.s. firms raise concerns that chinese investment restrictions and requirements ( such as technology sharing ) often hamper their efforts .

china's economic reforms and rapid economic growth , along with the effects of globalization , have caused the economies of the united states and china to become increasingly integrated .

although growing u.s. - china economic ties are considered by most analysts to be mutually beneficial overall , tensions have risen over a number of chinese economic and trade policies that many u.s. critics charge are protectionist , economically distortive , and damaging to u.s. economic interests .

according to the ustr , most u.s. trade disputes with china stem from the consequences of its incomplete transition to a free market economy .

major areas of concern for u.s. stakeholders include china's extensive network of industrial policies ( including widespread use of trade and investment barriers , financial support , and indigenous innovation policies ) that seek to promote and protect domestic sectors and firms , especially soes , deemed by the government to be critical to the country's future economic growth ; failure to provide adequate protection of u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) and ( alleged ) widespread government - directed cyber - theft of u.s. trade secrets security to help chinese firms ; mixed record on implementing its wto obligations ; and government - directed financial policies that promote high savings ( but reduce private consumption ) , encourage high fixed investment levels ( but may contribute to overcapacity in many industries ) , and a managed exchange rate policy that may distort trade flows .

the trump administration has taken a number of steps in regard to u.s - china commercial relations .

at their first official meeting as heads of state in april 2017 , president trump and chinese president xi jinping announced the establishment of a "100-day plan on trade" as well as a new high - level forum called the "u.s. - china comprehensive dialogue. .

following the meeting then - u.s. secretary of state rex tillerson stated that "president trump noted the challenges caused by chinese government intervention in its economy and raised serious concerns about the impact of china's industrial , agricultural , technology , and cyber policies on u.s. jobs and exports .

the president underscored the need for china to take concrete steps to level the playing field for american workers , stressing repeatedly the need for reciprocal market access. .

the trump administration's december 2017 national security strategy report took aim at a number of chinese economic policies of concern to the united states ( see text box ) .

on may 11 , 2017 , the two sides announced that china would open its markets to u.s. beef , biotechnology products , credit rating services , electronic payment services , and bond underwriting and settlement .

the united states agreed to open its markets to chinese cooked poultry and welcomed chinese purchases of u.s. liquefied gas .

chinese officials also indicated their support for continuing negotiations for continuing the bit negotiations , although the trump administration did not indicate its position on this proposal .

following the meeting , president trump in a series of tweets appeared to indicate that he would link u.s. trade policy toward china with china's willingness to pressure north korea to curb its nuclear and missile programs .

on july 19 , 2017 , the two sides held the first session of the ced in washington , dc , which sought to build on the 100-day action plan through a new one - year action plan on trade and investment , seeking to achieve "a more balanced economic relationship. .

the outcome of the meeting is unclear as , unlike past high - level meetings , no joint fact sheet was released .

the u.s. side issued a short statement that said that "china acknowledged our shared objective to reduce the trade deficit which both sides will work cooperatively to achieve. .

this led some u.s. observers to claim that the ced was marred with high tensions and disagreements , and failed to produce any meaningful results .

they noted , for example , that china's ced representative , vice premier wang yang , stated that "[d]ialogue cannot immediately address all differences , but confrontation will immediately damage the interests of both. .

politico reported that china's excess steel capacity was a contentious issue and may have stalemated the talks .

the united states and china have not indicated if and when the ced talks will resume .

the trump administration has taken a number of trade actions that have raised tensions with china in recent months and could result in a series of tit - for - tat retaliation .

these include using section 301 trade action against china's ipr policies and section 232 tariffs on u.s. steel and aluminum imports .

china's economic rise has had both positive and negative effects on the united states .

on the one hand , china's past economic and trade reforms have made china an increasingly significant market for u.s. exporters , a central factor in u.s. global supply chains , and a major source of low - cost goods for u.s. consumers .

on the other hand , china has not fully transitioned to a free - market economy .

the chinese government continues to intervene in many parts of the economy ( such as through the use of subsidies and trade and investment barriers ) , which often distort markets ( prices ) domestically and globally .

china accounts for 37% of u.s. antidumping and countervailing orders currently in place as of june 2018 .

many analysts argue that china has been the largest factor in global overcapacity in a number of industries , including steel and aluminum .

china has indicated a number of objectives and plans to boost innovation and the competitiveness of a number of chinese industries in order to maintain relatively healthy economic growth .

yet , a number of those initiatives appear to include industrial policies that subsidize and protect domestic chinese firms , aimed in part to reduce china's reliance of foreign technology , such as the made in china 2025 initiative .

some see china as a free rider in the global trading system .

while china made significant concessions to enter the wto in 2001 , it was allowed to continue to maintain significant barriers on various sectors of the economy ( especially in regard to fdi and services ) .

many u.s. policymakers charge that china's implementation of its wto commitments has been fair at best and has failed to meet the expectations of significantly expanded market access in china .

this has increasingly led u.s. policymakers to seek options to press china to move away from distortive economic policies and to liberalize its trade and investment regimes .

the obama administration sought to negotiate a high standard bit with china to address many of its concerns over china's fdi restrictions , although an agreement was not reached by the end of president obama's term .

the trump administration has not expressed interest in resuming the bit talks even though china has .

president trump's january 2017 decision to withdraw the united states from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) free trade agreement ( fta ) has been viewed by many analysts as a blow to u.s. efforts to induce economic and trade liberalization in china .

prior to the u.s. pull - out of tpp , chinese officials had expressed interest in eventually joining the agreement , in part to avoid being economically marginalized by an fta of countries constituting 40% global gdp .

the tpp agreement signed by the united states was described as a "high standard agreement. .

it included enhanced ipr protection , liberalized provisions on digital trade , and new rules governing soes .

the remaining 11 tpp members on march 8 , 2018 , concluded the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ( cptpp ) .

many analysts contend that the u.s. withdrawal from tpp weakened u.s. economic leverage with china and damaged u.s. credibility in asia .

the trump administration and some members of congress have advocated taking a harder line against china in regard to its economic and trade policies .

a number of goals and justifications have been offered .

some argue that greater efforts should be made to require china to afford u.s. firms the same market access chinese companies enjoy in the united states .

others contend that wto agreements do not cover ( or adequately cover ) many of the policies and practices that china employs to protect and support its industries and therefore argue that the united states should act unilaterally ( including the threat of sanctions ) when u.s. economic interests are at stake .

others argue that u.s. trade remedy laws should be more aggressively used to stop imports of chinese products that have been dumped in the united states or subsidized by the chinese government , in order to afford greater protection to u.s. firms and workers from china's unfair trade practices .

finally , some policymakers have advocated for a more forceful response to chinese industrial policies that seek to force foreign firms to transfer technology or lock u.s. technology firms out of china's markets through domestic content requirements .

a number of congressional members have expressed concerns over the efforts of chinese to acquire u.s. high technology firms or assets , and many have called for reforms to the cfius review process to flag chinese mergers that may impact the global competitiveness of u.s. economic sectors .

others support a more balanced approach to dealing with china that seeks to use the multilateral process in the wto to resolve major trade disputes , high - level forums to address complex and long - term economic and trade issues , and negotiated trade agreements to boost market access in china .

supporters of this view contend that the imposition of unilateral trade sanctions by the united states ( outside the wto process ) against china could result in rounds of economically damaging retaliation and counter - retaliation .

some critics of the trump administration's approach to trade policy contend that focusing too much on bilateral trade imbalances to judge the benefits or fairness of u.s. trade relations with various countries contradicts basic economic theory that only the overall trade balance matters and is the result of macroeconomic forces , not unfair trade policies .

in addition , u.s. trade data is a poor measurement of who benefits from trade because it fails to reflect the value that was added in each country before it was shipped to its final destination .

many u.s. products imported from china ( such as iphones ) contain inputs from numerous countries , which are not reflected in u.s. trade data .

therefore , some contend , it makes little sense to make reducing trade imbalances the top priority in trade negotiations with china ( and other countries ) .

rather , the central focus of trade negotiations , they argue , should be the reduction of trade and investment barriers that are deemed by the united states as having the most significant impact in limiting u.s. trade flows , measuring the impact from a reduction of those barriers , but refraining from using trade balance data to measure the success or failure of such actions .

president trump's comments about his request to president xi to reduce the u.s. trade deficit with china , while announcing section 301 action against china's ipr policies , made it appear to some observers that deficit reduction , not improvements to china's ipr regime , was the administration's real motive for using section 301.the trump administration's demand that tariff levels between china and the united states be reciprocal is also puzzling to some observers .

while china's average tariff levels are about three times higher than u.s. tariffs , they are largely what china agreed to when it joined the wto in 2001 .

observers contend that china's tariff levels are rarely cited as a major trade barrier by u.s. firms doing business in china , especially compared to the numerous nontariff barriers and fdi restrictions they face there .

many analysts have raised concern that unilateral trade action by the united states against china ( and other countries under section 232 ) could undermine the multilateral trading system and negatively impact global economic growth .

for example , on march 23 , 2018 , wto director - general roberto azevêdo stated the following: i encourage members to continue working through the wto's many forums and mechanisms to deal with their concerns and explore potential solutions .

actions taken outside these collective processes greatly increase the risk of escalation in a confrontation that will have no winners , and which could quickly lead to a less stable trading system .

disrupting trade flows will jeopardize the global economy at a time when economic recovery , though fragile , has been increasingly evident around the world .

i again call for restraint and urgent dialogue as the best path forward to resolve these problems .

made in china 2025 on may 19 , 2015 , the leading group for creating a strong manufacturing country , a task force created by china's state council , released the made in china 2025 initiative .

made in china 2025 is a comprehensive plan to upgrade the chinese manufacturing sector , focused largely on making intelligent information and communications technology ( ict ) - based machines , systems , and networks manage the industrial process , otherwise known as "smart production. .

china's slowing economy and the unsustainability of its "growth at any costs" model have led the government to focus on new sources of growth , such as promoting innovation .

although it is the largest manufacturing sector in the world , china is still a relatively weak manufacturer when it comes to core technology and innovation .

the innovation gap , desire to avoid the middle - income trap , and the slowing economy have all reportedly pushed the chinese government to pursue the made in china 2025 plan to move the manufacturing sector up the value chain , shifting from "made in china" to "made by china. .

priorities the made in china 2025 plan was the first of a "three step" strategy involving 10-year national plans to transform china into a leading high - value manufacturing economy by 2049 , which will mark the 100 th anniversary of the founding of the people's republic of china ( prc ) .

according to the minister of industry and information technology , miao wei , "by 2025 , china will basically realize industrialization nearly equal to the manufacturing abilities of germany and japan at their early stages of industrialization. .

the goals of made in china 2025 are split into four key categories: innovation , quality efficiency , smart manufacturing , and green development .

there are 9 priority tasks , 10 sectors , and 5 definitive projects with timelines that can be sorted into those four categories .

the nine priority tasks laid out in made in china 2025 include improving manufacturing innovation , integrating technology and industry , strengthening green manufacturing , promoting breakthroughs in 10 key sectors , advancing restructuring of the manufacturing sector , promoting manufacturing - related service industries , and internationalizing manufacturing .

the 10 key sectors identified include new information technology , numerical control tools and robotics , aerospace equipment , ocean engineering equipment and high - end vessels , high - end rail transportation equipment , energy saving and new energy vehicles , electrical equipment , and agricultural machinery .

within made in china 2025 , there are also five projects with definitive goals and timelines: construction of 15 manufacturing innovation centers by 2020 , with 40 by 2025 .

creation of 1,000 green demonstration factories and 100 green demonstration zones by 2020 and reduced primary pollution emissions by 20% .

decreased operating costs for smart manufacturing pilot projects by 30% , shortened production timelines by 30% , and lower rates of defective products by 30% , with decreased costs , timelines , and defects by another 20% by 2025 .

increased self - sufficiency in development infrastructure by 40% of infrastructure components and key infrastructure materials by chinese sources by 2020 , with an increase to 80% by 2025 .

new indigenous research and development ( r&d ) in key sectors by 2020 with the goal of achieving significant market share growth in indigenous ip for high - value equipment by 2025 .

made in china 2025 also references strengthened security reviews for investment , mergers and acquisitions , and procurement in manufacturing sectors that are related to national economy and national security ; promoting indigenous or domestic innovation ; enlarging tax policies for smart manufacturing , and enhancing cooperation with foreign companies in areas such as health care , aviation , and basic manufacturing .

the plan calls for chinese firms to invest abroad , become familiar with overseas cultures and markets , and strengthen investment and operation risk management before investing .

according to a report by csis , if china genuinely decides to embrace intelligent manufacturing , it could become easier for chinese companies and multinational corporations ( mncs ) to collaborate both in china and abroad and possibly "reduce the zero - sum elements of the business relationship. .

in addition , if china successfully upgrades its manufacturing capacities , there is also a likely chance of improved overall economic governance , including financial and fiscal systems , a strengthened educational system , and increased access to varied sources of information .

the made in china 2025 is one component of china's plan to become a center and leader of innovation .

deputy head of the ministry of industry and information technology li beiguang said that the key to a country becoming a manufacturing power is innovation , and "to promote manufacturing and national competitiveness , it is important to mobilize every conceivable element to stimulate innovation rather than simply support a single industry. .

issues made in china 2025 has faced criticisms on its viability .

some analysts say that china will succeed with its more modest goals , such as the immediate aims to improve the quality , productivity , digitization , and expansion of numerically controlled machines , which are all already used by manufacturers in developed countries .

however , they contend that other goals , such as encouraging companies to use 3d printing and adopting robotics are or may be unrealistic .

trade implications the ambiguity surrounding the language of made in china 2025 objectives may impact foreign mncs that operate within china and interact with chinese companies globally .

made in china 2025 mentions "strengthened security reviews" for investments , mergers and acquisitions , and procurement in manufacturing areas related to the national economy and national security , which are not clearly defined .

language in the made in china 2025 plan also seeks to boost indigenous innovation .

for example , it lists the goal of ensuring that domestic chinese firms will handle the majority of local infrastructure development with specific timetables .

for example , the plan states that 40% of core infrastructure components and key infrastructure materials should come from chinese sources by 2020 and to increase further to 80% by 2025 .

this has led to concerns that such goals will discriminate against foreign firms .

internet plus the internet plus plan was announced to the national people's congress on march 5 , 2015 by premier li keqiang , as part of the report on the work of the government ( 2015 ) , with a follow - up implementation plan issued by the state council on july 4 , 2015 .

with 721 million users as of 2016 , china has the largest absolute number of people in the world using the internet .

the plan reportedly came out of an effort to push for more innovation , as many chinese leaders view innovation as the key to avoiding the middle - income trap .

additionally , there is still the prevailing idea in china , especially in the rural regions , that enterprises in the traditional sectors do not know how to link their businesses to the internet .

according to the united states information technology office , launched in cooperation with the department of commerce's international trade administration , china's internet plus seeks to "drive economic growth by integration of internet technologies with manufacturing and business. .

goals in his speech on the internet plus plan during the 2015 report on the work of the government , premier li keqiang described the plan as such: "we will develop the 'internet plus' action plan to integrate the mobile internet , cloud computing , big data , and the internet of things with modern manufacturing to encourage the healthy development of e - commerce , industrial networks , and internet banking , as well as guide internet - based companies to increase their presence in the international market .

in addition to the 40 billion yuan government fund already in place for investment in china's emerging industries , more funds need to be raised for promoting business development and innovation. .

premier li reiterated these points in the 2016 report on the work of the government , but also highlighted the need to improve the efficiency of communication between governmental departments to cut down on "red tape. .

internet plus has four primary goals: ( 1 ) upgrade and strengthen the security of the internet infrastructure , ( 2 ) expand access to the internet and related technologies , ( 3 ) make social services more convenient and effective , and ( 4 ) increase both the quality and effectiveness of economic development .

the plan also maps development targets and supportive measures for key sectors , such as mass entrepreneurship and innovation , manufacturing , agriculture , energy , finance , public services , logistics , e - commerce , traffic , biology , and artificial intelligence .

in order to achieve these goals , the chinese government will reportedly clear barriers and lower limits for the market entry of internet plus - related products , optimize the credit system , and draft a big data strategy and promote legal services for companies that pursue the internet plus system .

the government has also expressed interest in training and making better use of local and foreign talent , providing financial support and tax preferences to key projects , launching more pilot zones as well as encouraging innovation demonstration zones and local governments to come up with their own plans aligned to internet plus .

chinese authorities have also promised that families in large cities will have access to 100 megabyte - per - second internet , and that broadband services will reach 98% of the population living in incorporated villages .

according to the seconded european standardization expert in china ( sesec ) , a project co - financed by the european union , the chinese government has created a new investment fund worth 40 billion rmb , or approximately $6 billion , to further promote new industry innovation and entrepreneurship under internet plus .

internet plus is intertwined with other economic plans outlined by the chinese government .

for example , a goal of internet plus , which is restated in the 13 th five - year plan , is to increase the percentage of research and development spending as part of gdp from 2.1 to 2.5 .

the chinese government has also tied internet plus to the "one belt one road" initiative , an effort to boost development and economic connectivity across three continents , encouraging chinese internet companies to increase their efforts in the global market .

issues the release of internet plus and made in china 2025 , and the notable mention of both plans in the 13 th five - year plan , are all efforts by the chinese government to increase the growth rate of the economy .

within internet plus , there is an emphasis on innovation that the government believes will result from the integration of the internet with economic and social sectors and that an increasing trend of innovation will benefit from government intervention .

some experts raise concerns about a "helping hand," contending that government intervention could slow the beneficial effect start - ups have on the economy .

gordon chang in a forbes magazine article , for example , contends that "perhaps the worst thing for tech companies is direct government support , which means meddling by central , provincial , and local officials. .

chang also pointed out that new e - commerce companies , like the ones that internet plus aims to create , may be net job - destroyers by contributing to the closing of "brick - and - mortar" shops , and that many of these new companies may be "zombie shops. .

press reports point out the lack of reference to "freedom of the internet" in internet plus , leading them to question how strict internet censorship would be , especially with the trend of increased censorship since xi jinping became president in 2012 .

they also mention that if beijing continues to censor access to information , internet plus may increase consumer shopping , instead of having any significant and long - term impact on the economy .

analysts have also criticized the implementation of internet plus .

internet plus places a large emphasis on modernizing the agricultural sector of the economy , but agencies tasked with overseeing the implementation of internet plus for agriculture include the ministry of agriculture ; national development and reform commission ; ministry of science and technology ; ministry of commerce ; general administration of quality supervision , inspection , and quarantine ; china food and drug administration ; and the state forestry administration .

a lack of coordination could lead to problems with internet plus , including the misallocation of state resources , redundant or contradictory policies , and opportunities for local officials to exploit policy overlaps for their own profits .

implications there are both positive and negative implications for the united states if internet plus is implemented as the chinese government intends it .

seconded european standardization expert in china ( sesec ) notes that transforming and upgrading key sectors could open up new sectors , highlighting the example of how mobile internet reforms promoted the development of taxi - hailing apps in a previously closed vehicle transportation and operation market .

if internet plus is successful , an example of a possible sector that could open up is the agricultural industry , as there has been some emphasis on modernizing the sector , specifically moving from network sale sectors like e - commerce to the production sector .

some analysts speculate that internet plus could increase censorship , further closing off high - tech sectors from china and halting innovation .

during the announcement of internet plus , premier li keqiang mentioned more precise web management to "clean up illegal and bad information" to "strengthen the struggle against enemies in online sovereign space and increase control of online public sentiment. .

in its 2016 u.s. - china business council ( uscbc ) recommendations for the u.s. - joint commission on commerce and trade ( jcct ) , uscbc recommended ensuring "that regulations calling for 'secure and controllable,' 'secure and reliable,' and similarly worded standards included in existing policy documents do not discriminate against foreign companies or procurement of foreign it equipment and do not create unnecessary requirements that will not enhance the security of networks. .

national informatization development strategy on august 31 , 2015 , china released its "national informatization development strategy," or big data development plan .

in july 2016 , china released its outline of the national informatization development strategy , a guiding document that explains the regulations and direction of information - based development in china over the next 10 years .

according to the united states information technology office , the outline calls for core information technology , such as integrated circuits and basic software to create a core technology system ; strengthened ipr and standards ; improved protection regulations for ipr ; implementation of a multi - level classification information management system ; accelerated lawmaking process for relevant policies ; emphasis on the importance of international cyberspace development and administration cooperation ; implementation of network identity administration regulations ; and tightened control over all internet news services and platforms .

the outline also emphasizes the leadership of the central network security and informatization leading group , led by president xi jinping .

the outline sets targeted goals for the next 10 years that will be reached by both 2020 and 2025 .

by 2020 , china wants to strengthen its domestic industry by specifically focusing on certain core technologies , providing internet access to an additional 350 million people by expanding 3g and 4g services , and achieving breakthroughs in 5g technology .

by 2025 , china wants to further improve household fixed - broadband connectivity rates , build a leading mobile telecommunications network , and increase information consumption values to 12 trillion rmb ( u.s. $1.79 trillion ) and e - commerce trading values to 67 trillion rmb ( u.s. $10 trillion ) .

implications the national informatization development strategy builds upon the ict and big data goals set in the 13 th five - year plan , internet plus , and made in china 2025 .

however , as some have noted , the outline differentiates itself from the other goals set in these other plans in that it is bolder with a nationalistic frame .

the strategy further emphasizes the need for china to strengthen its domestic industry , easing its dependence off of foreign sectors .

efforts to promote an indigenous semiconductor industry in june 2014 , the chinese government released a plan called "guidelines to promote national integrated circuit industry development. .

a year later , the government announced an investment of 1 trillion rmb , or 161 billion usd , in the domestic semiconductor industry to be developed over the next 10 years .

the guidelines to improve the semiconductor industry are split into three main strategies: mergers and acquisitions ( m&a ) , market power , and regulation .

according to the u.s. international trade administration , "the chinese government appears to be driven by a desire to acquire know - how in all segments of the semiconductor supply chain," resulting in heavy recruitment of foreign talent by the chinese government .

china wants to "catch up technologically" with other leading semiconductor firms by 2030 and produce 70% of the chips consumed by the chinese industry .

china purchases over half of all semiconductors produced each year globally , but lacks the capabilities in its domestic semiconductor industry to back up its consumption .

in 2014 , china accounted for 56.6% of the global consumption of semiconductors , and its demand grew at an 18.8% compounded annual growth rate between 2003 and 2014 .

in order to build up domestic industries and promote indigenous innovation , china wants to lessen its dependency on u.s. technology , especially in the semiconductor industry .

chinese consumption of semiconductors in 2015 was 9% domestically produced and 91% foreign , of which 56.2% was made in the united states , while domestic chinese chips accounted for less than one - tenth of local demand .

globally , china makes up 4% of global semiconductor sales , and views its reliance on foreign companies as a national security concern .

issues analysts have compared the chinese ambitions to the rise of the taiwanese semiconductor industry , but point out differences between the two situations .

according to the economist , taiwan was able to succeed because they entered the market during an industry shift to a model that separated the design and fabrication of the chip .

however , when taiwan tried to enter the market for memory chips , it failed due to the lack of a transitional period in the industry .

currently , the global semiconductor industry is facing a period of relatively slow growth .

this , in combination with the maturing of the global semiconductor industry , or the increased complexity of semiconductor chips and their associated software , could , some argue , make it more difficult for chinese firms to succeed .

other criticisms include the methods and goals that china has undertaken to develop its semiconductor industry .

as of march 2016 , china , through its integrated circuit ( ic ) industry investment fund , has invested 43 billion rmb ( 6.61 billion usd ) to expand its semiconductor industry , with much of the money going toward mergers and acquisitions .

analysts note that simply acquiring the technology will not help improve china's competitiveness in the long run , but will only increase the profit margin for china temporarily .

intel alone spends four times as much on research and development on its semiconductors as the entire chinese chip industry .

the emphasis on increasing domestic demand for domestically made chips is also a concern .

some analysts note that the emphasis on domestically made chips assumes that chinese firms will buy chinese - produced microchips because they are made in china , disregarding the idea that the same firms might buy foreign microchips because they are of better quality .

if chinese - produced microchips are of lesser quality , but the chinese government guides companies toward buying domestically made products , china could end up with a domestic industry that lacks global competitiveness .

a government mandate for chinese high tech firms to use chinese - made chips could also undermine their global competitiveness as well .

implications the united states is a leading actor in the global semiconductor industry , and has great interest in asia , with u.s. semiconductor exports to the broader asia - pacific region representing 85% of total u.s. semiconductor goods exported in 2014 at $36.5 billion .

between 2014 and 2015 , semiconductor exports grew from $8.03 billion to $8.45 billion , a growth of 5.2% ; 82% of all semiconductor products produced in the united states are sold to customers overseas , supporting 250,000 u.s. jobs and an additional 1 million jobs in related sectors .

in 2015 , u.s. companies accounted for 50% of total semiconductor sales .

the department of commerce's international trade administration views policies promoting chinese domestic industries as "potentially discriminatory" and posing "real long - term threats to not only u.s. firms , but the entire semiconductor ecosystem. .

in the short term , some note that there will be larger investment in both u.s. and foreign companies that develop semiconductors , but in the long term , it is possible that once chinese companies have the intellectual property , there could be less reliance on u.s. companies .

in january 2016 , the chinese provincial government of guizhou and u.s. firm qualcomm signed an agreement to form a new joint venture ( with an initial registered capital of $280 million ) , focusing on the "design , development and sale of advanced server chipset technology in china. .

the guizhou provincial government investment arm will have a 55% controlling share .

qualcomm will provide investment capital , license its server technology to the joint venture , and assist with r&d process and implementation expertise .

if china successfully develops its semiconductor industry , it may enjoy a bigger share of the global electronics industry's profits , as profit margins for successful semiconductor firms are around 40% or more .

analysts say that there will be a continuation of strong , but slowing growth in demand for semiconductors by china and a large increase in their demand for semiconductor manufacturing equipment in the short term as china continues to develop their industry .

on january 2017 , the president's council of advisors on science and technology issued a issued a report on u.s. semiconductor innovation , competitiveness , and security , which warned that a "concerted push by china to reshape the market in its favor , using industrial policies backed by over one hundred billion dollars in government - directed funds , threatens the competitiveness of u.s. industry and the national and global benefits it brings," and that such policies "put u.s. national security at risk. .

