japan's trade policy has historically centered on multilateral negotiations and dispute resolution mechanisms .

the rules of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) and the world trade organization ( wto ) have provided tokyo an ability to interact with its trade partners on an equal basis .

given its global trade interests , a contentious bilateral past with the united states , and historic legacy with asian countries , particularly korea and china , reliance on the multilateral system has helped promote japan's trade interests .

over the past five years , japan has shifted course somewhat by pursuing negotiations in the wto but by also seeking free trade agreements ( ftas ) and economic partnership agreements ( epas ) with mostly asian countries .

an fta is an agreement between two countries or regional groupings to eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers , while an epa goes further by also attempting to facilitate the free movement of people and capital among the partners to an agreement .

non - members find their exports discriminated against .

as a practical matter , officials at japan's ministry of economy , trade , and industry ( meti ) acknowledge that there is little difference between an fta and epa .

meti , however , prefers the epa label based on the view that it does less to provoke domestic political opposition than the "free trade" moniker .

the pursuit of ftas is occurring worldwide with nearly 300 estimated to be currently in effect .

the united states has an extensive fta program and agenda , and has ftas in effect with two asian - pacific countries — singapore and australia .

europe has been pursuing a similar course for years .

china and six asean states ( thailand , malaysia , indonesia , philippines , singapore , and brunei ) are in the process of establishing an fta by 2010 .

now japan is trying to catch up .

economists still disagree about the merits of negotiating ftas on the grounds that discrimination may undermine the multilateral trading system while others believe that ftas promote multilateral deals in the long run .

the concern is that ftas could lead to a "spaghetti bowl" of overlapping conflicting trading partnerships each with its own set of rules at the expense of a more unified and non - discriminatory set of multilateral rules .

but domestic support in japan for an fta program appears strong .

prime minister koizumi is firmly behind the approach , as well as the ruling ldp - komeito coalition .

while the democratic party , the major opposition party , supports the general thrust of the policy , some members maintain that the united states and china should be considered as prospective fta partners .

given its own aggressive fta program , the united states is hardly in a position to criticize japan's new policy orientation .

but it has considerable interest in whether japan's policy evolves in a manner that is supportive of u.s. interests in asia — which include promoting a stable balance of power and insuring that u.s. trade and investment interests are not discriminated against in the region .

japan's fta program has been motivated by a combination of economic and political objectives .

the most important entail avoidance of becoming isolated as other major trading countries actively pursue ftas , energizing domestic economic activity , and promoting japanese influence in asia .

japan's concern about the possible emergence of economic blocs in the americas and in europe goes back to the early 1990s .

in 1994 the united states entered into the north america free trade agreement ( nafta ) and announced plans to create a free trade area of the americas .

europe at the same time was busy entering into preferential trade agreements and subsequently has come to conduct trade relations on a multilateral or non - discriminatory basis with only a handful of trading partners , including japan and the united states .

in 1999 the collapse of multilateral trade negotiations at the wto ministerial in seattle shook japanese confidence in the future of multilateralism .

china's decision in 2001 to negotiate an fta with asean countries was also a seminal event , providing more ammunition for those in japan that were advocating a change of policy course .

the case for developing an fta program was also driven by asian economic trends and opportunities .

meti officials see east asia as the fastest growing region in the world and a region that is increasingly vital to japan's economic future .

ftas and epas are viewed as one way to deepen economic ties with east asia and facilitate a new division of labor and production sharing .

the experience of the european union has demonstrated that , as institutional integration develops , so too does intra - regional division of labor that leads to a more effective production network and to more efficient industrial structures .

as a result , meti maintains that both individual parties to an fta , as well as the region as a whole , can enjoy more robust economic growth powered by an expansion of exports and imports .

reform - minded meti officials also hope that an aggressive fta - epa program will serve as a force for promoting domestic agricultural reforms .

by entering into negotiations with trading partners that continue to demand liberalization of japan's protected agricultural sector , it is hoped that domestic support for programs that might aid farmers transition to a less protected environment would be proposed and implemented .

finally , many decision makers see ftas providing japan with varied political and diplomatic advantages .

these range from increasing japan's bargaining power in wto negotiations to helping japan better compete with china for influence in asia .

under the view that ftas symbolize special relationships based on political trust , japan hopes to bolster its diplomatic influence on a range of political and security issues .

three regions — asia , north america , and europe — account for 80% of japan's total trade .

given that the simple average tariff rates imposed by the united states and the european union are low ( 3.6% for the u.s. and 4.1% for the eu ) compared to east asia ( 10% for china , 14.5% for malaysia , 16.1% for south korea , 25.5% for the philippines , and 37.5% for indonesia ) , the government of japan ( goj ) placed priority on negotiating ftas with countries in east asia .

not only do east asian countries impose the highest trade barriers against japanese exports , they also account for the highest and most dynamic share of japan's trade , thereby providing the greatest additional opportunities for expanding japan's economy via cuts in both foreign and domestic trade barriers .

as shown in table 1 , 11 east asian countries ( china , south korea , taiwan , hong kong , thailand , singapore , malaysia , australia , the philippines , indonesia , and vietnam ) purchased nearly 50% of japan's total exports in 2004 , up from 33% in 1998 .

similarly , japan is sourcing a growing share of its imports from these 11 countries as well .

as shown in table 2 , these countries supplied japan with 47.86% of its imports in 2004 , up from 39.59% in 1998 .

accordingly , in developing its fta strategy , the goj placed the highest priority on negotiating ftas with the republic of korea and the four largest asean member states ( thailand , the philippines , malaysia , and indonesia ) .

an fta with mexico , now in effect , was also made a priority due to the relatively high tariffs japanese companies face compared to those companies from the united states , canada , and european union .

the latter enjoy duty free treatment for the most part due to nafta ( 1994 ) and the eu - mexican fta ( 2000 ) .

after achieving ftas with priority countries , the goj views china and australia as the next most promising candidate partners .

consideration is also being given to countries outside east asia , including chile and switzerland .

since japan launched its first fta negotiation with singapore in 2000 , progress has been hampered by a defensive agricultural position .

while some liberalization has been achieved , the amount so far has been greatly constrained by an inability to offer major reductions in its most protected crops — beef , rice , starches , wheat , and dairy — and to open up its borders to foreign labor .

some critics have argued that japan , following a course of least resistance , could end up with numerous watered - down ftas that neither harm nor energize the japanese economy .

according to this view , the ftas with the largest benefits for japan , such as australia , china , and south korea , are also the most politically challenging and the most likely to fail .

a short synopsis of the main features and significance of japan's fta program follows .

the negotiations are divided into four categories: ( 1 ) those already entered into force ; ( 2 ) those agreed to in principle ; ( 3 ) those under negotiation ; and ( 4 ) those that are in the pipeline or under consideration .

japan's ability to promote its economic interests through an aggressive fta / epa program is constrained by protection of its agricultural sector and rigid immigration policies .

while the fta / epa negotiations themselves provide pressures for more open policies , the ministries charged with these portfolios ( agriculture and justice , respectively ) have not yet advanced effective reform policies that would make a substantial difference .

japan's fta program , assuming the current defensive course persists , may have varied effects on u.s. interests .

on the one hand , it is likely to provide a positive , yet small , boost to increasing japan's role in the economics and political economy of east asia .

it is also likely to be favorable to bilateral trade ties as other asian trading partners , instead of the united states , pressure japan to open its agricultural market further .

in the absence of a japan - u.s. fta as a realistic option , other forms of comprehensive engagement may be considered .

on the other hand , lack of a meaningful agricultural reform program bodes poorly for positive support from japan in the agricultural negotiations of the doha round .

there are also concerns that a defensive and weak fta program pursued by japan could allow china to play a more dominant role in the asian economy — perhaps even creating an exclusionary asian trading bloc .

more than a decade ago , there was concern in the united states that japan was an economic threat because its economy was too strong .

subsequently , u.s. policymakers have come to believe that japan is more of a problem when its economy is weak .

a lackluster growth position in japan not only affects u.s. - japan trade and financial ties adversely , but also undermines growth of the east asian economy .

moreover , an economically strong japan is needed to serve as a counterweight to a rising china .

despite regaining a good deal of financial stability in recent years , japan's economy remains weak .

with growth projections of no more than 1.3% - 1.6% over the next five years , japan will not be in a position to play much of a locomotive role either for the united states or the region .

this assessment is not likely to be altered by the estimated weak impact of japan's fta program on growth .

lagging china in ftas with asian countries , as well in other trade and investment linkages , japan currently cannot be said to be moving rapidly to establish itself as a credible counterweight to a rising china .

post 9 / 11 , u.s. - japan trade relations arguably have received less attention than security issues .

with the exception of japan's ban of the imports of beef from the united states , there have been few bilateral trade disputes and tensions .

perhaps due to a declining share of the u.s. trade deficit and a stagnant economy for much of the 1990s , japan's economy is no longer seen as threat to major u.s. industries .

the reduction in bilateral tensions has been accompanied by japan's fta negotiating partners replacing the united states as demanders of agricultural trade liberalization .

to the extent that these pressures lead to cuts in japan's agricultural protection or agricultural reform proposals , this will be helpful to u.s. agricultural interests not only in bilateral context , but also in the context of the doha round .

unfortunately , slow movement or progress along these lines is occurring .

at the same time , japan's ftas could diminish the benefits that the united states has obtained from ftas .

the japan - mexico fta and the japan - singapore fta are cases in point , moving japan towards an equal footing with these trading partners .

although proposals have been made in the past for negotiation of an fta between japan and the united states , japan's reluctance to reduce its agricultural protection has proved a formidable stumbling block .

nothing has changed in recent years to alter that calculation , but concerns have been raised that the respective fta programs of the two sides could allow the bilateral economic relationship to drift and weaken as japan engages increasingly with its asian neighbors and the u.s. seeks new partnerships throughout the world .

one consequence could be lost economic opportunities for the two largest economies in the world , as well as a weakening of political and security cooperation .

in this context , one former u.s. trade negotiator has proposed consideration of what he calls a "comprehensive economic initiative" ( cei ) between japan and the united states .

the cei is seen as a way for japan and the united states ( both governments and private sector representatives ) to consider actions to promote trade , investment , financial flows , and deregulation , and to harmonize standards and coordinate competition policy .

china has been much more aggressive than either japan or the united states in negotiating ftas .

beijing has concluded a partial fta with asean ahead of japan and south korea .

china has also opened its tropical farm products to thailand in a partial fta , and has also agreed to start fta negotiations with singapore , australia , and new zealand .

moreover , china's long - term goal may be to form the center of an east asian trade bloc .

given that the united states has a limited fta agenda with asian countries ( ftas in place with singapore and australia and talks contemplated with only south korea ) , an east asian trade bloc could have the potential for substantial discrimination against u.s. exports .

in addition , such a bloc could have adverse effects on u.s. influence in the region .

also worrisome is the possibility of a japan - china fta .

much of japan's private sector reportedly is enthusiastic about such a deal .

a japanese government sponsored study found that a china fta could boost japan's gdp by 0.5% , the most among any potential partner country or region .

while many big obstacles stand in the way of a japan - china fta , the possibility should give pause to u.s. policymakers .

some observers opine that the united states would actively work to deter japan from entering into an fta with china .

at the same time , china's aggressive fta program is said to being used by tokyo's opposing fta negotiators for negotiating advantage .

trade negotiators representing asean , for example , reportedly have played this "china card" by telling japan that china is more forthcoming and willing to negotiate an fta than japan .

presumably , this kind of gamesmanship could nudge japan to take more aggressive and trade liberalizing fta positions .

how this confluence of fta developments in asia ultimately impacts u.s. interests is uncertain .

what seems clear , however , is the need for u.s. policymakers to give appropriate attention to how u.s. trade policies can best affect trends in the region to evolve in a direction favorable to u.s. interests .

