the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) established a prescription drug benefit for medicare beneficiaries under part d , which began on january 1 , 2006 .

the mma establishes that medicare beneficiaries will receive the prescription drug benefit through private organizations , typically insurers or similar risk - bearing organizations , that sponsor prescription drug plans ( pdps ) or medicare advantage managed care plans that offer the prescription drug benefit ( ma - pds ) .

one provision of mma , the "noninterference" clause , expressly forbids the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) from interfering with drug price negotiation between manufacturers and medicare drug plan sponsors , and from instituting a formulary or price structure for prescription drugs .

the medicare drug plans ( or their agents ) negotiate prices with the drug manufacturers .

the framework created by the law emphasizes competition among the medicare drug plans to obtain price discounts .

the medicare drug plans have incentive to provide the drug benefit to beneficiaries as efficiently as possible while simultaneously attracting enrollees through low premiums and cost - sharing requirements .

the democratic party included "affordable health care" as one of the "six for '06" initiatives .

as part of this effort , the house passed h.r .

4 on january 12 , 2007 , a bill that requires the secretary of hhs to negotiate prescription drug prices for medicare beneficiaries .

as of this writing , the senate finance committee has not reported a prescription drug negotiation bill in the 110 th congress .

this report discusses what it means for the federal government to "negotiate" drug prices under existing public programs , the arguments for and against such activities , and some implications for the pharmaceutical industry , medicare beneficiaries , and others if similar federal involvement were to occur on behalf of the medicare part d program .

there are a number of approaches that the federal government could adopt to affect prescription drug prices and expenditures .

a few rely primarily on the power of government to dictate an outcome , such as imposing statutory mandates and setting administered prices .

others emphasize more market - oriented approaches , such as soliciting competitive bids from voluntary participants .

a reference pricing approach combines elements of both by dictating some aspects of the price but also allowing market forces to work .

some of these methods are currently employed by federal government programs ( see below ) , while others have been adopted by governments in other countries .

many of the methods are used together .

the federal government has a track record of active involvement in the determination of drug prices through the experience of the department of veterans affairs in obtaining discounts for va beneficiaries and through the medicaid program in obtaining rebates from pharmaceutical manufacturers for states .

if the secretary were to engage in activities that affect drug prices on behalf of medicare part d beneficiaries , the implications could be wide - ranging and potentially quite significant .

the direct effects on beneficiaries , drug companies , wholesalers , pharmacy benefit managers are potentially great , but the long - term and secondary effects on the overall population and the industry may also be significant and are important to consider .

on january 12 , 2007 , the house passed h.r .

4 , the medicare prescription drug price negotiation act of 2007 .

this bill would amend the social security act by ( 1 ) striking section 1860d — 11 ( i ) ( relating to noninterference ) , ( 2 ) add language that would require the secretary of hhs to negotiate prescription drug prices , and ( 3 ) maintain the prohibition against the establishment of a formulary by the secretary while ( 4 ) allowing prescription drug plans to obtain discounts or price reductions below those negotiated by the secretary .

the bill would also require the secretary to submit a report "on negotiations conducted by the secretary to achieve lower prices for medicare beneficiaries , and the prices and price discounts achieved by the secretary as a result of such negotiations" to the committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and oversight and government reform of the house of representatives and the committee on finance of the senate beginning no later than june 1 , 2007 , and every six months thereafter .

the bill would take effect on the date of enactment and would first apply to negotiations and prices for plan years beginning on january 1 , 2008 .

cbo has scored the bill as having "a negligible effect on federal spending. .

cbo anticipates that "the secretary would be unable to negotiate prices across the broad range of covered part d drugs that are more favorable than those obtained by pdps under current law. .

specifically , the absence of the authority to establish a formulary would limit the secretary's ability to influence the outcome of negotiations , as bargaining leverage would be limited .

cms actuaries have also concluded that h.r .

4 would not produce lower drug prices or any additional savings .

on april 11 , 2007 , the senate finance committee passed an amended version of s. 3 that repeals the noninterference provision but does not mandate that the secretary negotiate for lower prescription drug prices .

the bill also includes additional provisions to increase transparency in the part d program by making some data available to congressional support agencies and to prioritize comparative effectiveness research on drugs .

the bill as passed by the finance committee would allow data collected by the secretary on pdps and ma - pds to be used by congressional support agencies ( the congressional budget office , or cbo ; the congressional research service , or crs ; the government accountability office , or gao ; and the medicare payment advisory commission , or medpac ) to fulfill their duties .

upon request , the secretary would make available to any of the congressional support agencies aggregate data on negotiated prices including discounts , subsidies , and rebates ; drug claims data ; reinsurance payments paid to plans ; and the adjustments of payments to plans as a result of the risk corridors established under mma .

in addition , cbo would be able to obtain non - aggregated information about negotiated rebates , discounts , and other price concessions by drug and by contract or plan .

the congressional support agencies would be prohibited from disclosing the information in any manner that would result in the disclosure of trade secrets , and where the disclosure , report , or release of the information would permit the identification of a specific prescription drug plan , ma - pd plan , pharmacy benefit manager , drug manufacturer , drug wholesaler , drug , or individual enrolled in a prescription drug plan or an ma - pd plan .

s. 3 would also require the cbo to study the effect of market competition on prices for drugs under part d. the study would ( 1 ) examine the number and extent of discounts and other price concessions received by prescription drug plans and ma - pd plans for covered part d drugs , ( 2 ) examine the relationship between discounts and price concessions and drug utilization , ( 3 ) compare the medicare part d discounts and price concessions with those obtained under the medicaid program , and ( 4 ) examine the extent to which the efforts of the secretary of health and human services would have an effect upon payers in non - medicare markets .

a report on this study would be due a year after enactment .

the bill would also require the secretary to make public the data on the prices charged for each covered part d drug under each prescription drug plan and ma - pd plan to individuals enrolled in the plan .

the data would reflect actual prices posted on the website of the centers for medicare and medicaid services , and would be made available in a manner that permits linkage of the data to data contained in other public prescription drug plan and ma - pd plan data files .

s. 3 would also instruct the secretary of hhs to develop a new prioritized list of comparative clinical effectiveness studies on prescription drugs covered under part d. the list is to reflect studies most critical to advancing value - based purchasing of covered part d drugs .

the bill would also establish an advisory committee to provide advice on setting priorities for comparative clinical effectiveness studies .

the committee would include a diverse range of public and private experts , stakeholders , and interests from industry , patients and representatives of patients , researchers , and government with no group having a majority of members .

within one year of the enactment of the act , the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress that would include ( 1 ) the prioritized list of comparative clinical effectiveness studies and plans for the conduct of the studies ; ( 2 ) a summary of the four factors the secretary would be required to take into account in constructing the list ; and ( 3 ) an explanation of how the secretary took into account each of the four factors in developing the list and preparing the report .

the secretary would be required to make the report publicly available .

finally , s. 3 would also instruct pharmacy and therapeutic ( p&t ) committees to consider comparative clinical effectiveness studies in developing and reviewing formularies for medicare prescription drug plans , if relevant .

currently , guidelines for medicare part d formularies require the inclusion of two drugs in each therapeutic class , except if only one drug is available , coverage of "all or substantially all" drugs in six protected classes .

plans can neither change their formularies without cms approval nor drop coverage for persons currently using the drug , except at the beginning of the calendar year .

cbo's evaluation of s. 3 is very similar to its assessment of h.r .

4 .

in a letter dated april 10 , 2007 , cbo wrote that modifying the noninterference provision would have a negligible effect on federal spending because we anticipate that under the bill the secretary would lack the leverage to negotiate prices across the broad range of covered part d drugs that are more favorable than those obtained by pdps under current law .

without the authority to establish a formulary or other tools to reduce drug prices , we believe that the secretary would not obtain significant discounts from drug manufacturers across a broad range of drugs .

cbo's letter also noted that the provisions of the bill that would permit congressional support agencies access to part d data and establish a prioritized list of potential studies of the comparative clinical effectiveness of drugs covered under part d "would have no effect on direct spending. .

on april 18 , 2007 , the senate did not invoke cloture on s. 3 .

this report will be updated .

