the united nations ( u.n. ) human rights council ( the council ) is the primary intergovernmental body that addresses human rights worldwide .

the united states is not currently a council member ; in june 2018 , the trump administration announced that the united states would withdraw its membership .

administration officials cited concerns with the council's disproportionate focus on israel , ineffectiveness in addressing human rights situations , and lack of reform .

members of the 116 th congress may continue to consider the council's role and effectiveness , including what impact , if any , the u.s. withdrawal might have on ( 1 ) the council's efforts to combat human rights and ( 2 ) the united states' ability to further its human rights objectives in u.n. fora .

policymakers might also consider the following questions: what role , if any , should the council play in international human rights policy and in addressing specific human rights situations ? .

is the council an effective mechanism for addressing human rights worldwide ? .

if not , what reform measures might improve the council and how can they be achieved ? .

what role , if any , might the united states play in the council , or in other u.n. human rights mechanisms , moving forward ? .

should the united states rejoin the council ? .

if so , under what circumstances ? .

this report provides background on the council , including the role of the previous u.n. commission on human rights .

it discusses the council's current mandate and structure , as well as administration policy and congressional actions .

finally , it highlights policy aspects of possible interest to the 116 th congress , including the debate over u.s. membership , u.s. funding of the council , alternatives to the council in u.n. fora , and the council's focus on israel .

the u.n. commission on human rights was the primary intergovernmental policymaking body for human rights issues before it was replaced by the u.n. human rights council in 2006 .

created in 1946 as a subsidiary body of the u.n. economic and social council ( ecosoc ) , the commission's initial mandate was to establish international human rights standards and develop an international bill of rights .

during its existence , the commission played a key role in developing a comprehensive body of human rights treaties and declarations , including the universal declaration of human rights .

over time , its work evolved to address specific human rights violations and complaints , as well as broader human rights issues .

it developed a system of special procedures to monitor , analyze , and report on country - specific human rights violations , as well as thematic cross - cutting human rights abuses such as racial discrimination , religious intolerance , and denial of freedom of expression .

in the late 1990s and early 2000s , controversy developed over the human rights records of some commission members that were widely perceived as systematic abusers of human rights .

these instances significantly affected the commission's credibility .

critics , including the united states , claimed that countries used their membership to deflect attention from their own human rights violations by questioning the records of others .

some members were accused of bloc voting and excessive procedural manipulation to prevent debate of their human rights abuses .

in 2001 , the united states was not elected to the commission , whereas widely perceived human rights violators such as pakistan , sudan , and uganda were elected .

in 2005 , the collective impact of these and other controversies led u.n. secretary - general kofi annan to propose the idea of a new and smaller human rights council to replace the commission .

in 2006 , as part of broader u.n. reform efforts , the u.n. general assembly approved resolution 60 / 251 , which dissolved the u.n. commission on human rights and created the human rights council in its place .

this section provides an overview of council structure and selected policy issues and concerns that have emerged over the years .

most u.s. policymakers have generally supported the council's overall purpose and mandate ; however , many have expressed concern regarding its effectiveness in addressing human rights issues — leading to ongoing disagreements as to whether or not the united states should be a member of or provide funding for the council .

for example , under president george w. bush , the united states voted against the assembly resolution creating the council and did not run for a seat , arguing that the council lacked mechanisms for maintaining credible membership .

 ( the george w. bush administration also withheld council funding in fy2008 under a provision enacted by congress in 2007. ) .

on the other hand , the obama administration supported u.s. membership and council funding , maintaining that it was better to work from within to improve the body ; the united states was elected as a council member in 2009 , 2012 , and 2016 .

under president obama , the united states consistently opposed the council actions related to israel and sought to adopt specific reforms during the council's five - year review in 2011 .

congressional perspectives on the issue have been mixed , with some members advocating continued u.s. participation and others opposing it .

a key concern among many members of congress is the council's focus on israel .

congressional debate regarding the u.n. human rights council has generally focused on a recurring set of policy issues .

in general , u.s. policymakers have been divided as to whether the united states should serve as a member of the council .

supporters of u.s. participation contend that the united states should work from within the council to build coalitions with like - minded countries and steer the council toward a more balanced approach to addressing human rights situations .

council membership , they argue , places the united states in a position to advocate its human rights policies and priorities .

supporters also maintain that u.s. leadership in the council has led to several promising council developments , including increased attention to human rights situations in countries such as iran , mali , north korea , and sudan , among others .

some have also noted that the number of special sessions addressing israel has decreased since the united states joined the council .

in addition , some council supporters are concerned that u.s. withdrawal might lead to a possible leadership gap and countries such as china and russia could gain increased influence in the council .

opponents contend that u.s. membership provides the council with undeserved legitimacy .

the united states , they suggest , should not be a part of a body that focuses disproportionately on one country ( israel ) while ignoring many human rights situations in countries that are widely believed to violate human rights .

critics further maintain that the united states should not serve on a body that would allow human rights abusers to serve as members .

many also suggest that u.s. membership on the council provides countries with a forum to criticize the united states , particularly during the upr process .

over the years , policymakers have debated to what extent , if any , the united states should fund the council .

some members have proposed that the united states withhold a proportionate share of its assessed contributions , approximately 22% , from the u.n. regular budget , which is used to fund the council .

most recently , fy2017 through fy2019 state - foreign operations acts have placed conditions on u.s. funding to the council , and the trump administration subsequently withheld $7.67 million from u.s. contributions to the u.n. regular budget in both fy2017 and fy2018 .

information on fy2019 council funding is currently unavailable .

legislating to withhold council funds in this manner is a largely symbolic policy action because assessed contributions finance the entire u.n. regular budget and not specific parts of it .

the united states had previously withheld funding from the council in 2008 , when the george w. bush administration withheld a proportionate share of u.s. council funding from the regular budget under a law that required the secretary of state to certify to congress that funding the council was in the best national interest of the united states .

some observers and policymakers have argued that if the united states were to withdraw from the council , it could pursue its human rights objectives in other u.n. fora .

specifically , some suggest that the united states focus on the activities of the general assembly's third committee , which addresses social , humanitarian , and cultural issues , including human rights .

some also recommend that the united states could increase its support for the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights , as well as the council's independent experts who address country - specific and functional human rights issues .

other u.s. policymakers have proposed addressing human rights in the u.n. security council .

in april 2017 , u.s .

permanent representative haley held the security council's first ever thematic debate on human rights issues , where she stated the following: the traditional view has been that the security council is for maintaining international peace and security , not for human rights .

i am here today asserting that the protection of human rights is often deeply intertwined with peace and security .

the two things often cannot be separated .

on the other hand , critics of this approach might argue that some proposed alternatives do not carry the same level of influence as the human rights council , particularly since bodies such as the general assembly and security council do not focus exclusively on human rights issues .

opponents of u.s. withdrawal contend that unlike the proposed alternatives , the council includes unique mechanisms to address human rights issues , such as the complaint procedure and universal periodic review process .

the council's ongoing focus on israel has continued to concern some members of congress .

in addition to singling out israel as a permanent part of the council's agenda , other council actions — including resolutions , reports , and statements by some council experts — have generated significant congressional interest for what many view as an apparent bias against israel .

for example , some members of congress demonstrated considerable concern with a september 2009 council report ( often referred to as the "goldstone report" after the main author , richard goldstone , an independent expert from south africa ) , which found "evidence of serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law," including possible war crimes , by israel .

the report received further attention in april 2011 , when goldstone stated that the report's conclusion that israel committed possible war crimes may have been incorrect .

in addition , the statements and findings of richard falk , the council's previous special rapporteur on the situation of human rights on palestinian territories occupied since 1967 , have drawn considerable criticism from many u.s. policymakers for apparent bias against israel .

more recently , some members of congress have expressed alarm regarding a march 2016 council resolution that , among other things , requested ohchr to produce a database of all business enterprises that have "directly and indirectly , enabled , facilitated and profited from the construction and growth of the ( israeli ) settlements. .

the united states has opposed this resolution .

some experts suggest that the council's focus on israel is at least partially the result of its membership composition .

after the first elections , members of the organization of islamic cooperation ( oic ) held 17 seats on the council , accounting for about one - third of the votes needed to call a special session ( 15 oic members currently serve on the council ) .

some experts contend that blocs such as the african group and non - aligned movement ( nam ) , who may at times account for the majority of council seats , tend to view economic and security issues as more important than human rights violations .

appendix a .

special sessions of the human rights counci .

