throughout the u.s. debate on international family planning assistance — at times the most controversial foreign aid issue considered by congress — the cornerstone of u.s. policy has remained a commitment to funding international family planning programs based on principles of voluntarism and informed choice that give participants access to information and services on a broad range of family planning methods .

at present , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) maintains family planning projects in nearly 40 developing countries that include counseling and services , training of health workers , contraceptive commodities and distribution , financial management , policy dialogue , data collection , monitoring and evaluation , public education and marketing , and biomedical and contraceptive research and development .

usaid applies a broad reproductive health approach to its family planning programs , increasingly integrating it with other interventions in maternal and child health , the enhancement of the status of women , and hiv treatment and prevention .

in addition to these bilateral activities , the united states has supported multilateral family planning efforts through annual contributions to the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) .

family planning assistance has become a source of substantial contention among u.s. policymakers , centering on two key issues: setting appropriate and effective funding levels for family planning assistance , and the use of federal funds to perform or promote abortions abroad and how to address possible coercion in some national family planning programs , especially in china .

arguably , the most bitter controversies in u.s. family planning policy have erupted over abortion — in particular , the degree to which legal abortions and coercive programs occur in other countries' family planning programs , the extent to which u.s. funds should be granted to or withheld from such countries and organizations that administer these programs , and the effect that withholding u.s. funds might have on global population growth and access to voluntary family planning services in developing nations .

these issues stem from the contentious domestic debate over u.s. domestic abortion policy that has continued since the supreme court's 1973 roe v. wade decision holding that the constitution protects a woman's decision whether to terminate her pregnancy .

in every congress since 1973 , abortion opponents have introduced constitutional amendments or legislation that would prohibit abortions supported with u.s. foreign assistance funds .

as an alternative , congress has attached numerous provisions to annual appropriation measures banning the use of federal funds for performing legal abortions .

much of this debate has focused on domestic spending bills , especially restrictions on abortions under the medicaid program in the labor / health and human services appropriation legislation .

however , the controversy spilled over into u.s. foreign aid policy when congress approved an amendment to the foreign assistance act of 1961 in late 1973 introduced by then - senator jesse helms ( §104 ( f ) ) .

the provision , widely referred to as the "helms amendment," prohibits the use of foreign development assistance to ( 1 ) pay for the performance of abortions or involuntary sterilizations , ( 2 ) motivate or coerce any person to practice abortions , or ( 3 ) coerce or provide persons with any financial incentive to undergo sterilizations .

since 1981 , congress has enacted the helms amendment , as well as other family planning and abortion - related restrictions , in annual foreign operations appropriation bills .

in the mid - 1980s , debate over international abortion restrictions reached the executive branch .

in 1984 , at the second international conference on population held in mexico city , mexico , president reagan issued what has become known as the "mexico city policy," which required foreign non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) receiving usaid family planning assistance to certify that they would not perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning , even if such activities were undertaken with non - u.s. funds .

in the intervening years , the mexico city policy has been rescinded and reissued by various administrations .

most recently , it was rescinded by president barack obama in january 2009 .

in 1985 , congress adopted the "kemp - kasten" amendment due to the concerns of president reagan and some members of congress that the u.n. population fund's ( unfpa's ) program in china engaged in or provided funding for abortion or coercive family planning programs .

kemp - kasten prohibits u.s. assistance to organizations that , as determined by the president , support or participate in the management of coercive family planning programs .

demonstrating the politicized nature of the international family planning debate , presidential determinations regarding the mexico city policy and unfpa's activities in china have generally been divided along party lines .

presidents reagan , george bush , and george w. bush prohibited u.s. contributions to unfpa and supported the mexico city policy , while presidents clinton and obama have supported u.s. funding of unfpa and overturned the mexico city policy .

for the past several decades , both congressional actions and administration directives have restricted u.s. population assistance in various ways .

such restrictions are found in provisions in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as well as executive regulations and appropriation provisions prohibiting indirect support for coercive family planning ( specifically in china ) and abortion activities related to the work of international and foreign ngos .

this section addresses two key actions that were initiated in the mid - 1980s and have remained particularly controversial in the u.s. family planning debate: the mexico city policy involving funding for foreign non - governmental organizations , and "kemp - kasten" restrictions on funding for the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) because of its activities in china .

usaid is the lead u.s. agency addressing voluntary family planning and reproductive health and has been the largest international family planning donor for over 40 years .

since 1965 , it has obligated over $13.8 billion in assistance for international family planning activities .

its current family planning activities span nearly 40 countries and focus on seven key technical priorities: healthy timing and spacing of pregnancy policies that encourage healthy birth spacing to maximize health impact of family planning programs ; community - based approaches , including using front - line community health workers to bring services , information , and referrals to women who are not easily reached through fixed facilities ; contraceptive security to ensure that there are adequate stocks of contraceptives for communities ; access to long - active and permanent family planning method s , such as intrauterine devices , implants , and sterilization ; integrati ng with hiv programs to ensure that hiv positive men and women have access to family planning information and services ; and integrating with maternal and child health ( mch ) programs , particularly during the post - partum period for women , when demand for pregnancy spacing is the highest .

in many years , and especially over the past two decades , the level of funding for family planning and reproductive health activities has been controversial , and at times , linked directly with differences concerning mexico city policy restrictions , unfpa funding , and abortion .

until fy1996 , congress generally supported higher funding levels for population aid than proposed by the president , especially during the reagan and bush administrations .

during the balance of the clinton administration , however , congress cut and placed restrictions on bilateral funding ( see table 1 ) .

in some years , bilateral family planning , reproductive health , and maternal health levels received additional resources when unfpa - earmarked funds were reprogrammed for bilateral activities after unfpa was determined to be ineligible for u.s. support under the kemp - kasten amendment .

u.s. population assistance levels peaked in fy2010 , with usaid estimating that total assistance , including contributions to unfpa , reached a high of $648.4 million .

this increase in funding can be attributed in part to president obama's determination that unfpa is eligible for u.s. funding under the kemp - kasten amendment and to the president's global health initiative ( ghi ) .

from fy2012 to fy2015 , enacted bilateral and unfpa funding levels remained constant at $575 million and $35 million , respectively .

in fy2016 , bilateral family planning funding was level at $575 million , while unfpa funding decreased to $32.5 million .

the following sections highlight key administration and congressional actions regarding bilateral and multilateral fp / rh funding during the past five fiscal years .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

113-114 ) , stated that not less than $575 million shall be made available for bilateral fp / rh activities , $523.95 of which would be drawn from the global health programs account ( ghp ) .

it further stated that $32.5 million shall be made available for unfpa , a $2.5 million decrease from the enacted level of $35 million annually from fy2012 through fy2015 .

the act included unfpa funding restrictions related to china from previous fiscal years .

it also dropped modifications to the mexico city policy that were included in the house and senate appropriations committee reports .

the fy2016 administration request for bilateral fp / rh activities totaled $577.623 million , including $538 million from ghp and $39.623 million from the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

the administration also requested $39.6 million for unfpa from the international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , enacted in december 2014 , stated that not less than $575 million should be made available for bilateral fp / rh activities , and that $35 million shall be made available for unfpa .

the act included unfpa funding restrictions related to china from previous fiscal years .

for fy2015 , the president requested a total of $609 million for bilateral fp / rh activities , including $538 million from the ghp account and $71 million from the esf account .

the request also included $35.3 million for unfpa from the io&p account .

enacted in january 2014 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , directed that no less than $575 million shall be made available for bilateral fp / rh activities , and that an additional $35 million shall be made available for unfpa .

as during previous appropriations cycles , unfpa funding is subject to certain restrictions , including funds not made available for unfpa because of any provision of law shall be transferred to the global health programs account and made available for family planning , maternal , and reproductive health activities ; none of the funds made available may be used by unfpa for a country program in china ; u.s. contributions must be kept in an account separate from other unfpa accounts and should not commingle with other sums ; and unfpa must not fund abortions .

in addition , four months after the enactment of the act , the secretary of state is required to report to the committees on appropriations on the funds that unfpa is budgeting for that year for its country program in china .

for fy2014 , president obama had requested $635.4 million in bilateral and multilateral family planning funding .

this included including $37 million for unfpa from the international organizations and programs account ( io&p ) and $598.4 for bilateral family planning .

the bilateral funding included $534 million from the global health programs account ( ghp , formerly global health and child survival ) , and $64.4 million from the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

on march 26 , 2013 , president obama signed the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) , which funded most state - foreign operations accounts , including those that provide family planning and reproductive health funding , for the remainder of fy2013 at the fy2012-enacted level , not including sequestration .

all restrictions and conditions included in fy2012 state - foreign operations appropriations legislation ( p.l .

112-74 ) , described below , apply under the act .

in february 2012 , president obama requested a total of $642.7 million for fy2013 international family planning and reproductive health funding .

this included $530 million from ghp , $73.7 million from esf , and $39 million for unfpa from the io&p account .

on december 23 , 2011 , president obama signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , which directs that not less than $575 million should be made available for family planning and reproductive health activities .

the act also states that $35 million shall be made available for unfpa .

as during previous appropriations cycles , unfpa funding is subject to certain restrictions , including funds not made available for unfpa because of any provision of law shall be transferred to the global health programs account and made available for family planning , maternal , and reproductive health activities ; none of the funds made available may be used by unfpa for a country program in china ; u.s. contributions must be kept in an account separate from other unfpa accounts and should not commingle with other sums ; and unfpa must not fund abortions .

in addition , four months after the enactment of the act , the secretary of state is required to report to the committees on appropriations on the funds that unfpa is budgeting for that year for its country program in china .

for fy2012 , the obama administration requested a total of $769.105 million for international family planning and reproductive health assistance .

this included $625.6 million from the global health and child survival account ( ghcs ) ; $89.073 million from esf ; and $6.932 million from the assistance to europe , eurasia , and central asia account ( aeeca ) .

in addition , it requested $47.5 million for unfpa through the io&p account .

