federal surface transportation programs are a major component of national spending on transportation capital infrastructure .

according to a government accountability office ( gao ) report , 46% of all u.s. highway capital spending in fy2002 was attributable to federal funding .

likewise , it is the availability of federal transit funding that has provided the possibility of bus and rail transit projects in many communities during the last few decades .

structurally , surface transportation legislation normally consists of multiple separate legislative titles which can be viewed as the principal programs and their funding mechanism ; highways , highway safety , transit , motor carrier safety , research , planning , hazardous materials transportation , rail , and finance .

additional titles are sometimes included in reauthorization legislation , that are often unrelated to transportation ( as is the case of certain tax provisions in safetea ) .

it should be pointed out that the term "program" has multiple meanings in a discussion of federal surface transportation policy .

the larger federal - aid highway program , for example , consists of a number of separate programs , such as the surface transportation program ( stp ) .

funds in the various programs are distributed on the basis of formulas ( known as apportioned programs in highway parlance ) and on a discretionary basis ( also referred to as the allocated programs in the highway program ) .

the majority of funding in the overall surface transportation bill , and the vast majority of highway funding , goes to the so - called "core" highway programs .

safetea increases the number of these core programs from five to six: interstate maintenance ( im ) , national highway system ( nhs ) ; surface transportation program ( stp ) ; bridge and bridge maintenance ; congestion , mitigation , and air quality ( cmaq ) ; and the new highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) are all apportioned programs .

a seventh program , called the equity bonus ( eb ) ( which replaced the tea - 21 minimum guarantee program ) , is sometimes also referred to as a core program .

most remaining highway funding goes to the allocated programs , such as federal lands highways , which are ostensibly under the control of the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , but in recent practice have been largely earmarked during the annual appropriations process .

the structures of the highway safety , research , and transit programs also include a mix of formula and discretionary programs .

in the transit program , for example , about half of all funding is distributed directly to transit operators by the urbanized area formula program and the non - urbanized area formula program .

each of the major programs also includes planning , environmental , and other elements that are major subjects of discussion during reauthorization debates .

historically , transportation policy battle lines have often formed along regional rather than partisan alignments .

the regional character of transportation policy is evident in the debate over the so - called "equity" of distribution of federal highway aid among the states .

since 1982 congress has included legislative provisions in every surface transportation reauthorization act to remedy these perceived funding distribution concerns through a variety of minimum guarantee provisions .

for many years , some states ( mostly southern as well as some midwestern and western states ) have complained that they receive significantly less federal highway aid than their highway users pay in federal highway taxes to the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

these states , referred to as donor states , have pressed for legislative remedies that would assure them a higher share rate - of - return , most recently 95% , on their tax payments to the treasury .

donee states , states that receive more federal highway aid than they pay in federal highway taxes , have not opposed equity provisions per se but have opposed any reduction in their existing shares .

the basic donor state argument is a relatively straightforward call for equity or fairness .

donor state advocates generally contend that for too many years they have been subsidizing the repair and improvement of donee state infrastructure , especially the older highway infrastructure in the northeast .

most also argue that they are more road dependent and do not benefit from federal transit spending to the same degree as some donee states .

southern and western donor states also argue that they are fast growth areas , relative to most donee states , and that , consequently , their needs are as great or greater .

finally , they argue that with the completion of the interstate highway system there is no valid rationale for the donor - donee disparity .

donee state advocates argue that fairness should not be separated from needs .

they assert that the age of their highway infrastructure , especially in the northeast , the high cost of working on heavily congested urban roads , and the limited financial resources in large sparsely populated western states justify their donee status .

they also argue that there are needs that are inherently federal rather than state and that a national highway network cannot be based solely on state or regional boundaries .

donee states also argue that midwestern and southern states spend less local and state money on highways than donee states , and chide them for pleading for federal funds when they are unwilling to ante up their own resources .

in a broader sense , the debate over equity remedies has implications for a number of overarching issues .

an equity guarantee of a 95% rate of return could , in the minds of some , leave little room for addressing other or additional transportation needs that are uniquely federal , such as the federal lands highway program .

also , the role of the federal government vis - à - vis the states comes into question as the minimum guarantee approaches 100% .

at what point does the federal role become so limited that converting the federal aid highway program to a revenue sharing or a block grant program make sense ? .

another controversial issue is whether the mg should be broadened , as some states have proposed , to include federal transit administration programs .

the 109 th congress faced a difficult policy problem in resolving the seemingly contradictory goals of meeting donor state demands for a higher rate - of - return and donee state demands to be held harmless at a time when the htf revenue base was expected to be insufficient to easily fund both goals .

part of the problem was that a bill that simply reduced the shares of donee states to increase the shares of donor states would have had difficulty overcoming a filibuster by donee states in the senate .

to construct a minimum guarantee ( mg ) mechanism that could overcome this obstacle , previous reauthorization bills had included "hold harmless" provisions that maintained certain base shares for all states .

this meant that part of the process of bringing donor state shares up to the mg percentage required increasing the overall federal highway program size , usually by a significant amount ( since donee state funding could not be reduced ) .

in other words , providing equity remedies that keep both donor and donee states reasonably content has been accomplished by giving more money to all states but giving even more to donor states to bring their shares up to a designated per cent share , 90.5% during tea21 .

providing equity in this way has been very expensive in dollar terms , the minimum guarantee program under tea21 , in fact , became the largest highway program .

in the end , the constraints of limited funding availability and the practical politics of getting the surface transportation legislation through both houses of congress , resulted in a modest and gradual increase in the guaranteed rate - of - return to the states .

safetea provides $45.3 billion in guaranteed funding for transit for the five - year authorization period ( fy2005-fy2009 ) .

including fy2004 transit funding , the six - year total is $52.6 billion , a 46% increase over the $36 billion guaranteed for transit in tea - 21 .

within the overall increase , congress shifted the share of funding going to various parts of the transit program .

the share of transit funding going to the urbanized area formula program shrank from 47.9% under tea - 21 to 44.0% , while the share going to the non - urbanized ( i.e .

rural ) formula program increased from 3.3% under tea - 21 to 5.2% .

relatedly , the share of total transit formula funding going to four of the largest ( in terms of population ) states shrank by nearly 8% ( though the share of the largest state in terms of population , california , increased by 1.2% ) , while the share going to the 40 least - populated states ( plus the district and territories ) increased by 11.1% .

generally , the act made only minor changes to the structure of the federal transit program .

as described below , a few new programs were added , several new funding categories were created within existing programs , and some changes were made to existing programs .

other provisions in the act include a requirement that all federal agencies in the national capital region offer their employees a transit pass as a transportation fringe benefit ( section 3049 ) ; a provision making the alternatives analysis required as part of the new starts program eligible for fta grants ( section 3037 ) , with 18 such studies earmarked for fy2006-fy2007 ; and earmarks for the bus and bus facilities program for fy2006-fy2009 ( in tea - 21 , there were no earmarks for that program for the last three years of the authorization period , leaving the earmarking during those years to the appropriations committees ) .

both the short - and long - term , research and development , as well as technology deployment activities ( rd and td ) have a role in helping to reduce the various challenges that affect the performance or operation of the nation's surface transportation systems .

these challenges include congestion , security , loss of life and injury due to traffic crashes , degradation of environmental or life quality ( eg , suburban sprawl ) , and the continual need for infrastructure rehabilitation .

the federal role in rd and td seeks to advance and accelerate the use of improved or safer technologies , processes , policies , vehicles , and infrastructure to reduce these challenges .

in the surface transportation arena , the federal role is primarily administered or overseen by the fhwa , fta , nhtsa , and the research and innovative technology administration ( rita ) .

in terms of the transportation budget , two of the largest efforts of rd and td pertain to its and fhwa's rd and td program ( discussed below ) .

this section deals primarily with funds used to support fhwa - administered programs .

fhwa conducts an extensive rd and td program that involves all aspects of the highway system .

for these activities , title v of safetea authorizes roughly $295 million per year , up from roughly $200 million annually under tea - 21 .

for each of the years fy2005-fy2009 , safetea authorizes the following amounts for transportation research and education: $169.4 million for surface transportation research , development , and deployment ; $26.7 million for training and education , $27 million for the bureau of transportation statistics , and $69.7 million for the university transportation research program .

 ( safetea also authorizes research , development , and testing funds for transit and motor carrier activities as well as for a variety of other technological objectives. ) .

research funds are used primarily to advance and deploy technologies intended to improve highway pavements , structures , roadway safety , and study highway policies .

some of the technology deployment funds are earmarked for specific types of research or projects , and much of the university - oriented funds are earmarked for specific institutions .

many state and industry experts assert that fhwa's rd and td funds are of fundamental importance to the states and their long - term ability to maximize the effective use of federal aid funds .

 ( crs contact: [author name scrubbed] ) .

title ix of safetea , "rail transportation," addresses three issues with respect to freight rail transportation: infrastructure capacity , rail - to - rail competition , and grade crossing conflicts .

in light of increasing international trade volumes and growing congestion on certain parts of the nation's highway system , congress has been considering the capability of the freight railroads to expand their infrastructure capacity to handle more freight .

freight railroads primarily finance their infrastructure needs without government aid .

congress has been evaluating how , and under what circumstances , it might be appropriate for the federal government to assist the railroads in expanding their networks .

another rail issue is the increasing frequency of freight train traffic through the middle of some towns and city neighborhoods .

more frequent trains have increased delays for motor vehicle traffic at grade crossings .

while railroads have reduced the total number of railway miles they maintain in service , they are utilizing their remaining track more intensely in an effort to improve operating efficiency .

a further congressional issue of a perennial nature since price deregulation of the rail industry in 1980 is the captive shipper question .

some members of congress , who have rail shippers in their district served by only one railroad , are concerned with the high rail rates and poor rail service they contend these shippers receive .

all of these rail issues have been debated in the context of stand alone legislation introduced in the 109 th congress but safetea also reflects these issues in title ix of the act .

for example , section 9007 requests the transportation research board of the national academies to report to congress on the performance of the nation's rail system in terms of service quality and rates , the railroads' ability to meet projected demand , and the effectiveness of public policy in balancing the need for railroads to earn adequate revenues with those of shippers for reasonable rates and adequate service .

congress also provided the following two funding mechanisms in title ix of safetea that are intended , at least partially , to address these issues .

safetea continues the recreational trails program ( rtp ) , initially authorized under istea and expanded under tea - 21 , as a state - administered , federal - aid program to help states develop and maintain recreational trails for motorized and non - motorized trail uses .

the rtp provides funds for all types of recreational trail use , including hiking , running , bicycling , equestrian use , wheelchair use , snowmobiling , four wheel driving , off - road motorcycling , all - terrain riding , and other off - road vehicle use .

rtp funds may not be used for property condemnation , constructing new trails for motorized use on national forest or bureau of land management lands unless the project is consistent with resource management plans , or facilitating motorized access on otherwise non - motorized trails .

before final design , property acquisition , or construction on a highway or transit project can proceed , dot ( i.e. , fhwa or fta ) must comply with certain environmental review requirements , including those of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

4321 et seq. ) .

nepa requires all federal agencies to consider the environmental impacts of proposed federal actions .

to ensure that environmental impacts are considered before final decisions are made , nepa requires dot to prepare an environmental impact statement ( eis ) for any federally funded action that significantly affects the quality of the human environment .

projects for which it is not initially clear whether impacts will be significant require the preparation of an environmental assessment ( ea ) .

if , it is determined , at any time during the assessment , that a project's impacts will be significant , an eis must be prepared .

projects that do not individually or cumulatively have a significant social , economic , or environmental effect , and which dot has determined from past experience have no significant impact , are processed as categorical exclusions .

 ( for more detailed information about the nepa process , see crs report rl32024 , background on nepa implementation for highway projects: streamlining the process , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

another requirement that is generally carried out within the context of the nepa process is compliance with section 4 ( f ) of the department of transportation act of 1966 .

section 4 ( f ) requirements apply to the use of publicly owned parks and recreation areas , wildlife and waterfowl refuges , and to publicly or privately owned historic sites of national , state , or local significance .

the law prohibits the use of a section 4 ( f ) resource for a transportation project unless there is no "prudent and feasible" alternative to do otherwise , and the project includes all possible planning to minimize harm to the resource .

some members of congress have expressed concerns that the environmental review process for large , complex highway and transit projects can be inefficient , leading to delays in completion of those projects .

to address this concern , "environmental streamlining" provisions were included in tea - 21 .

although not defined by the statute , fhwa defines environmental streamlining as the timely delivery of federally funded transportation projects , while protecting and enhancing the environment .

because major transportation projects may be affected by dozens of federal , state , and local environmental requirements , administered by multiple agencies , improved interagency cooperation was identified by congress as a critical element to the success of environmental streamlining .

the streamlining provisions of tea - 21 required the department of transportation ( dot ) to develop and implement a "coordinated environmental review process" for highway projects that either do have , or may have , a significant impact on the environment ( approximately 9% of all highway projects fall into one of these categories ) .

this coordinated review process encouraged full and early participation by all relevant federal and state agencies required to participate in a highway project .

since the passage of tea - 21 , numerous administrative activities have been undertaken to facilitate streamlining .

however , some members of congress expressed the need for further legislation to expedite the environmental review process required of highway construction and transit projects .

as a result , safetea includes provisions intended to further streamline the environmental review process .

the provisions deal primarily with nepa and section 4 ( f ) requirements , but could also be used to expedite compliance with other environmental requirements .

 ( for detail about the nepa process , section 4 ( f ) requirements , and streamlining provisions in safetea , see crs report rl33057 , surface transportation reauthorization: environmental issues and legislative provisions in safetea - lu ( h.r .

3 ) , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

unlike tea - 21 , the term "streamlining" is not used in safetea .

however , the intended effect is the same — to expedite compliance with certain environmental requirements , primarily nepa and section 4 ( f ) .

with regard to nepa , many of the provisions in safetea codify existing regulatory requirements , such as: specifically designating dot as the lead agency for surface transportation projects ; specifying the role of the lead and cooperating agencies ; and allowing deadlines for decision - making to be set .

following are key safetea provisions related to streamlining that change existing statutory or regulatory requirements: the establishment of a new entity in the nepa process , referred to as a "participating agency," that includes those that intend to submit comments on nepa documentation in addition to those that meet the definition of a cooperating agency ; the establishment of procedures to be followed by lead and participating agencies for the collaborative development of the project's statement of purpose and need and project alternatives , including the establishment of deadlines on comments ; the establishment of a 180-day statute of limitation on judicial claims on final agency actions related to environmental requirements ; authorization to allow the use of transportation funds to help agencies required to expedite the environmental review process ; the establishment of a dispute resolution process when agencies disagree on elements of the environmental review process ; authorization to allow states to determine whether certain classes of projects may be processed as categorical exclusions ; and authorization to allow the establishment of state pilot programs to allow participating states to assume certain federal responsibilities regarding compliance with environmental laws .

with regard to section 4 ( f ) , under §6009 ( a ) , safetea allows for the use of publicly owned parks and recreation areas , wildlife and waterfowl refuges if it is determined that such use would result in "de minimis impacts" to that resource .

that determination must receive concurrence from the official with jurisdiction over that resource ( eg , the u.s .

fish and wildlife service , the national park service , or applicable state or local park authorities ) .

safetea similarly allows for the use of a publicly or privately owned historic site if a de minimis impact determination is made in accordance with provisions of the national historic preservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

470f ) .

further , §6009 ( b ) requires dot , within one year , to issue regulations clarifying factors to be considered and standards to be applied in determining whether alternatives are "prudent and feasible" under the section 4 ( f ) requirements .

also related to section 4 ( f ) requirements , §6007 of safetea specifies that , under administrative procedures established under §106 of the national historic preservation act , the interstate system cannot be considered a "historic site" under provisions of section 4 ( f ) .

it may still be determined that individual elements of the interstate system possess an independent feature of historic significance that may still be protected under section 4 ( f ) requirements .

 ( crs contact: [author name scrubbed] ) .

under the clean air act , areas that have not attained one or more of the six national ambient air quality standards must develop state implementation plans ( sips ) demonstrating how they will reach attainment .

as of may 2005 , at least 124 areas with a combined population of 159 million people were subject to the sip requirements .

section 176 of the clean air act prohibits federal agencies from funding projects in these areas unless they "conform" to the sips .

specifically , projects must not "cause or contribute to any new violation of any standard," "increase the frequency or severity of any existing violation," or "delay timely attainment of any standard. .

because new highways generally lead to an increase in vehicle miles traveled and related emissions , both the statute and regulations require that an area's transportation improvement program ( tip ) , which identifies major highway and transit projects an area will undertake , demonstrate conformity each time it is revised ( i.e. , at least every two years ) .

highway and transit projects cannot receive federal funds unless they are part of a conforming tip .

while conformity has been required for more than a decade , the impact of the conformity requirements is expected to grow in the next few years for several reasons .

the growth of emissions from suvs and other light trucks and greater than expected increases in vehicle miles traveled have both made it more difficult to demonstrate conformity ; recent court decisions have tightened the conformity rules ; and the implementation over the next three years of more stringent air quality standards ( both for ozone and for fine particles such as those found in diesel exhaust ) will mean that additional areas are subject to conformity .

thus , numerous metropolitan areas could face a temporary suspension of highway and transit funds unless they impose sharp reductions in vehicle , industrial , or other emissions .

in a 2003 survey , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that , over the previous six years , only 5 metropolitan areas had had to change transportation plans in order to resolve a conformity lapse ; but about one - third of local transportation planners surveyed expected to have difficulty demonstrating conformity in the future .

 ( see u.s. gao , environmental protection: federal planning requirements for transportation and air quality protection could potentially be more efficient and better linked , april 2003. ) .

the clean air act provides no authority for waivers of conformity , and the only grace period allowed has been for one year following an area's designation as nonattainment .

only a limited set of exempt projects ( mostly safety - related or replacement and repair of existing transit facilities ) can be funded in lapsed areas .

the rules do not even allow funding of new projects that might reduce emissions , such as new transit lines .

these limitations are among the issues of concern .

in addition , many have raised concerns about a mismatch between the sip , tip , and long range transportation planning cycles , and have called for less frequent , but better coordinated demonstrations of conformity .

in its 2003 report , the gao recommended that "relevant federal agencies ... consider extending the three - year time frame between required [long range] transportation plan updates and asking the congress to amend the clean air act to change the conformity rules to match ...." this recommendation was generally supported by transportation planners and highway builders , but opposed by environmental groups and air quality planning officials .

as enacted , p.l .

109 - 59 requires less frequent conformity demonstrations ( at least every four years instead of every two years ) , and will shorten the planning horizon over which conformity must be demonstrated to 10 years in many cases , instead of the former requirement of 20 years .

the local air pollution control agency will need to be consulted and public comments solicited if the planning horizon is to be shortened .

the law also establishes a 12-month grace period following a failure to demonstrate conformity before a lapse would be declared .

 ( for additional information , see crs report rl32106 , transportation conformity under the clean air act: in need of reform ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

 ( crs contact: jim mccarthy ) .

