the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) authorizes the president to issue major disaster , emergency , and fire management declarations , which in turn enable federal agencies to provide assistance to state and local governments overwhelmed by catastrophes .

the statute also authorizes the president to determine whether certain types of authorized assistance will be provided and the conditions under which the aid is distributed .

the stafford act comprises the following titles: title i: findings , declarations , and definitions ; title ii: preparedness and pre - disaster mitigation authority ; title iii: administrative provisions ; title iv: major disaster assistance ; title v: emergency assistance ; title vi: emergency preparedness ( previously the civil defense act of 1950 ) ; title vii: miscellaneous provisions .

titles iv and v identify the types of assistance that may be provided , and , in some circumstances , the limitations on the aid .

most of the presidential authority set out in titles iv and v in the statute , with the exception of the authority to issue declarations , has been delegated to administration officials — currently the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) — through executive orders .

following the investigation into the response to hurricane katrina , congress also authorized the administrator to provide federal leadership before and after catastrophes , including "assisting the president in carrying out the functions" of the stafford act .

stafford act definitions establish eligibility for assistance and the conditions that may be catalysts for presidential action .

the definition of "major disaster" is relatively restrictive ─ "any natural catastrophe" including storms , earth movements and high water , and "regardless of cause , any fire , flood or explosion. .

presidents bush and obama issued 55 major disaster declarations in calendar year 2009 .

by comparison , the definition of "emergency" is broad , authorizing the president to determine "any occasion or instance" when federal aid is needed by state and local governments to save lives and property or to address the threat of a catastrophe .

in calendar year 2009 , president bush issued one emergency declaration for the presidential inauguration in the district of columbia ; president obama issued six others in the remainder of the year , five for winter storms and one for a refinery explosion in puerto rico .

the statute also authorizes the president to provide fire suppression assistance to prevent a forest or grassland fire from becoming a major disaster .

president obama issued 48 fire management declarations in 2009 ; president bush issued one before leaving office , for a yearly total of 49 such declarations .

stafford act assistance funding derives from appropriations made to the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , administered by dhs .

federal assistance supported by the drf , and authorized in title iv ( for major disasters ) or title v ( for emergencies ) provides grants for mass care for disaster survivors , the restoration of damaged or destroyed facilities , amelioration of the impact of future disasters , clearance of debris , and aid for those with uninsured critical needs .

the statute also authorizes loans to communities that suffer significant revenue losses as a result of major disasters .

in addition , the statute authorizes unemployment assistance directly related to the event ( administered by the department of labor ) and allows federal agency heads to provide technical assistance , personnel , equipment and other resources to help state and local response and recovery efforts .

while the president may exercise discretion under authority of the statute , that authority is circumscribed by the act's administrative provisions .

federal aid cannot duplicate that provided by other sources .

federal agency heads may waive administrative , but not statutory , requirements to expedite assistance .

a federal coordinating officer , appointed by the president ( or the designee ) , ensures that federal and non - federal assistance provided to major disaster or emergency areas is coordinated .

applicants for aid must purchase appropriate levels of insurance .

title iii of the statute sets out these and other administrative requirements and limitations .

major disaster and emergency declarations are two of the five types of actions that may be taken under authority of the stafford act .

the other three include fire management declarations , the provision of defense resources before a major disaster is declared , and the decision to pre - position supplies and resources .

the stafford act identifies the universe of eligible applicants ( eg , states , local governments , owners of certain private nonprofit facilities , individuals , or families ) .

however , not all persons or entities affected by a catastrophe are eligible for stafford act assistance even if the president issues a declaration .

fema officials determine the need for assistance after a major disaster or emergency declaration is issued .

aid is provided only to those persons or entities determined to need the assistance .

for example , a family with adequate insurance and alternative housing options might not be considered eligible to receive financial aid .

a unit of local government that suffers damages to some facilities , but not to the extent considered necessary pursuant to fema regulations and guidelines , might not receive funds to rebuild infrastructure .

the type of assistance made available varies from one disaster to another and among eligible applicants within a state , commensurate with decisions by fema officials on the extent of damage and the eligibility of applicants .

for instance , under a major disaster declaration , local jurisdictions with large numbers of damaged or destroyed residences might be eligible for assistance under the individual assistance ( ia ) program , whereas those with severely damaged infrastructure but relatively few damaged homes might be eligible only for assistance under the pa program .

similarly , if a local government had extensive debris in public rights - of - way due to a disaster , but very little damage to public facilities , a determination might be made to provide assistance only for debris removal activities under the pa program .

on the other hand , areas severely devastated by a catastrophe are often eligible for both ia and pa .

the stafford act authorizes the president to make the initial determination of eligibility for federal relief and recovery assistance through the issuance of either a major disaster or emergency declaration .

the following subsections summarize the types of assistance authorized under each .

before federal assistance is provided under stafford act authority contractual agreements between fema and the state must be finalized .

these agreements set forth the terms under which fema will obligate and distribute disaster assistance funding to the state for redistribution to eligible applicants ( eg , local governments ) .

pursuant to stafford act requirements , federal assistance programs are limited either to a fixed dollar amount or to a percentage of eligible costs .

all parties use the agreements to establish federal , state , and local cost shares pursuant to statutory requirements and allowances .

the stafford act stipulates that the minimum federal assistance for certain eligible activities "shall be not less than 75% of the eligible cost of such assistance. .

other provisions specify ceilings , rather than floors , for federal aid .

specific cost share requirements set out in the statute include the following .

essential assistance: the federal share must be at least 75% of eligible costs .

repair , restoration , or replacement of public facilities: in general , at least 75% of eligible costs must be provided , but this threshold may be reduced to 25% if a facility has previously been damaged by the same type of disaster and mitigation measures have not been adopted to address the hazard .

federal aid generally will be reduced if facilities in flood hazard areas are not covered by flood insurance .

cost estimation requirements must be adhered to , but the president may approve costs that exceed the regulatory limitations .

"associated costs," such as the employment of national guard forces , use of prison labor , and base and overtime wages for employees and "extra hires," may be reimbursed .

the president must notify congressional committees with jurisdiction before providing more than $20 million to repair , restore , or replace facilities .

debris removal: the federal share must be at least 75% of the eligible costs .

individual and household assistance: temporary housing units may be provided directly to victims of disasters , without charge , for up to 18 months , unless the president extends the assistance "due to extraordinary circumstances. .

fair market rents may be charged at the conclusion of the 18 month period .

the federal share of housing assistance is 100% .

financial assistance is also provided for other needs assistance ( ona ) .

this includes uninsured medical , dental , funeral , transportation , personal property , and other needs ; the federal share for ona is capped at 75% of eligible costs ; the total amount that may be provided under the individuals and household program ( ihp ) cannot exceed $25,000 ( adjusted annually ) .

small project grants: if the estimated costs of assistance for facility repair or replacement ( section 406 ) , essential assistance ( section 403 ) , debris removal ( section 407 ) , or emergency assistance ( section 502 ) do not exceed $35,000 ( adjusted annually ) , a small project grant may be issued .

emergency declaration assistance: federal assistance must constitute at least 75% of eligible costs .

expenditures made under an emergency declaration are limited to $5 million per declaration unless the president determines that there is a continuing need ; congress must be notified if the $5 million ceiling is breached .

in instances where the state - local match is unduly burdensome due to factors such as the impact of the disaster or the fiscal condition of the state and its units of local government , the president may waive some or all of the cost - sharing requirement for pa programs .

however , the president may not waive the 25% state - local requirement for assistance provided under the individual assistance ( ia ) program , except for insular areas .

as noted previously in this report , congress statutorily waived the cost share provision for assistance provided after specified disasters .

if a state or a local government believes that the economic impact from the disaster warrants , officials may contact fema to request a reduction in their portion of the federal cost - share .

the regulations specify that an adjustment in the cost - share requirement may be made "whenever a disaster is so extraordinary that actual federal obligations under the stafford act , excluding fema administration cost , meet or exceed" specified thresholds .

 ( the costs incurred are based on stafford act obligations for the disaster and may differ from those of the preliminary damage assessment. ) .

under the hazard mitigation program grant ( section 404 or hmgp ) and the pre - disaster mitigation grant ( section 203 or pdm ) authorities the federal government provides grants to state and local governments to reduce the impact of future disasters .

hmgp funds are allocated to each state in which a major disaster has been declared .

the funds generally may be used for any eligible hazard mitigation activity in the state ( consistent with the governor's request and presidential designation ) , not necessarily related to the catastrophe that led to the declaration .

pdm grants , by comparison , are applied for pursuant to criteria established in section 203 and are not related to major disaster declarations .

congress appropriates money to the disaster relief fund ( drf ) to ensure that the federal assistance described earlier in this report is available to help individuals and communities stricken by severe disasters .

funds appropriated to the drf remain available until expended .

such accounts are referred to as "no - year" accounts .

appropriations to the drf generally evoke little controversy .

supplemental appropriations measures are generally required each fiscal year to meet the urgent needs of particularly catastrophic disasters .

while the hurricane season of 2009 ( june through october ) resulted in no major disaster declarations for named hurricanes , 56 severe storms during calendar year 2009 caused a level of destruction sufficient for the president to invoke stafford authority .

in addition to the appropriation of $1.6 billion in regular appropriations for fy2010 to meet the needs associated with those and previous declarations , the fund also received an additional $5.5 billion through p.l .

111-112 , based on a request from the obama administration for supplemental funding for fy2010 to pay for gulf coast recovery projects that have been the subject of decisions by an arbitration panel established pursuant to a congressional mandate. .

the "appeal process" section at the end of this report discusses the impact of the panel's actions on the appropriation of supplemental fy2010 funds for the drf .

questions have been raised in the past concerning the increased cost of federal disaster assistance authorized by the stafford act as the categories of aid and eligibility for federal disaster assistance have expanded .

for example , over the past five decades , congress has expanded the basic authority first enacted in 1950 to include housing , grants for the repair of infrastructure , aid to individuals , loans to communities for lost revenue , and other needs .

congress has previously explored the issue of rising federal disaster assistance costs and reliance upon supplemental appropriations .

see " reducing federal expenditures ," for a discussion of this topic .

as noted above , previously introduced legislation would amend provisions of the stafford act concerning eligibility for assistance , the types of assistance to be provided by the federal government , and administration of the emergency management process .

members of the 112 th congress might elect to consider the following in assessing whether further legislative changes are required .

the 1988 amendments to the disaster relief act of 1974 added certain private nonprofit organizations that provide essential government services to the category of eligible recipients of stafford act public assistance .

prior to that change , only state and local governments were eligible for the aid .

legislation introduced during the 111 th congress suggested further changes to the stafford act by enabling certain organizations or persons to receive assistance for which they are not currently eligible .

the most significant proposals would breach the long - standing bright line that has divided public and for - profit entities .

private for - profit organizations and property owners have not been deemed eligible for grants authorized by the statute since enactment of the 1950 statute and in subsequent amendments .

instead , congress has directed that owners and operators of private , for - profit institutions must rely on pre - paid insurance or loans .

the devastation caused by hurricane katrina to all components of many communities , and the recognition that community recovery is tied not only to public institutions but to private sector entities that provide essential services and employment , has revived interest in the issue of expanding eligibility for stafford act assistance to certain for - profit entities .

in addition to adding new organizations to the category of entities eligible for public assistance , some have suggested that the congress take a different approach to extending stafford act assistance .

currently , only property owners are eligible to receive financial assistance for the repair or replacement of housing , some of the legislation from the 111 th congress sought to make several changes: h.r .

1059 would extend eligibility to the heirs of deceased property owners .

another approach is to modify the definition of the term "major disaster" to include other types of catastrophes .

h.r .

1131 would authorize the president to issue such a declaration after instances of terrorist attacks , contamination , or most broadly , "or other catastrophic event. .

other bills ( h.r .

3377 and h.r .

3453 ) would take a different approach ; they would require that administration officials revise and update the criteria currently used to determine whether a major disaster declaration will be issued .

also , one bill ( h.r .

4297 ) would require that the president consider the needs of rural areas marked by less dense land development in determining eligibility for assistance .

revisions to the criteria for declarations could result in expanded eligibility for aid , or , as discussed below , possibly lead to reduced federal expenditures .

some might contend that any such expansion of eligibility would result in considerably higher federal disaster relief expenditures as private , for - profit entities , newly designated property owners , or entire states would increasingly turn to federal grants in lieu of relying upon insurance policies or agreeing to repay loans .

accordingly , opponents of the proposals might argue that just as the 2000 amendments expanded certain federal assistance ( largely through the establishment of a new pre - disaster hazard mitigation program ) and reduced costs in some areas , the pending legislation should balance increased aid proposals with cost - cutting measures .

others would contend that amendments that would expand the boundaries of eligibility are appropriate as state and local governments struggle with budget problems , property owners face increased costs of credit , and policyholders face more expensive insurance premiums and more stringent insurance requirements .

also , they may contend that just as some of the facilities newly designated as eligible for public assistance funds in 1988 , notably educational and health care institutions , provide services comparable to those available through public or non - profit organizations , the institutions identified in the pending legislation also provide public services critical to a community's revival .

such a conclusion , it might be argued , is consistent with congressional findings in the statute .

as discussed below , precedent exists for the provision of such assistance .

on at least two occasions , congress appropriated funds to help private corporations deemed to be particularly affected after disasters — when utility companies' electricity lines were damaged in 1998 ice storms , and when other companies lost infrastructure in the terrorist attacks of 2001 in new york city .

a third instance , involving the texas medical center , directly involves stafford act eligibility criteria .

the first two instances involved appropriations made outside of stafford act authority , the third consisted of special designation under the stafford definition .

in the early winter months of 1998 , an ice storm resulted in the destruction of electricity distribution infrastructure as heavily laden trees collapsed on miles of poles and wires .

private utilities owned and maintained the infrastructure .

to address concerns that the private utilities would have to pass on the costs of repairs to customers , congress included funding in the omnibus appropriations act for fy1999 ( p.l .

105-277 ) for the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

the act directed that funds would be provided "for disaster relief , long - term recovery , and mitigation in communities affected by presidentially - declared natural disasters designated during fiscal years 1998 and 1999. .

according to news reports , disagreement arose between the secretary of hud and members of congress over the use of the appropriated funds because the statute did not specify how the funds would be used .

the destruction of much of the infrastructure around and under the world trade center on september 11 , 2001 , resulted in the appropriation of billions of dollars in federal assistance to new york city .

the communications networks owned by private for - profit corporations were not eligible for assistance under the stafford act .

congress appropriated $783 million for a range of rebuilding efforts in lower manhattan , for economic revitalization and reconstruction in order to facilitate redevelopment , "including the restoration of utility infrastructure. .

the conference report accompanying the legislation provided the following statements regarding this appropriation: the conference agreement includes an emergency appropriation of $783,000,000 for assistance to properties and businesses , including restoration of damaged infrastructure , and for economic revitalization activities in the areas of new york city affected by the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , instead of $750,000,000 as proposed by the house and senate .

the conferees recognize the tremendous human losses suffered by those businesses located in the world trade center , particularly those firms which suffered the greatest loss of life in the attacks .

because of the conferees' strong desire to support the redevelopment of the areas of new york city affected by the attacks and to encourage those businesses most devastated by the attacks to remain in new york city , the conferees have provided a $33,000,000 increase over the request .

the conferees expect that these additional funds will be made available to assist those firms located in new york city at the time of the terrorist attacks which suffered a disproportionate loss of its workforce and who intend to re - establish their operations in new york city .

the conferees concur with the language included in the house report encouraging the lower manhattan development corporation to consider the needs of utility companies and other institutions affected by the world trade center attacks .

in early june , 2001 , president bush issued a major disaster declaration for the state of texas due to flooding associated with tropical storm allison .

the texas medical center ( tmc ) , a health care complex that includes 13 hospitals as well as medical and nursing schools , suffered considerable damage .

the tmc , however , was not eligible for stafford act assistance because of its for - profit status .

through a provision included in an omnibus appropriations statute , tmc was declared eligible for stafford act assistance , as follows: that notwithstanding any other provision of law , for disaster declaration fema - 1379-dr and hereafter , the texas medical center is to be considered for fema public assistance and hazard mitigation grants as if it were an eligible applicant .

members of congress might elect to take action on or in opposition to the legislation noted above in order to expand eligibility for stafford act assistance .

another option available to members of congress is to consider the integration of existing loan authority with the grant - in - aid provisions in the stafford act .

congress already moved in this direction in 2000 with the requirement that public assistance grants be available to certain non - profit facilities "only if" they provide critical services ( defined in the statute ) or the owner or operator has applied for a small business administration ( sba ) loan and has been found ineligible for such aid or has received the maximum amount of assistance possible through such a loan .

congress might elect to consider modifying the thresholds for assistance by authorizing grants for businesses before they obtain loans at the maximum level or eliminating the requirement that they be found ineligible for such aid .

one research organization cited the need for a legislative change such as this as follows: currently , there are no federal grants programs ─ only loans ─ to assist small business .

we further recommend converting some federal assistance for small businesses from loans to grants in order to ease the burden of loan repayments following a catastrophe .

the amount of grants versus loans could be weighted depending upon the size and history of the business .

the integration of the sba disaster loan authority and the stafford act grant - in - aid assistance authority has previously been considered by congress decades ago .

first , when president richard nixon proposed the establishment of a department of community development , the integration of "the disaster relief programs of the sba and the farmers home administration" were expected to be integrated with the transfer of emergency preparedness and disaster relief functions .

congress did not act on president nixon's proposal .

next , when president jimmy carter successfully reorganized federal emergency management authorities in 1978 through the creation of fema , the loan - making authority and resources of the sba were viewed as separate activities from those moving into fema .

in questioning administration officials on the carter proposal , one senator argued for the separation of fema's coordination authority from the sba loan authority as follows: i would think that , first of all , we would have for the first time in the government a single accountable public official with broad coordinative authority over all disaster relief programs .

we are not going to be duplicating staffs in agencies such as the farmers' home administration or small business administration , who are very expert in making loans and following up and managing loans .

but we are going to have a place in the government where overall policies can be developed .. .

i think we will be able to address overall emergency related policies , including those of programs that are actually carried out by other agencies .

members of the 112 th congress might elect to reopen the debate on whether loan authority , including that currently administered by the sba , might be recast to address concerns raised in the discussion on whether stafford act grant - in - aid eligibility might be expanded .

the need for federal assistance after a disaster , particularly one of catastrophic magnitude , may lead some members and other officials to promise "whatever it takes" to restore the area to its pre - disaster condition .

the knowledge that families have been disrupted , livelihoods compromised , and basic governance threatened stimulate congressional action to ensure that past precedents are followed and , at times , additional aid is provided .

such assistance , however , requires the expenditure of revenues that might arguably be used elsewhere for other urgent purposes .

for years congress has wrestled with the competing goals of providing disaster assistance and controlling expenditures .

the debate , often muted in the face of devastating losses , continues today .

in light of the ongoing discussions in the 112 th congress to reduce the federal deficit and federal expenditures , members of congress may wish to consider changes to the stafford act that would reduce federal expenditures .

one of the most straightforward , and arguably difficult options , is to eliminate or reduce some of the benefits authorized by the statute .

that option would require an examination of the components of the stafford act , their relative costs , and the effect of enacting changes to current benefits .

should members elect to consider other options , they may wish to consider past efforts to reduce expenditures .

perhaps the most extensive effort to evaluate the range of federal disaster assistance programs and identify alternative financing approaches involved a senate bipartisan task force .

following the high costs associated with hurricane andrew in 1992 , senators formed the bipartisan task force on funding disaster relief to compile information on federal policies and programs , identify costs , and discuss budgetary options .

the final report issued by the task force included a discussion of one proposal to modify disaster assistance policies: establish more explicit and / or stringent criteria for providing federal disaster assistance .

the senate bipartisan task force report focused on the criteria considered by the president in deciding whether a major disaster or emergency declaration would be issued .

the policy that currently guides the decision process is set out in statute and regulations , and provides for discretionary judgment as well .

as some analysts have concluded , however , the criteria have not always been well documented or consistent .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress ( h.r .

3377 and h.r .

3453 ) would have mandated updating of the existing regulatory criteria used to determine whether major disaster declaration assistance ( and what type of assistance ) is to be provided .

such an examination may lead to the tightening of requirements that could result in reduced federal expenditures .

conversely , less stringent requirements would result in expanded eligibility and assistance levels .

the issue of which criteria are used by the president to issue a declaration has been the focus of some analytical studies .

questions have been raised about whether federal aid is needed at all after some catastrophes .

some have contended that political considerations , as much as estimates of need , contribute to the costs of disaster relief as well .

one 2002 study by economists thomas a. garrett and russell s. sobel purported: "states politically important to the president have a higher rate of disaster declaration by the president , and disaster expenditures are higher in states having congressional representation on fema oversight committees .

election year impacts are also found. .

another study , which built upon the 2002 paper , examined presidential disaster declarations from 1981 through 2004 and found that "... the greater the electoral prize and the more competitive the statewide presidential contest , the more likely it is that a state will receive a presidential disaster declaration even after controlling for actual need. .

another , earlier perspective on the issue appeared in a 1989 study completed by government accountability office ( gao ) that also considered the effects of politics on disaster declarations .

after examining presidential declaration data from the perspective of the party affiliation of governors and members of state congressional delegations , the authors concluded that there "were no indications that party affiliation affected white house major disaster declaration decisions. .

members of congress may elect to consider amending the stafford act to reduce the discretion exercised by the president in issuing the declarations .

such amendments might include establishing quantitative measures of need , damage thresholds higher than those currently used , or mandating that such declarations be subject to congressional review .

stafford act assistance for individuals ( and the assistance authorized under the predecessor legislation since 1950 ) has never been means tested .

all residents of areas included in major disaster or emergency declarations remain eligible for assistance , providing the president ( through administrative officers ) determine that the assistance is to be provided .

disaster survivors must provide an indication of need and assurance that federal aid will not be duplicative , but they do not have to meet income or other requirements .

it is arguable that the destruction of paper records and the need for victims to evacuate an area with scant or no proof of their income or other means of support , overwhelms any argument for means testing .

however , one piece of legislation introduced in the 111 th congress would have established increased individual and household assistance for disaster victims with annual incomes below $100,000 .

one might argue that if federal officials could obtain this information to assess the needs of lower income households for more assistance , similar information could be used to identify those with higher incomes in order to establish a maximum threshold for assistance .

in the face of record deficits and calls to reduce federal spending , members of congress may elect to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of enacting a means test before housing or other needs assistance ( referred to as ona ) are to be provided pursuant to section 408 of the stafford act .

some may argue that means testing should not be used after a disaster when the full extent of losses is unknown , seemingly wealthy households will face new expenses , and administrative workloads will increase .

others may contend that such thresholds would result in lower federal expenditures , be consistent with the existing provision that federal aid not duplicative assistance from other sources , and encourage individuals and families to allocate personal resources to unanticipated needs .

the most significant action taken by the 111 th congress regarding stafford act policy involved the authority of the u.s .

civilian board of contract appeals to finalize decisions on public assistance applications .

the fy2010 appropriations legislation for the department of homeland security authorized the temporary reemployment of retired administrative law judges to preside over arbitration proceedings involving disputes of public assistance applications that exceed $500,000 in total costs .

through this legislation congress sought to expedite action on public assistance applications in the gulf coast that have been pending for years in order to stimulate recovery efforts in louisiana , alabama , mississippi , and texas associated with hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 .

implementing regulations issued by fema outline the standard appeal process and summarize the conditions under which cases in appeal would be subject to the process established by congress .

from december 2009 through march 3 , 2010 , the civilian board of contract appeals issued 14 rulings on disputed applications .

the first five decisions set out the scope of the panel's authority .

of the remaining nine decisions , one resulted in fema's favor ( cbca 1760 ) ,due to the lack of timeliness of the appeal , while seven were decided in favor of the appellants .

the parties reached settlement in one decision ( numbered cbca 1781 ) , obviating the need for a panel decision .

perhaps the most significant decision made during this period involved the disposition of charity hospital in new orleans .

in short , the panel ruled in favor of the appellants , and determined that fema should award almost $475 million for the replacement of the hospital ( cbca 1741 ) .

the decisions to date by the appeals panel have influenced the debate between the administration and congress on appropriations for the drf .

administration officials determined that the funds appropriated for fy2010 were insufficient for the fund , in part due to the decision involving charity hospital and the expectation that other appeals will also result in increased demands for drf assistance .

on february 12 , 2010 , the president submitted a second supplemental fy2010 budget request for an additional $1.5 billion for the drf , in addition to the $3.6 billion supplemental included in the fy2011 submission to congress .

this total supplemental of $5.1 billion , according to the administration , would be expected to meet needs in the current fiscal year , including "arbitration panel decisions likely to impact the disaster relief fund in a previously unexpected manner. .

after senate defeat on march 9 , 2010 of a proposal to include the supplemental in legislation ( h.r .

4123 ) that would extend expiring tax provisions , members of congress eventually passed the supplemental to the disaster relief fund in p.l .

111-112 that provided more than $5.5 billion in additional supplemental disaster relief funding .

while limited to appeals of decisions associated with hurricanes katrina and rita , the congressional action indicates some degree of dissatisfaction with the standard appeals process established through regulation under the broad statutory guidance in the stafford act .

as opined by a former general counsel for fema , the decision by congress to authorize the arbitration process reflects "congressional belief that the appeal process for fema's public assistance program was broken ..." the issue before congress is whether the appeal process requires a "fix," and whether that modification should take the form of a statutory change .

the regulations issued by fema implementing the arbitration process identified the criteria to be considered in determining whether public assistance applications could be submitted to the arbitration process as follows: large projects that exceed the $500,000 statutory threshold , applicants who remained eligible to file an appeal under the standing regulations ( 44 cfr 206.206 ) and withdrew their appeal , and those applicants that met specified time frames and deadlines .

the regulation vested final determinative authority with the majority of arbitration panel members .

according to the statement accompanying the final rule , approximately 44 appeals were pending in mississippi and alabama ( hurricane katrina ) , texas ( hurricane rita ) and louisiana ( both hurricanes ) when the agency published the regulation .

also , 2,188 projects were awaiting initial rulings and were estimated to be subject to the process .

accordingly , fema expected that 127 appeals would be forthcoming out of the 2,188 large projects eligible for the arbitration process the actual number of appeals submitted to arbitration , however , are far below the estimate .

according to the former general counsel for fema , "more than a dozen applicants have elected arbitration ...." at least three topics may be explored by members of congress if they elect to debate the need for a statutory change .

first , would an arbitration panel or other determinative party outside of fema be designated to participate in the appeals process , or should appeals continue to be heard and decided upon solely by fema administrators ? .

it may be argued that only fema officials are most familiar with the details of public assistance grants , the application requirements , and comparable applications .

the cost estimates , circumstances unique to that particular disaster ( such as the availability of skilled contractors and material ) , need for modifying initial damage projections , and other factors arguably require considerable knowledge of the public assistance grant program .

others may contend that this familiarity of the process and ownership of required information complicates efforts by appellants to even determine whether they should seek arbitration or appeal a fema decision , and may not meet the statutory mandate that rules "provide for the fair and impartial consideration of appeals under this section. .

for example , the quality of information available to appellants may be questioned , as summarized by the former fema general counsel , "the rules assume that an applicant has the information and documentation required to establish eligibility at the outset of the arbitration process... .

in fact , fema frequently is the only party with information that allows applicants to understand and respond to the disallowance of cost in an appeal ( or an arbitration ) .

and fema's responsiveness to foia [freedom of information act] requests is notoriously slow ─ generally requiring a number of months .

one option that members might consider involves enacting an amendment that would mandate that fema maintain and provide applicable information to the appellants within the time frame established for an applicant deciding to file an appeal .

another option would maintain the current appeals process but provide for a final determinative authority outside of fema , perhaps through the permanent establishment of an arbitration panel comparable to that established by the 111 th congress , through the federal arbitration association , or an arbitrator assigned to the matter through the federal arbitration act ( 9 u.s.c .

1 et seq. ) .

second , the arbitration panel established pursuant to the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 is solely authorized to consider appeals related to the stafford act public assistance program .

as noted previously in this report , assistance is also provided to individuals and households for housing and uninsured needs , and the statute provides for appeal regulations that address decisions related to any assistance provided under the authority of title iv .

there is no provision for public review or consideration of the arbitration panel process .

congress might elect to consider whether the proceedings should remain closed .

