in existence since 1965 , medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term care , to nearly 60 million people at an estimated cost to the federal and state governments of roughly $333 billion in fy2006 , making it as large as medicare , the federal health care program for the elderly and certain individuals with disabilities .

among major domestic entitlement programs , only social security costs more .

each state designs and administers its own medicaid program under broad federal guidelines .

for states , it is the second largest spending item after education .

medicaid is expected to represent 2.5% of gdp in fy2006 .

the expenditure growth is even more striking .

program spending increased by more than 49% between 2000 and 2005 , exceeding growth in general and medical inflation , and the rates of growth in spending for both medicare and social security over the same period .

medicaid spending has grown partly because medical care keeps getting more expensive , and because over time , federal law has been expanded significantly to cover more people and more benefits .

certain state financing mechanisms have also played a role in increased spending under medicaid .

as medicaid entered the 1980s and 1990s , more attention — and blame — for steadily rising medicaid costs was attributed to the economic incentive to provide more care under the fee - for - service ( ffs ) delivery system , in which payments are made for each unit of service delivered .

under this system , medicaid budgets were somewhat unpredictable , and outlays were significantly affected by the quantity and types of care provided .

it was also unclear whether state medicaid programs were getting good value for their ever increasing medicaid dollars .

following the lead in the private sector among large employers , many states began to turn to managed care for their medicaid programs .

the goal , then and today , is both to rein in medicaid costs by making payments on a predetermined , per - person - per - month basis , rather than for each unit of service delivered , and to provide a better , coordinated system of care for beneficiaries , with an emphasis on preventive and primary care services .

but medicaid managed care has not fully achieved either goal yet .

data from fy2003 ( most recent available ) indicate that while about two - thirds of medicaid beneficiaries nationwide participate in some form of managed care , the majority of expenditures still occur in the ffs setting , mainly because expensive long - term care services are rarely offered through managed care .

in addition , while there are some data suggesting improvements in the quality of care delivered in medicaid managed care , commercial ( employer - based ) and medicare managed care plans continue to do better on some measures of effectiveness .

before getting into the specifics of how care is delivered under medicaid , it is important to understand who is eligible for the program and the range of benefits that may be covered .

there are two major types of service delivery systems under medicaid — fee - for - service and managed care .

these two approaches to delivering services to medicaid beneficiaries differ in important ways across several key dimensions , including: choice of providers for beneficiaries , how much professional management and coordination of medical care is provided , which entity has direct oversight responsibilities for service delivery , how states pay providers for services rendered , and assuring access to and quality of care .

in many cases , these two delivery systems are not entirely independent approaches to providing medical care under medicaid .

in a number of states , there are hybrid models that combine various features of fee - for - service and managed care for a given population or set of interrelated services .

at a given point in time , beneficiaries may obtain all their services under a single system of care , or different sets of services under each system simultaneously ( eg , primary and acute care under managed care arrangements , and long - term care such as home health services or on - going rehabilitative services under the fee - for - service delivery system ) .

each of these features of delivery systems is described in more detail below .

nationally , most medicaid beneficiaries participate in some form of managed care .

however , benefit expenditures under medicaid , especially for long - term care services , still largely occur in the ffs delivery system .

state variation in the proportion of beneficiaries and expenditures associated with managed care is the rule rather than the exception .

such variation is likely due at least in part to political , geographic , and market considerations unique to each state .

states continue to redesign their medicaid programs and experiment with managed care via waiver authority .

in addition , states may rely on managed care delivery systems for the new medicaid benefit package option now available through dra ( described above ) .

recent examples include new programs in florida using section 1115 waiver authority , and idaho , kentucky and west virginia , all using the dra benefit option .

whether via waiver or the dra option , these new programs provide access to a different set of tailored benefits for different groups of beneficiaries , based on their anticipated health care needs , rather than giving all beneficiaries access to the full range of medicaid services covered in each state .

groups participating in these new programs include not only healthy children and adults , but in some cases , also the elderly and individuals with disabilities living in the community and those needing institutional care .

most programs will start off in a subset of counties .

some programs will allow beneficiaries to "opt out" of the new medicaid benefit plans and enroll in employer - sponsored or private health insurance subject to capped payments ( eg , florida , kentucky ) or remain in traditional medicaid ( eg , idaho ) .

incentives such as access to additional benefits or credits for purchasing other goods and services may be offered to encourage healthy behaviors ( all four states ) .

access to enhanced benefits may be subject to certain conditions such as signing a member agreement to fully comply with recommended medical treatment and wellness behaviors ( eg , west virginia ) .

all four states expect to use managed care delivery systems in these new programs .

although managed care under medicaid holds the potential for providing coordination and management of a variety of medical and related health services for beneficiaries , that potential has been largely limited to sub - populations of generally healthy adults and children .

significant challenges still remain for serving the elderly and individuals with disabilities under traditional models of managed care , most likely because of the wide range and intensity of services they require to meet their on - going special health care needs .

relative to other services , long - term care is expensive and an individual's need for such care may change repeatedly over time .

for states that want to save money on long - term care under medicaid , these factors make setting adequate per - person - per - month payment rates difficult , in turn leading to an inability to attract managed care plans to this market .

in addition , many mainstream managed care plans lack experience with both these special needs populations and with delivering long - term care services .

how successful has medicaid managed care been in reducing program costs and providing beneficiaries with better , coordinated care ? .

this report is not intended to provide a detailed review of this literature .

however , there is some evidence that savings can be achieved through medicaid managed care .

for example , in one analysis synthesizing results from 14 studies , the lewin group concluded that ( 1 ) comprehensive , prepaid managed care plan models typically yield cost - savings compared to program costs under a ffs model , ( 2 ) savings can be gained in programs that serve individuals with disabilities , and ( 3 ) although cost savings is largely attributable to decreases in inpatient utilization , some savings is also associated with moving prescribed drugs from the ffs setting into managed care .

there is also some evidence that medicaid managed care plans are not as effective as employer - based or medicare plans , but some improvements have been observed in recent years .

for example , the national committee for quality assurance ( ncqa ) regularly publishes reports for commercial ( i.e. , employer - based ) , medicare and medicaid managed care plans .

table 9 shows a few examples of the 40+ measures voluntarily reported to ncqa by more than 500 health plans for 2005 .

in general , higher percentages represent greater effectiveness of care and member satisfaction .

on the selected effectiveness of care measures for preventive services , acute medical care and mental health services , the ratings for commercial and medicare plans exceed those for medicaid plans .

nonetheless , very similar ( high ) ratings were observed for both medicaid and commercial plans on two acute care measures — appropriate treatment for children with upper respiratory infection and persistence of beta - blocker treatment after a heart attack .

all three types of plans struggled with antidepressant medication management , probably reflecting the challenges of helping persons with severe mental illness regardless of the public or private sector health care system involved .

member satisfaction measures were consistently high for medicaid plans .

ncqa noted that regional differences in plan performance are large as are variations within each plan type ( eg , among medicaid plans ) .

thus , attaining high quality in managed care is an on - going , continuous process for medicaid , commercial and medicare plans .

building on the reforms introduced in bba - 97 , what additional role can congress play with respect to managed care under medicaid ? .

for example , congress could elect to expand the use of medicaid managed care to address some of the issues identified in this report , in particular with respect to managed long - term care , and with holistic integration of primary , acute and long - term care for special needs populations .

congress could also choose to monitor and evaluate access to and quality of medicaid managed care programs , as well as assess the short - and long - term costs and savings attributable to various forms of managed care for different sub - populations of medicaid beneficiaries .

crs report rl33495 , integrating medicare and medicaid services through managed care .

crs report rl33357 , long - term care: trends in public and private spending .

crs report rl32219 , long - term care: consumer - directed services under medicaid .

crs report rl32977 , dual eligibles: a review of medicaid ' s role in providing services and assistance .

