as noted , p.l .

109-401 allows the president to exempt a u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement with india from several aea requirements .

however , the law requires the president to certify , before such an agreement can enter into force , that several steps have been completed .

president bush did so september 10 , 2008 .

the following section describes the completion of these steps .

the law's relationship to the atomic energy act is explained in a later section .

p.l .

109-401 requires ( 1 ) provision of a credible separation plan for india's nuclear facilities ; ( 2 ) approval by the iaea board of governors of india's new nuclear safeguards agreement ; ( 3 ) substantial indian progress toward concluding an additional protocol to its safeguards agreement ; ( 4 ) india's active support for the conclusion of a treaty to ban fissile material production for nuclear weapons ; ( 5 ) india's support for u.s. and international efforts to halt the spread of sensitive nuclear fuel cycle technologies ( enrichment and reprocessing ) ; ( 6 ) india taking necessary steps to secure nuclear and other sensitive materials and technologies through adherence to multilateral control regimes , such as the nsg and the missile technology control regime ; and ( 7 ) a consensus decision by the nsg to except india from some of the group's export control guidelines .

as noted , the house passed h.r .

7081 , which approved the nuclear cooperation agreement , september 27 , 2008 .

the senate committee on foreign relations had , following a september 18 hearing and subsequent markup , approved identical legislation , s. 3548 ( introduced by senator christopher dodd ) , september 23 .

the senate passed h.r .

7081 october 1 .

president bush signed p.l .

110-369 into law october 8 , 2008 .

p.l .

110-369 , the united states - india nuclear cooperation approval and nonproliferation enhancement act , obviated the 30-day consultative period , as well as other procedures cited in sections 123 b. and d. of the aea .

section 101 states that "notwithstanding the provisions for congressional consideration and approval of a proposed agreement for cooperation" in those two sections , "congress hereby approves the united states - india agreement for cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear energy. .

it also states that the agreement "shall be subject to" applicable u.s. law as if it had been approved according to section 123's provisions .

under existing law ( atomic energy act [aea] of 1954 ; p.l .

95-242 ; 42 u.s.c .

§2153 et seq. ) .

all significant nuclear cooperation requires an agreement for cooperation .

the nuclear non - proliferation act of 1978 ( nnpa ) amended the atomic energy act of 1954 to include , among other things , a requirement for full - scope iaea safeguards for significant nuclear exports to non - nuclear - weapon states .

at issue are the requirements for full - scope nuclear safeguards contained in section 123 a .

 ( 2 ) for approval of an agreement for cooperation and in section 128 for licensing nuclear exports .

india , a non - party to the npt , does not have full - scope safeguards , nor is it ever expected to adopt full - scope safeguards , since it has a nuclear weapons program that would preclude them .

also at issue is the requirement in section 129 to stop exports if a non - nuclear - weapon state has detonated a nuclear device after 1978 , among other things .

india detonated several nuclear devices in 1998 .

these three sections of the aea provide mechanisms for the president to waive those requirements and sanctions , which are spelled out in more detail below .

sections 126 and 128 also provide legislative vetoes , in the form of concurrent resolutions , of the presidential determinations .

in 1983 , however , the supreme court decided in ins v. chadha that legislative veto provisions that do not satisfy the bicameralism and presentment requirements of article i of the constitution were unconstitutional .

in 1985 , some parts of the aea were amended to provide for joint resolutions of approval or disapproval ( eg , section 123 d. ) .

the chadha decision affects how congress would disapprove of such presidential determinations under existing law and therefore affects the impact of the administration's proposed legislation .

the agreement announced in july 2007 by the united states and india lists a variety of civilian nuclear projects on which the two countries "may pursue cooperation. .

although the bush administration argued that the agreement "is consistent with applicable u.s. law," some members of congress expressed concern that it may be inconsistent with parts of p.l .

109-401 .

for example , h.res .

711 , which was referred to the house committee on foreign affairs october 4 , 2007 , stated that "it is the sense of the house of representatives" that the bush administration should not propose changes to nsg guidelines until it has resolved "all differences of interpretation" of the agreement with new delhi and "answered all outstanding questions raised by congress regarding apparent inconsistencies between the nuclear cooperation agreement" and p.l .

109-401 .

non - governmental experts also raised questions about several aspects of the agreement , arguing that they may be inconsistent with p.l .

109-401 .

despite restrictions in p.l .

109-401 regarding u.s. exports of equipment , material or technology related to uranium enrichment , spent fuel reprocessing or heavy water production , the agreement states that sensitive nuclear technology , heavy water production technology , sensitive nuclear facilities , heavy water production facilities and major critical components of such facilities may be transferred under this agreement pursuant to an amendment to this agreement .

however , the agreement also states that "transfers of dual - use items that could be used in enrichment , reprocessing or heavy water production facilities will be subject to the parties' respective applicable laws , regulations and license policies. .

such transfers would , therefore , be subject to the same restrictions described in p.l .

109-401 .

any other transfers of such technology would require changes to existing u.s. law .

the state department has said that washington does not intend to negotiate an amendment to the agreement .

furthermore , "as a matter of policy , the united states does not transfer dual - use items for use in sensitive nuclear facilities" and "will not assist india in the design , construction , or operation of sensitive nuclear technologies through the transfer of dual - use items , whether under the [nuclear cooperation] agreement or outside the agreement," according to the state department .

p.l .

109-401 does not exempt the agreement from a future cutoff in exports if india tests a nuclear explosive device again .

however , the agreement does not explicitly mention u.s. responses to such a test of such a device .

instead , the agreement states that "either party shall have the right to terminate this agreement prior to its expiration on one year's written notice to the other party" — that is , the agreement does not limit the grounds upon which the agreement may be terminated .

similarly , the agreement provides that the party seeking termination has the right to cease further cooperation under this agreement if it determines that a mutually acceptable resolution of outstanding issues has not been possible or cannot be achieved through consultations .

this provision means that nuclear cooperation under the agreement may be terminated by a party during the one - year notice period for termination of the agreement .

the agreement also specifies that the two governments are to "hold consultations" prior to ceasing cooperation or terminating the agreement .

the united states and india are to take into account whether the circumstances that may lead to termination or cessation resulted from a party's serious concern about a changed security environment or as a response to similar actions by other states which could impact national security .

this provision suggests that , in the event that india conducts a nuclear explosive test , new delhi may argue that the agreement should not be terminated ( and nuclear cooperation should not cease ) because geopolitical circumstances justified the test .

however , in such cases , the u.s. right to terminate and cease cooperation under this provision would not be constrained by the results of the consultations .

with regard to the u.s. right of return , section 123 a .

 ( 4 ) of the aea requires that nuclear cooperation agreements include a stipulation that the united states shall have the right to require the return of any nuclear materials and equipment transferred pursuant thereto and any special nuclear material produced through the use thereof if the cooperating party detonates a nuclear explosive device or terminates or abrogates an agreement providing for iaea safeguards .

the july agreement states that , following the cessation of cooperation under this agreement , either party has the right to require the return of "any nuclear material , equipment , non - nuclear material or components transferred under this agreement and any special fissionable material produced through their use. .

however , the agreement does not say explicitly that a future indian test of a nuclear explosive device would allow the united states to exercise its right of return .

rather , it provides for a right of return whenever a party has given notice of termination of the agreement and has ceased nuclear cooperation , which would include but not be limited to the circumstances specified in section 123.a ( 4 ) of the aea .

the agreement also provides that a "notice by a party that is invoking the right of return shall be delivered to the other party on or before the date of termination of this agreement. .

this means that the right of return cannot be exercised after the one - year interval prior to the agreement's termination .

a closely related issue is the agreement's four assurances regarding india's future nuclear fuel supply: the united states is willing to incorporate assurances regarding fuel supply in the bilateral u.s. - india agreement on peaceful uses of nuclear energy under section 123 of the u.s. aea , which would be submitted to the u.s. congress .

the united states will join india in seeking to negotiate with the iaea an india - specific fuel supply agreement .

the united states will support an indian effort to develop a strategic reserve of nuclear fuel to guard against any disruption of supply over the lifetime of india's reactors .

if , despite these [above] arrangements , a disruption of fuel supplies to india occurs , the two governments would jointly convene a group of friendly supplier countries ( including countries such as russia , france , and the united kingdom ) to pursue such measures as would restore fuel supply to india .

the last two provisions are particularly controversial because they could potentially provide india a way to mitigate the effects of a u.s. cessation of nuclear exports ( in the event that , for example , india were to test a nuclear weapon ) .

indeed , india's then - foreign secretary saran asserted in a february 18 , 2008 , statement that , under the 123 agreement , india is entitled to build a strategic fuel reserve "to last the lifetime of such reactors. .

and a spokesperson for india's ruling congress party indicated in september 2008 that reserve supplies of fuel would enable new delhi to continue operating its reactors even if other countries were to halt cooperation in response to an indian nuclear test .

p.l .

109-401 contains several provisions that could be in tension with the july agreement .

for example , section 103 ( b ) ( 10 ) addresses the issue of a fuel reserve: any nuclear power reactor fuel reserve provided to the government of india for use in safeguarded civilian nuclear facilities should be commensurate with reasonable reactor operating requirements .

with regard to supplying india with nuclear fuel after a nuclear test , section 103 a .

 ( 6 ) says that the united states should seek to prevent the transfer to a country of nuclear equipment , materials , or technology from other participating governments in the nsg or from any other source if nuclear transfers to that country are suspended or terminated .

similarly , section 102 ( 13 ) expresses the sense of congress that the united states "should not seek to facilitate or encourage the continuation of nuclear exports to india by any other party if such exports are terminated under united states law. .

however , president bush's september 10 , 2008 , message transmitting the agreement to congress characterizes the agreement's fuel - supply assurances as "political commitments" that are not "legally binding" because the agreement is only a "framework agreement" that does not compel specific nuclear cooperation .

furthermore , according to the state department , the "disruption of fuel supplies" referred to in the agreement refers only to disruptions "that may result through no fault" of india's .

regarding the question of non - u.s. suppliers , washington has not sought commitments from any other country to supply fuel to india .

the "united states would be compelled to encourage transfers of nuclear fuel to india by other" nsg members if supply disruptions "occur through no fault of india's own," according to the state department .

however , these assurances "are not ... meant to insulate india against the consequences of a nuclear explosive test or a violation of nonproliferation commitments. .

indeed , such u.s. commitments "would no longer apply" if the united states were to terminate the agreement in response to an indian nuclear test .

with respect to fuel reserves , the agreement does not define what it means to "support an indian effort to develop a strategic reserve. .

furthermore , the state department suggests that the united states may not supply india with a fuel reserve sufficient for the lifetime of india's reactors , though the department's 2008 responses to questions for the record do not specify the size of any such reserve .

appendix a. u.s. nuclear cooperation with india: history and bush administration policy the united states actively promoted nuclear energy cooperation with india from the mid - 1950s , building nuclear power reactors ( tarapur ) , providing heavy water for the cirus research reactor , and allowing indian scientists to study at u.s. nuclear laboratories .

however , india refused to join the 1970 nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) , arguing that it was discriminatory .

the npt defines a nuclear - weapon state as "one which has manufactured and exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device" prior to january 1 , 1967 .

these states are china , france , russia , the united kingdom , and the united states .

the treaty allows these states to retain their nuclear weapons , although they are also to pursue negotiations "in good faith" on nuclear disarmament by an unspecified date .

all other parties to the npt , are non - nuclear - weapon states .

although india conducted a "peaceful" nuclear test in 1974 and tested nuclear weapons in 1998 , it is not a recognized nuclear - weapon state .

india's 1974 nuclear test reinforced the notion that nuclear technology transferred for peaceful purposes could be used to produce nuclear weapons .

congress responded to that test by passing the nuclear non - proliferation act of 1978 ( nnpa , p.l .

95-242 ) , which imposed tough new requirements for u.s. nuclear exports to non - nuclear - weapon states .

these included a requirement that recipients of nuclear exports must have full - scope safeguards on their nuclear facilities , as well as a requirement that the united states terminate nuclear exports if a recipient state detonates a nuclear explosive device or engages in activities related to acquiring or manufacturing nuclear weapons .

the united states created the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) , a voluntary nuclear export regime , in 1975 .

the nsg published guidelines in 1978 "to apply to nuclear transfers for peaceful purposes to help ensure that such transfers would not be diverted to unsafeguarded nuclear fuel cycle or nuclear explosive activities. .

the full - scope safeguards requirement created a problem for u.s. fuel supplies to india's reactors at tarapur , which were built by u.s. firms and fueled by u.s. low - enriched uranium , pursuant to a 1963 nuclear cooperation agreement .

after passage of the nnpa , the carter administration exported two more uranium shipments under executive order after the nuclear regulatory commission refused to approve an export license on nonproliferation conditions .

although the house voted to disapprove the president's determination , the senate voted 46-48 on a resolution of disapproval .

after 1980 , all nuclear exports from the united states to india were cut off under the terms of the nnpa .

france supplied fuel under the terms of the u.s. agreement with india until france also adopted a full - scope safeguards requirement in 1995 .

after the nsg adopted the full - scope safeguards condition in 1992 , china supplied the reactor .

russia supplied fuel from 2001 to 2004 .

although the npt requires safeguards on items going to non - nuclear - weapon states , it does not explicitly prohibit nuclear commerce with states outside the npt .

however , the 1995 npt review and extension conference , npt states - parties supported the principle that non - npt parties should not be eligible for the same kinds of assistance as npt parties in good standing .

nevertheless , as noted , india tested several nuclear weapons in 1998 ; pakistan followed suit shortly thereafter .

later that year , the u.n. security council adopted resolution 1172 , which called upon those countries to "stop their nuclear weapon development programmes , to refrain from weaponization or from the deployment of nuclear weapons , to cease development of ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons and any further production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. .

bush administration policy the bush administration had been considering a strategic partnership with india as early as 2001 .

indian officials identified their growing energy needs as an area for cooperation , particularly in nuclear energy .

the u.s. - india 2004 next steps in strategic partnership ( nssp ) initiative included expanded cooperation in civil nuclear technology as one of three goals .

phase i of the nssp , completed in september 2004 , required addressing proliferation concerns and ensuring compliance with u.s. export controls .

on july 18 , 2005 , president bush announced the creation of a global partnership with india in a joint statement with prime minister manmohan singh .

noting the "significance of civilian nuclear energy for meeting growing global energy demands in a cleaner and more efficient manner," president bush said he would "work to achieve full civil nuclear energy cooperation with india" and would "also seek agreement from congress to adjust u.s. laws and policies. .

the joint statement noted that the united states will work with friends and allies to adjust international regimes to enable full civil nuclear energy cooperation and trade with india , including but not limited to expeditious consideration of fuel supplies for safeguarded nuclear reactors at tarapur .

the united states committed to encouraging its partners to consider this request — a reversal in the u.s. position , which has been to ban fuel to tarapur — and to consulting with its partners on indian participation in iter ( collaboration on fusion research ) and in the generation iv international forum for future reactor design .

prime minister singh conveyed that india "would take on the same responsibilities and practices and acquire the same benefits and advantages as other leading countries with advanced nuclear technology , such as the united states. .

india agreed to identify and separate its civilian and military nuclear facilities and programs ; declare its civilian facilities to the iaea ; voluntarily place civilian facilities under iaea safeguards ; sign an additional protocol for civilian facilities ; continue its unilateral nuclear test moratorium ; work with the united states to conclude a fissile material cut off treaty ( fmct ) ; refrain from transferring enrichment and reprocessing technologies to states that do not have them , as well as support international efforts to limit their spread ; secure its nuclear materials and technology through comprehensive export control legislation and through harmonization and adherence to mtcr and nsg guidelines .

issues of controversy the aea requires congressional approval and oversight of peaceful nuclear cooperation agreements .

as senator lugar noted , "ultimately the entire congress ... must determine what effect the joint statement will have on u.s. efforts to halt the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. .

congress held eight hearings in 2005 and 2006 on the global partnership and has consulted with the administration on various aspects of the u.s. - india nuclear agreement .

the discussion of the following issues is drawn in part from the hearings and from the emerging debate .

strategy vs .

tactics the bush administration described its "desire to transform relations with india" as "founded upon a strategic vision that transcends even today's most pressing security concerns. .

there is clearly broad congressional support for cultivating a close relationship with india , yet some members of congress have suggested that civil nuclear cooperation may not be the most appropriate vehicle for advancing our relationship .

in a house international relations committee hearing on september 8 , 2005 , then - representative jim leach stated , i don't know any member of congress that doesn't want to have a warming of relations with the government of india... .

i also don't know many members of congress who are pushing for the precise commitment that the administration has made .

representative leach suggested instead that u.s. support for a permanent seat for india on the united nations security council might have been a more appropriate gesture .

other observers outside of congress have questioned whether u.s. energy assistance should focus on expanding nuclear power , in contrast to other energy alternatives .

henry sokolski of the nonproliferation policy education center has argued that indian energy needs might be better met through free market allocation , including improved efficiency .

he asserts that nuclear power is the least leveraged of india's options to meet india's energy needs , given that it currently provides only 2.7% of installed electrical capacity .

india's projections of its nuclear energy needs are predicated on an estimated annual growth rate of 8% , which some observers believe may be unrealistic .

one well - known indian commentator , brahma chellaney , argued in the international herald tribune that the premise that india should meet its rapidly expanding energy needs through importing nuclear power reactors was flawed .

chellaney argued that a better approach for india would be to secure clean - coal and renewable energy technologies .

the senate foreign relations committee's november 2 , 2005 , hearing sought , among other things , to answer the question of why civil nuclear cooperation was so important to the u.s. - indian strategic relationship .

then - under secretary of state nicholas burns told committee members that "india had made this the central issue in the new partnership developing between our countries. .

impact on u.s. nonproliferation policies the bush administration characterized civil nuclear cooperation with india as a "win" for nonproliferation because it would bring india into the "nonproliferation mainstream. .

in short , the administration proposed that india should be courted as an ally in u.s. nonproliferation policy , rather than continue as a target of u.s. nonproliferation policy .

according to this reasoning , india should become an ally for three reasons: past policies have not worked ; india has a relatively good nonproliferation record ; and india could be a useful ally in the nonproliferation regime .

some observers , however , are concerned that india may not support u.s. nonproliferation policies sufficiently to warrant nuclear cooperation , particularly where the united states faces its greatest nuclear proliferation threat: iran .

for example , at the september 8 , 2005 , house foreign affairs committee hearing , several members of congress questioned whether the united states had obtained assurances from india of its support on iran before it issued the july 18 , 2005 , joint statement .

iran two factors may present challenges to indian support for u.s. policies toward iran .

first , india has a growing strategic relationship with iran , not limited to its interest in a proposed $7.4 billion , 2800-km - long gas pipeline between iran , pakistan , and india .

second , india has a strong tradition of foreign policy independence , as a long - time leader of the non - aligned movement ( nam ) states and as a vigorous opponent of the discriminatory nature of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty .

one witness before the house international relations committee hearing on november 16 , 2005 , suggested that opposition from the united states on the gas pipeline project is considered to be "interference with india's autonomy in foreign relations , as well as disregard for its security and energy needs. .

on iran's nuclear program , indian officials have stated they do not support a nuclear weapons option for tehran .

however , they did not agree with the united states on the urgency of reporting iran's nuclear program to the u.n. security council , which the united states has proposed since 2003 , nor on the need to limit iran's nuclear fuel cycle development .

when the iaea board of governors passed a resolution ( gov / 2005 / 77 ) on september 24 , 2005 , finding iran in noncompliance with its safeguards agreement , india voted with the united states , provoking significant domestic dissent .

according to india's then - foreign secretary shyam saran , india voted for the resolution and against the majority of nam states which abstained , because it felt obligated after having pressured france , germany , and the united kingdom to omit reference to immediate referral to the u.n. security council .

moreover , india explained its vote this way: in our explanation of vote , we have clearly expressed our opposition to iran being declared as noncompliant with its safeguards agreements .

nor do we agree that the current situation could constitute a threat to international peace and security .

nevertheless , the resolution does not refer the matter to the security council and has agreed that outstanding issues be dealt with under the aegis of the iaea itself .

this is in line with our position and therefore , we have extended our support .

on february 4 , 2006 , following iran's resumption of some uranium enrichment research and development , the iaea board of governors met in an emergency session and voted to report iran's noncompliance to the u.n. security council .

india voted with the united states to report iran , although this followed a controversial remark to the press the previous week by ambassador david mulford that india would have to support the united states on iran in vienna or the u.s. congress would not support the peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement .

several years later , new delhi voted in support of a november 27 , 2009 , iaea board resolution that criticized iran's failure to comply with its iaea and u.n. security council obligations .

iran may also test india's support for curtailing peaceful nuclear programs .

new delhi has always been an advocate of states' rights to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for 30 years has derided the npt and nonproliferation policies as discriminatory .

the official iranian press agency reported prime minister singh as telling president ahmadinejad on september 22 , 2005 , that solutions to iran's nuclear problem should be based on the principle that iran as an npt member should retain its lawful rights .

on september 26 , 2005 , foreign secretary saran told the press that "with respect to iran's right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy , that is something which we have ourselves no reservations about. .

in september 2006 , india joined in the 118-nation nonaligned movement nam summit statement that expressed support for iran's "choices and decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear technology and its fuel cycle policies. .

concerns about india's relationship with iran extend , for some , to the transfer of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) - related items .

entities in india and iran appear to have engaged in very limited nuclear - , chemical - , and missile - related transfers over the years .

there are no publicly - available indications of activities related to biological weapons .

in the early 1990s , when iran actively sought nuclear - related assistance and technology from many foreign sources , india appears to have played only a minor role in contrast to other states .

india signed an agreement in november 1991 to provide a 10 megawatt research reactor to tehran , but cancelled under pressure from the united states .

nonetheless , india reportedly trained iranian nuclear scientists in the 1990s .

in september 2004 , the united states imposed sanctions on two indian nuclear scientists , dr. y.s.r .

prasad and dr. c. surendar , under the iran nonproliferation act .

indian officials protested , stating that cooperation had taken place under the auspices of the iaea technical cooperation program .

other reports suggest that the scientists , who had served as chairman and managing director of the nuclear power corporation of india , limited , which runs india's power reactors , passed information to iran on tritium extraction from heavy water reactors .

sanctions were lifted on dr. surendar in 2005 .

in the chemical area , there is one confirmed transfer of 60 tons of thionyl chloride , a chemical that can be used in the production of mustard gas , from india to iran in march 1989 .

other shipments in that time frame reportedly were halted under u.s. pressure .

india does not appear in the cia's unclassified nonproliferation report to congress as a supplier of chemical - weapons - related exports to iran since the report began publication in 1997 .

india signed the chemical weapons convention in 1993 and deposited its instrument of ratification until 1996 .

however , in december 2005 , the united states imposed sanctions on sabero organic chemicals gujarat limited and sandhya organic chemicals pvt .

limited , pursuant to the iran nonproliferation act of 2000 .

in july 2006 , the united states imposed sanctions on balaji amines and prachi poly products , chemical manufacturers , pursuant to the iran and syrian nonproliferation act .

enrichment and reprocessing one of india's commitments in the july 2005 statement was to refrain from transferring enrichment and reprocessing technologies to states that do not already have those technologies and to support international efforts to limit their spread .

as discussed in greater detail below , the nsg is considering adopting criteria for exporting enrichment and reprocessing technology .

india's external affairs minister shri pranab mukherjee stated september 5 , 2008 , that india will not be the source of proliferation of sensitive technologies , including enrichment and reprocessing transfers .

we stand for the strengthening of the non - proliferation regime .

we support international efforts to limit the spread of [enrichment and reprocessing] equipment or technologies to states that do not have them .

david albright , president of the institute for science and international security ( isis ) , published a report on march 10 , 2006 , asserting that india had potentially exported centrifuge enrichment - related technology by virtue of tendering public offers and providing blueprints for technology to interested parties .

a september 18 , 2008 , isis report described indian sales of documents related to centrifuges , as well as illicit indian procurement of a chemical used in reprocessing .

it is not clear whether new delhi's procurement practices facilitate transfer of technology , but the u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement will have no impact on those procurement practices .

although the state department asserted in responses to questions for the record from senator lugar that the united states will not engage in reprocessing or enrichment technology cooperation with india , other nsg members may transfer such technology .

the nuclear proliferation assessment statement ( npas ) notes that india , by concluding an additional protocol to its iaea safeguards agreement , "will commit to reporting to the iaea on exports of all nsg trigger list items. .

impact on the nuclear nonproliferation regime india's status outside the nuclear nonproliferation regime raised possible concerns that the nuclear agreement could negatively affect nuclear nonproliferation efforts .

some considerations include cohesion within the nsg , effects on non - nuclear - weapon member states of the npt , potential missed opportunities to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime , and whether u.s. nuclear cooperation might in any way assist , encourage , or induce india to manufacture nuclear weapons , in possible violation of our article i obligation under the npt .

nsg cohesion cohesion within the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) is critical to effective implementation of export controls .

as noted , the nsg has followed the u.s. lead on requiring full - scope safeguards as a condition of nuclear supply .

during the september 8 , 2005 , hearing , then - house international relations committee chairman henry hyde noted that "many of us are strong supporters of the nsg and would not want to see it weakened or destroyed. .

chairman hyde asked whether the administration could assure the committee that no matter what else happens , that the administration will continue to abide by nsg guidelines , and if you are unable to gain consensus within the nsg for the amendments you need , you will not implement the new india policy in violation of nsg guidelines .

then - ambassador joseph told the committee that "we intend to take no action that would undercut the effectiveness of the nsg," and further , that the administration did not intend to change the consensus procedure or even change the nsg full - scope safeguards condition of nuclear supply .

p.l .

109-401 states that the nsg should decide "by consensus to permit supply to india of nuclear items covered by" the nsg guidelines .

dissent within the nsg could be counterproductive to achieving other u.s. nuclear nonproliferation objectives , such as discouraging enrichment and reprocessing , persuading north korea to give up its nuclear weapons , and constraining iran's suspected nuclear weapons program , all of which rely on the considerable support of friends and allies .

moreover , harmonizing export controls has played a key role in u.s. counter - and non - proliferation policies and is particularly important for interdiction efforts .

u.s. - india cooperation could prompt other suppliers , like china , to justify supplying other non - nuclear - weapon states , like pakistan .

china , which joined the nsg in 2004 , has reportedly favored an nsg decision based on criteria , not just an exception for india .

indeed , beijing has apparently agreed to construct two additional nuclear power reactors in pakistan .

russia , which only halted fuel supplies to the indian tarapur reactors in december 2004 at the insistence of the nsg , agreed in 2006 to resume fuel supplies to tarapur under the guise of the safety exception , reportedly to the dismay of many nsg members .

effect on npt member states india has complained for years that it has been excluded from regular nuclear commerce because of its status outside the npt .

some observers believe this is a good thing and shows that the treaty works .

others believe that a new paradigm is needed for india because it will not join the npt as a non - nuclear - weapon state .

the npt is basically a two - way bargain .

non - nuclear - weapon states under the npt give up the option of developing nuclear weapons in exchange for the promise of peaceful nuclear cooperation .

nuclear weapon states under the treaty commit to eventual disarmament .

india , as a state outside the npt , is bound by neither of these commitments .

some observers may see the offer of nuclear cooperation previously reserved for states under the npt with full - scope safeguards not only as undermining the agreements made by non - nuclear - weapon states , but also the commitments made by nuclear weapon states to disarm .

in this view , india's continued unilateral testing moratorium is insufficient , compared with signing the comprehensive test ban treaty ( ctbt ) .

similarly , its support for fissile material cutoff treaty ( fmct ) negotiations is insufficient , compared with capping its nuclear weapons fissile material production now , as four of the five nuclear weapon states formally have done .

some have suggested that the absence of an indian cap on fissile material production for weapons may make it difficult for china to declare it has halted fissile material production for weapons .

others have suggested that , absent a cap on fissile material production , it would be difficult to ensure that peaceful nuclear cooperation was not indirectly assisting or encouraging india's nuclear weapons program .

the revelations during the early 1990s of the iraqi and north korean clandestine nuclear weapons programs led to the strengthening of the npt and export control regimes .

at the 1995 npt review and extension conference , npt parties affirmed the nsg's decision to require full - scope safeguards for nuclear exports , supporting the principle that non - npt parties should not be eligible for the same kinds of assistance as npt parties in good standing .

at the 2000 review conference , npt parties again supported that principle .

according to the u.s. ambassador to the conference at that time , "reinforcement of this guideline is important given some who have questioned whether this principle should be relaxed for india and pakistan , which have not accepted full - scope iaea safeguards .

the answer from npt parties is clearly no. .

in the past 10 years , virtually all states agreed to strengthen the nonproliferation regime , sacrificing some sovereignty by allowing additional , intrusive inspections under the additional protocol .

in the wake of 2004 revelations about pakistani scientist a.q .

khan's nuclear black market sales , non - nuclear - weapon states under the npt are also being asked to consider further restrictions on their sovereignty by voluntarily restricting their access to sensitive nuclear technologies like uranium enrichment and reprocessing .

if some states view the u.s. - indian nuclear cooperation agreement as a breach of faith in the basic bargain of the npt , they might be less inclined to accept additional sacrifices , to the detriment of the nonproliferation regime .

missed opportunities then - ambassador joseph described the nuclear initiative as representing "a substantial net gain for nonproliferation .

it is a win for our strategic relationship , a win for energy security , and a win for nonproliferation. .

joseph said he was "convinced that the nonproliferation regime will emerge stronger as a result. .

however , some experts have suggested the united states asked for too little .

for example , fred mcgoldrick , harold bengelsdorf , and lawrence scheinman argued in the october 2005 issue of arms control today that it is open to serious doubt whether the proposed indian concessions were significant enough to justify the accommodations promised by the united states and whether the steps the united states and india agreed to take in the civil nuclear area will , on balance , be supportive of global nonproliferation efforts... .

if the bush administration is able to implement the joint declaration without significant modification , it will have given the indians a great deal — acknowledgment as a de facto nuclear weapon state and access to the international nuclear energy market — in return for largely symbolic concessions in the nonproliferation area .

special advisor for nonproliferation and arms control to the secretary of state robert einhorn , then of the center for strategic and international studies , told members of the house international relations committee on october 26 , 2005 , that several of the steps pledged by india are "simply reaffirmations of existing positions. .

the indian embassy itself has downplayed the depth and breadth of its nonproliferation commitments , describing all but its safeguards commitments under the july 2005 statement in the following way: a number of existing policies were also reiterated by india , among them a unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing , working towards conclusion of a multilateral fissile material cut - off treaty , non - transfer of enrichment and reprocessing technologies , securing nuclear materials and technology through export control , and harmonisation with mtcr and nsg guidelines .

india has had a self - imposed nuclear test moratorium for years , although supporters of this agreement note that this agreement would bind india bilaterally to honoring that pledge .

india has supported fmct negotiations for years , despite continuing to produce fissile material for use in nuclear weapons .

since the pace of the conference on disarmament's discussions regarding an fmct has been glacial , support for negotiations could allow india to continue producing fissile material indefinitely .

prime minister singh told his parliament on august 17 , 2006 , that "india is willing to join only a non discriminatory , multilaterally negotiated and internationally verifiable fmct. .

the most far - reaching of the commitments is to separate civilian and military facilities , declare civilian facilities , and place them under safeguards .

administration officials have pointed to this aspect of the agreement as a nonproliferation "plus. .

yet , allowing india broad latitude in determining which of its facilities to put under international safeguards is a privilege accorded currently only to nuclear weapon states under the npt .

although the united states has said that it does not recognize india as an npt nuclear - weapon state , excluding military facilities from inspections is a tacit recognition of their legitimacy .

then - iaea director general dr. mohamed elbaradei said that he has "always advocated concrete and practical steps towards the universal application of iaea safeguards. .

in remarks to the carnegie endowment's nonproliferation conference in november 2005 , dr. elbaradei cited additional safety benefits of putting more indian facilities under safeguards .

however , it should be noted that the nsg already has an exception to its full - scope safeguards requirement for safety - related items .

the bush administration asserted that india has an "exceptional" record of nonproliferation and , despite a few isolated sanctions , most of the evidence supports the view that india has exercised restraint in export controls .

as such , however , new delhi's promise to refrain from transferring enrichment and reprocessing technologies to states that do not have them , as well as its promise to adhere to nsg guidelines , may be little more than a formality .

many observers have noted that india has not taken any measures to restrain its nuclear weapons program .

for example , india has not agreed to end fissile material production for nuclear weapons .

although then - ambassador joseph stated in 2005 that the united states remained "committed to achieving indian curtailment of fissile material production," he added that the bush administration would "not insist on it for purposes of this civil nuclear initiative. .

moreover , indian officials to pointed out that "there is no commitment at all to cease production of fissile material ahead of the conclusion of such a multilateral [fmct] treaty. .

prime minister singh told the parliament in august 2006 that "our position on this matter is unambiguous .

we are not willing to accept a moratorium on the production of fissile material. .

furthermore , although india committed to a moratorium on testing nuclear weapons , new delhi did not commit to signing the ctbt .

u.s. npt article i obligations / aiding india's nuclear arsenal article i of the npt states that each nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices directly , or indirectly ; and not in any way to assist , encourage , or induce any non - nuclear - weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices , or control over such weapons or explosive devices .

given that india will continue to make nuclear weapons , but is considered under the npt to be a non - nuclear - weapon state , the question arises as to whether u.s. assistance might in any way violate article i .

in testimony before the house international relations committee , david albright of isis stated that "without india halting production of fissile material for its nuclear weapons programs , nuclear assistance , particularly any in the areas involving the fuel cycle , would likely spill over to india's nuclear weapons program. .

three areas raise potential concerns: whether the separation plan is adequate to ensure that cooperation does not in any way assist in the development or production of nuclear weapons ; whether cooperation confers nuclear weapons state status on india , with an unintended consequence of encouraging the indian nuclear weapons program ; and whether opening up the international uranium market frees up india's domestic uranium for use in its weapons program .

separation plan credibility bush administration officials repeatedly have stressed that india's separation plan must be credible , transparent , and defensible from a nonproliferation standpoint , and that "the resultant safeguards must contribute to our nonproliferation goals. .

to those observers who interpreted that statement to mean that a separation plan would need to take into account india's past commitments ( eg , use of purportedly "peaceful" nuclear reactors like cirus to produce plutonium for nuclear weapons ) and the impact on its nuclear weapons program ( eg , capping india's fissile material production ) , the separation plan may not appear credible .

to those observers who interpreted "credible" to mean that all power reactors that supplied electricity would be declared civilian because they have a civilian use , the separation plan also may not appear credible .

bush administration officials defended the separation plan as credible and defensible because it covers more than just a token number of indian facilities , provides for safeguards in perpetuity , and includes upstream and downstream facilities .

however , although iaea safeguards ensure that nuclear material is not diverted , there are no procedures or measures in place to ensure that information , technology and know - how are not transferred from the civil sector to the military sector .

this issue , which the september 2008 npas does not appear to address , could become a key loophole .

for example , u.s. assistance to one of the eight indigenous power reactors , whether focused on nuclear safety , improving operational efficiency , or extending its lifetime , could easily be applied by indian personnel to one of the similar , but unsafeguarded indigenous power reactors .

some indian commentators , however , have suggested that the united states has little technology to offer india , and others have doubted whether u.s. assistance would be provided to those indigenous power reactors .

conferring nuclear weapon - state status a second area that raises concerns is whether nuclear cooperation confers nuclear weapon state status on india , which could encourage its weapons program .

senator lugar noted in a hearing on november 2 , 2005 , that prior to the july 18 joint statement india had repeatedly sought unsuccessfully to be recognized as an official nuclear weapons state , a status the npt reserves only for the united states , china , france , russia and the united kingdom .

opponents argue that granting india such status will undermine the essential bargain that is at the core of npt , namely , that only by foregoing nuclear weapons can a country gain civilian nuclear assistance .

under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology & logistics dr. ashton carter , then of harvard's kennedy school of government , stated during the same hearing that india obtained de - facto recognition of its nuclear weapons status .

the united states will behave , and urge others to behave , as if india were a nuclear weapons state under the npt .

we won't deny it most civil nuclear technology or commerce .

we won't require it to put all of its nuclear facilities under iaea safeguards — only those it declares to be civil .

beyond these technicalities , nuclear recognition confers an enormous political benefit on india .

secretary rice , in response to a question for the record in april 2006 on india's nuclear weapon state status , stated that "while india has nuclear weapons and we must deal with this fact in a realistic , pragmatic manner , we do not recognize india as a nuclear weapon state or seek to legitimize india's nuclear weapons program. .

however , other officials' statements appear to lend more support to india .

then - under secretary of state nicholas burns told reporters on march 2 , 2006 , that "india is a nuclear weapons power , and india will preserve part of its nuclear industry to service its nuclear weapons program. .

former iaea director general elbaradei argues that the u.s. - india deal is "neutral" because "it does not confer any 'status,' legal or otherwise , on india as a possessor of nuclear weapons. .

nonetheless , the successful u.s. effort to create an exemption in its nuclear cooperation law for new delhi has placed india in the company of only four other nations — the united kingdom , france , china , and russia — all de jure nuclear weapon states .

many observers believe that this legitimizes india's nuclear weapons program by providing de facto recognition .

indian official statements repeatedly have used the term "advanced nuclear states" as synonymous with nuclear weapon states ; prime minister singh told the parliament in august 2006 that the july statement did not refer to india as a nuclear weapons state because that has a particular connotation in the npt , but it explicitly acknowledged the existence of india's military nuclear facilities .

it also meant that india would not attract full - scope safeguards such as those applied to non - nuclear weapon states that are signatories to the npt and there would be no curbs on continuation of india's nuclear weapon related activities .

in these important respects , india would be very much on par with the five nuclear weapon states who are signatories to the npt .

similarly , the separation plan provided for an india specific safeguards agreement with the iaea with assurances of uninterrupted supply of fuel to reactors together with india's right to take corrective measures in the event fuel supplies are interrupted .

we have made clear to the us that india's strategic programme is totally outside the purview of the july statement , and we oppose any legislative provisions that mandate scrutiny of our nuclear weapons programme or our unsafeguarded nuclear facilities .

offsetting india's uranium shortage finally , critics of u.s. - indian civil nuclear cooperation have argued that giving india access to the international uranium market would free up new delhi's domestic uranium resources for use in its weapons program .

india has limited indigenous uranium reserves and apparently has difficulty producing reactor fuel from these reserves .

new delhi has reportedly reduced its power reactors' electricity output because of fuel shortages .

since the nsg's 1992 adoption of the full - scope safeguards condition for exports , new delhi has not had access to the international uranium market .

foreign secretary saran pointed out on february 18 , 2008 , that "a major expansion in nuclear power in the medium term" would require india to import "higher capacity reactors and uranium fuel. .

similarly , the npas states that "india must import fuel , reactors , and other technologies ... to meet its nuclear electricity - generating targets. .

india's current fuel situation means that new delhi cannot produce sufficient fuel for both its nuclear weapons program and its projected civil nuclear program .

a panel of nuclear experts concluded in 2006 that india's production of weapon grade plutonium is currently constrained by the competing demands of india's nuclear - power reactors for its limited domestic supply of natural uranium .

if india could import fuel for its civilian nuclear reactors , it could use more domestic uranium for the production of weapon materials .

acknowledging the country's uranium limitations , a leading indian nuclear strategist k. subrahmanyam suggested december 12 , 2005 , in the times of india , that new delhi should use imported nuclear fuel to preserve its domestic uranium reserves for nuclear weapons: given india's uranium ore crunch and the need to build up our minimum credible nuclear deterrent arsenal as fast as possible , it is to india's advantage to categorize as many power reactors as possible as civilian ones to be refueled by imported uranium and conserve our native uranium fuel for weapon - grade plutonium production .

proponents of u.s. - indian nuclear cooperation have made several arguments regarding the article i issue .

none of these claims , however , refute the fact that india's access to the international uranium market will result in more indigenous indian uranium available for weapons because it will not be consumed by new delhi's newly safeguarded reactors .

for example , proponents of the deal argue that india already has sufficient uranium to increase its nuclear arsenal and that new delhi does not plan to increase that arsenal .

the npas states that "india is capable of maintaining and expanding its existing nuclear arsenal within the limit of its indigenous resources and capabilities. .

secretary rice made a similar argument during an april 5 , 2006 , house international relations committee hearing .

but these arguments do not address the constraints india faces in pursuing its civilian and military nuclear programs using only indigenous uranium .

the npas also addresses new delhi's intentions regarding its future nuclear arsenal .

first , the statement says that washington has "no evidence indicating that india plans to use additional domestic uranium reserves in its nuclear weapons programs as a consequence of implementing" the nuclear cooperation agreement .

second , the npas argues that new delhi has "a posture of nuclear restraint," citing india's stated no - first - use nuclear weapon policy and need for only a "credible minimum deterrent. .

india , however , has never defined what it means by such a deterrent ; saran stated during an april 2006 television interview that "there is no responsibility on part of india to declare what its minimum deterrent is. .

moreover , new delhi's intentions are irrelevant to determining u.s. compliance with its article i obligations .

furthermore , the npas appears to argue that the agreement may reduce india's potential to produce additional fissile material for weapons , because the additional indigenous indian reactors placed under safeguards "will no longer be available for this purpose. .

however , the statement characterizes the reactors' potential to produce fissile material for weapons as "theoretical. .

moreover , as noted , india is not obligated to place future reactors under safeguards .

the state department report submitted with the agreement notes that iaea safeguards will prevent india from using its civil nuclear facilities for its nuclear weapons program .

it also describes the ways in which u.s. export control policies prevent exported u.s. dual - use nuclear technologies from being used for military purposes .

appendix b. india's september 5 , 2008 , statement on disarmament and nonproliferation statement by external affairs minister of india shri pranab mukherjee on the civil nuclear initiative .

to reiterate india's stand on disarmament and nonproliferation , eam has made the following statement: a plenary meeting of the nuclear suppliers group to consider an exception for india from its guidelines to allow for full civil nuclear cooperation with india is being held in vienna from september 4-5 , 2008 .

india has a long - standing and steadfast commitment to universal , non - discriminatory and total elimination of nuclear weapons .

the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons which shri rajiv gandhi put before the un in 1988 still has universal resonance .

we approach our dialogue with the nuclear suppliers group and all its members in a spirit of cooperation that allows for an ongoing frank exchange of views on subjects of mutual interest and concern .

such a dialogue will strengthen our relationship in the years to come .

our civil nuclear initiative will strengthen the international non - proliferation regime .

india believes that the opening of full civil nuclear cooperation will be good for india and for the world .

it will have a profound positive impact on global energy security and international efforts to combat climate change .

india has recently submitted a working paper on nuclear disarmament to the un general assembly , containing initiatives on nuclear disarmament .

these include the reaffirmation of the unequivocal commitment of all nuclear weapon states to the goal of complete elimination of nuclear weapons ; negotiation of a convention on the complete prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons ; and negotiation of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development , production , stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and on their destruction , leading to the global , non - discriminatory and verifiable elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified timeframe .

we remain committed to a voluntary , unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing .

we do not subscribe to any arms race , including a nuclear arms race .

we have always tempered the exercise of our strategic autonomy with a sense of global responsibility .

we affirm our policy of no - first - use of nuclear weapons .

we are committed to work with others towards the conclusion of a multilateral fissile material cut - off treaty in the conference on disarmament that is universal , non - discriminatory and verifiable .

india has an impeccable non - proliferation record .

we have in place an effective and comprehensive system of national export controls , which has been constantly updated to meet the highest international standards .

this is manifested in the enactment of the weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems act in 2005 .

india has taken the necessary steps to secure nuclear materials and technology through comprehensive export control legislation and through harmonization and committing to adhere to missile technology control regime and nuclear suppliers group guidelines .

india will not be the source of proliferation of sensitive technologies , including enrichment and reprocessing transfers .

we stand for the strengthening of the non - proliferation regime .

we support international efforts to limit the spread of enr equipment or technologies to states that do not have them .

we will work together with the international community to advance our common objective of non - proliferation .

in this regard , india is interested in participating as a supplier nation , particularly for thorium - based fuel and in establishment of international fuel banks , which also benefit india .

india places great value on the role played by the iaea's nuclear safeguards system .

we look forward to working with the iaea in implementing the india - specific safeguards agreement concluded with the iaea .

in keeping with our commitment to sign and adhere to an additional protocol with respect to india's civil nuclear facilities , we are working closely with the iaea to ensure early conclusion of an additional protocol to the safeguards agreement .

