the city of sacramento is located northeast of san francisco bay in california at the confluence of the american and sacramento rivers .

the city's location puts it among the u.s. cities most vulnerable to significant flooding .

potential flood losses grow as development in the area places more lives and properties in harm's way .

as illustrated by disasters like hurricane katrina , flood damage reduction infrastructure cannot protect all areas , control all floods , and be completely reliable .

to reduce flooding risks in sacramento , local , state , and federal entities have built dams , levees , and other structures , including the federally constructed folsom dam on the american river .

these entities currently are studying and pursuing ways to improve the reliability , capacity , and operations of the existing infrastructure as well as construction activities to modify and build flood damage reduction infrastructure .

whether and how to combine nonstructural methods ( eg , building restrictions and codes , insurance premiums ) and structural methods ( eg , levee strengthening , dam modification , new dam construction ) for managing flood risks is the subject of some dispute among stakeholders .

following a significant flood threat in 1986 , congress in 1987 authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to study additional flood damage reduction measures ( eg , dam and levee improvements , construction of new structures , adoption of operational improvements ) .

since then , congress has authorized and appropriated funding for studies and construction of specific flood damage reduction measures .

this report outlines the status of these studies and measures , with particular attention to measures at folsom dam .

following the 1986 storm , the corps , the california reclamation board , and the sacramento area flood control agency ( safca ) formed a partnership to find ways to reduce flood vulnerability and losses .

since 1992 , congress has authorized construction of physical modification projects to improve flood protection around sacramento and folsom dam , including ( 1 ) the common features project that consists of levee improvements on the american and sacramento rivers ; ( 2 ) the folsom dam modification that entails changes to the flood gates and spillway of folsom dam ; and ( 3 ) the folsom dam raise that elevates the concrete and earth portions of the dam , provides for the construction of a permanent bridge , and authorizes other related measures .

construction of the common features , the dam modifications , and the dam raise as currently planned would raise the flood protection for sacramento to a 1 in 233-year flood ( 0.4% annual chance of flooding ) .

these projects would improve levee reliability and permit higher releases from folsom dam .

the non - federal partners for these projects are the state of california and the sacramento area flood control agency .

it should also be noted that congress has authorized several operational changes to folsom dam , including forecast - based operations and variable storage .

re - operation is important in achieving the shared goals of the federal , state , and local partners .

forecast - based operations , authorized in the department of defense appropriations act of fy1993 ( p.l .

102-396 ) , allow for the release of waters from folsom dam in advance of anticipated floodwaters .

variable storage was originally authorized in the water resources and development act of 1996 ( wrda 1996 , p.l .

104-303 ) , and provides for additional flood storage capacity in folsom reservoir depending on the levels of other reservoirs in the american river watershed .

depending on the results of analyses underway , implementing re - operation may require congressional action .

since the focus of this report is on structural modifications to flood control structures , operational changes will receive little additional treatment here .

ongoing problems with currently authorized projects have led to the consideration of several other options relating to folsom dam and flood control for sacramento .

while it is unclear whether congress will consider any of the projects in this section for authorization , recent developments suggest that they may be part of the congressional debate in the future .

how to reduce flood risks in developed and developing areas is a problem being faced by communities nationwide , and is receiving increased attention as the reliability of existing infrastructure is reevaluated in the aftermath of hurricane katrina .

in the last half century , the dam and levee system around sacramento has proved crucial in protecting the city from flooding .

the folsom dam is an important component in this flood protection .

recently , the federal government has authorized three major flood protection improvement projects in the sacramento area .

these include improvements to folsom dam's operational rules , improvements to the american and sacramento rivers and natomas basin levees , as well as modifications to folsom dam's flood gates and a raise of the dam itself .

some of the federally authorized improvements involving fortification of the american and sacramento river levees are under construction or completed , while others are undergoing reevaluation .

other plans , which would increase the capacity and flow levels at folsom dam and improve its ability to provide flood protection , remain in the pre - construction engineering and design stage , and have encountered setbacks to construction because of high cost estimates .

a recent plan jointly authored by the corps and the bureau suggests that an auxiliary spillway to the south of folsom dam could achieve the objectives of prior authorizations on an enhanced timetable and at a reduced cost , but this option has not yet been officially endorsed by the corps .

a revised course of action will be suggested in the corps' pac report , due in december 2006 .

additional congressional authorization may be required if congress chooses to adopt the auxiliary spillway alternative .

issues for congress include whether , and if so , how , to modify authorization and appropriations for improvements to the management of floodwaters at folsom dam and in the american river basin .

in reconsidering these , congress has a range of options ; for example , it may consider less expensive alternatives to current projects , such as the auxiliary spillway , or undertake a full review of sacramento flood control policy , including unauthorized alternatives such as auburn dam .

