with the current economic downturn , members of the 111 th congress are likely to be faced with many policy options aimed at economic improvement .

a focus of past debates has been on the impact immigrants have on jobs and wages .

yet , these discussions frequently take on a different focus when it comes to foreign investors , in part because such visas are targeted at immigrants that are poised to inject capital into the economy and create employment .

foreign investors are often viewed as providing employment opportunities for u.s. citizens rather than displacing native workers .

thus , congress has in previous years been willing to set aside both temporary and permanent visas for foreign investors with the goal that this visa distribution would net positive economic effects .

yet , extending foreign investor visas provides several potential risks as well , such as visa abuses and security concerns .

with the extension of the immigrant investor visa pilot program — a program aimed at granting permanent immigrant visas for investments into certain limited liability corporations — until september 30 , 2012 , members of congress will have to decide if the current policy towards foreign investors should be maintained , or if a different set of policies should be implemented .

the central policy question surrounding foreign investors — and particularly legal permanent resident ( lpr ) investors — is whether the benefits reaped from allocating visas to foreign investors outweigh the costs of denying visas to other employment - based groups .

the subsequent analysis provides a background and contextual framework for the consideration of foreign investor visa policy .

after a brief legislative background , this report will provide discussions of immigrant and nonimmigrant investors visas , a comparison of u.s. and canadian immigrant investor programs , an analysis of the relationship between investment and migration , and finally a review of current issues .

since the immigration act of 1924 the united states has expressly granted visas to foreign nationals for the purpose of conducting commerce within the united states .

although foreign investors had previously been allowed legal status under several treaties of friendship , commerce and navigation treaties , the creation in 1924 of the nonimmigrant treaty trader visa provided the first statutory recognition of foreign nationals as temporary traders .

with the implementation of the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( ina ) , the statute was expanded to include nonimmigrant treaty investors — a visa for which trade was no longer a requirement .

nonimmigrant visa categories for traders and investors have always required that the principal visa holder stems from a country with which the united states has a treaty .

the nonimmigrant visa classes are defined in §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina .

these visa classes are commonly referred to by the letter and numeral that denotes their subsection in §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina , and are referred to as e - 1 for nonimmigrant treaty traders and e - 2 for nonimmigrant treaty investors .

unlike nonimmigrant investors , who come to the united states as temporary admissions , immigrant investors are admitted into the united states as lprs .

with the immigration act of 1990 , congress expanded the statutory immigrant visa categories to include an investor class for foreign investors .

the statute developed an employment - based ( eb - 5 ) investor visa for lprs , which allows for up to 10,000 admissions annually and generally requires a minimum $1 million investment .

through the regional center pilot program , investors may invest in targeted regions and existing enterprises that are financially troubled .

this pilot program was extended by the basic pilot program extension and expansion act of 2003 to continue through fy2008 .

foreign investors are generally considered to help boost the united states economy by providing an influx of foreign capital into the united states and through job creation .

for investor immigrants , job creation is an explicit criterion , while with the nonimmigrant visa categories economic activity is assumed to spur job growth .

additionally , foreign investors are often associated with entrepreneurship and increased economic activity .

critics , however , believe that such investors may be detrimental since they potentially displace potential entrepreneurs that are united states citizens .

there is currently one immigrant class set aside specifically for foreign investors coming to the united states .

falling under the employment - based class of immigrant visas , the immigrant investor visa is the fifth preference category in this visa class .

thus , the immigrant investor visa is commonly referred to as the eb - 5 visa .

when coming to the united states as a temporary investor , there are two classes of nonimmigrant visas which a foreign national can use to enter: the e - 1 for treaty traders and the e - 2 for treaty investors .

an e - 1 treaty trader visa allows a foreign national to enter the united states for the purpose of conducting "substantial trade" between the united states and the country of which the person is a citizen .

an e - 2 treaty investor can be any person who comes to the united states to develop and direct the operations of an enterprise in which he or she has invested , or is in the process of investing , a "substantial amount of capital. .

both these e - class visas require that a treaty exist between the united states and the principal foreign national's country of citizenship .

in the majority of cases , a commerce or navigation treaty serves as the basis for the e - class visa extension ( though other bilateral treaties and diplomatic agreements can also serve as a foundation ) .

a number of countries offer both the e - 1 and e - 2 visas as a result of reciprocal agreements made with the united states , although many countries only offer one .

currently there are 75 countries who offer the treaty class visas .

of these countries , 28 offer only the e - 2 treaty investor visa while 4 countries offer only the e - 1 treaty trader visa ( see appendix a ) .

in the cases where a country offers both types of visas , an applicant who qualifies for both types of visa may choose based upon his or her own preference .

such decisions , however , would depend upon the specific nature of the business as the e category visas carry different qualifying criteria for renewal .

although each category has some unique requirements , other requirements cut across all categories of nonimmigrant investor visas .

an applicant for any of the nonimmigrant investor categories must satisfy the following criteria: the principal visa recipient must be a national of a country with which the united states has a treaty .

the principal visa recipient must be in some form of executive or supervisory role in order to qualify as a treaty trader or investor the skills the principal visa recipient possesses must be essential and unique to the enterprise under consideration the visa holder must show an intent to depart the united states at the end of the visa's duration of status if investing in an existing enterprise , the applicant must show that the employer of the treaty trader or investor must be at least 50% owned by nationals of the treaty country .

a person granted an e - class visa is eligible to stay in the united states for a period of two years .

although an applicant is obligated to show intent of departing the united states at the end of the visa duration , the e - class visas may be renewed for an indefinite number of two year periods provided that the individual still qualifies .

spouses and child dependents are granted the same visa status and renewal as the principal visa holder so long as the child is under the age of 21 , after which the child must apply and qualify for his or her own visa .

generally with the e - class visas , the individual may not engage in other employment than that which is stipulated , although incidental activities are generally allowed .

if any e - class individual wishes to change employer , he or she is under obligation to contact the department of state ( dos ) and apply for adjustment of status .

although there are many countries with investor visa programs — including the united kingdom , australia , and new zealand — the canadian investor program has the strongest parallels to those of the united states .

these parallels are in part due to the fact that the u.s. immigrant investor program was modeled after its canadian counterpart .

the canadian program allows investors who have a net worth of at least $800,000 ( cdn ) to make a $400,000 ( cdn ) investment through citizenship and immigration canada ( cic ) .

the canadian government additionally offers an entrepreneurial visa for foreign nationals with a net worth of $300,000 ( cdn ) .

these nationals are required to invest and participate in the management of a certain sized business , and they must produce at least one new full - time job for a non - family member .

between 1986 and 2002 , the canadian investor visa program attracted more than $6.6 billion ( cdn ) in investments .

from fy1992 through fy2004 , united states lpr investor immigrants had invested an estimated $1 billion in u.s. businesses .

according to published accounts , the canadian investor visa was developed initially to attract investors from the british colony of hong kong .

the visa was created in 1986 in response to the significant numbers of investors seeking to migrate from hong kong in anticipation of the transfer of the colony from british to chinese control .

for these investors , the visa offered an opportunity to establish legal permanent residence in a country that was perceived to be more embracing of individual property rights and open markets .

these immigrant investors from hong kong , along with other immigrant investors , have cumulatively invested over $3 billion in the canadian economy .

as figure 3 demonstrates , the annual number of immigrant investor visas issued over the past decade has remained multiple times higher than that of its united states counterpart .

the margin between these two programs was closest in 1997 , when the canadian issuance of 5,595 immigrant investor visas was approximately 400% higher than the u.s. total of 1,361 immigrant investor visas issued .

although these ratios have fluctuated , the sizable canadian advantage in this measure has remained .

in terms of the absolute levels , the canadian immigrant visa level for 2008 represented a 13-year high , while the u.s. level for the same time period roughly equaled its 13-year high .

both countries have shown an upward trend in immigrant investor visas since 2003 .

what is unclear from the data is whether the competition between the u.s. and canadian program ( as well as investor programs in other countries ) constitutes a zero - sum game .

there are no data available showing the motive for migration among investors , or if they perceive the united states and canada as interchangeable investment locations .

if the investors are motivated purely by the economic returns , then economic theory suggests that equalizing the program financial requirements should result in more equal rates of petitions .

furthermore , a lowering of the financial requirements should increase the supply for both countries .

however , if the immigrant investors are motivated to migrate by non - financial considerations , then equalizing the united states program requirements with its canadian counterpart is likely to have little impact on the current trends .

classical economic theory has posited that trade liberalization ( including the reduction of investment restrictions ) establishes a conditional inverse theoretical relationship between foreign direct investment ( fdi ) and migration .

in other words , as trade increases , migration pressures decrease .

the theory posits that an increased level of fdi should reduce migratory pressures through growth in the targeted economy .

as economic growth produces a higher demand for labor , workers in that economy feel less pressure to seek employment in foreign economies , provided that the new jobs complement the workforce's skills .

for example , if economic growth creates demand for skilled labor , then an unskilled labor force should not experience any reduced migration pressures .

thus , while fdi increases host - country growth , there is not necessarily a direct reduction in host - country migration pressures .

the investor visas offered by the united states operate on the principal that fdi into the united states should spur economic growth in the united states .

according to the classical theory , if these investments are properly targeted towards the u.s. labor force's skill sets , it should reduce the migration pressures on u.s. workers .

such economic growth from fdi should further spur greater demand for trade .

in fdi between capital abundant countries such as the oecd member states ( between whom a marked majority of fdi flows ) , the empirical evidence has largely supported this notion .

furthermore , it has provided an increased per capita income in these states , as well as boosted the general standard of living .

what is less clear from the empirical research is the degree to which potential migration provides any additional incentive for investment activity in the united states .

the classical trade theory asserts that trade and migration are substitutes , and that trade liberalization should reduce migratory pressures .

these basic propositions are generally agreed to hold in the long term .

consequently , in the long term classical trade theory suggests there should be little migration of investors from countries with liberalized trade arrangements with the united states .

instead , these investors would achieve their investments through conventional fdi .

furthermore , the theory suggests that investors would be more likely to migrate from countries with restrictive trade policies ( a policy more highly correlated with less economically developed countries ) .

critics of the classical economic models contend that despite elegant predictions , the models produced by the theory frequently do not capture the costs of international finance .

such critics argue that foreign investments often occur at the expense of local businesses , and result in exploitive practices of local labor .

these criticisms are particularly common when critiquing the economic relationship between capital abundant countries and less economically developed countries ( ledc ) .

according to the argument , more powerful countries can leverage their power to construct investment relationships that shift a disproportionate amount of profits to the capital abundant countries .

simultaneously , a greater share of the costs are shouldered by the less powerful country .

classical economists generally respond by noting that these investments are still producing growth in the ledcs , making the countries better off than without the investments .

however , ledcs remain a source of contention between the classical economic theorists and their critics .

in recent years , significant efforts have been made by administrative agencies to both promote investment by foreigners in the united states economy , and to close perceived loopholes for visa exploitation .

at the center of these efforts has been the uscis' changes to the regional center pilot program , which addressed fraud concerns and the development of a regional center unit for coordination and targeting of foreign investments .

in the 111 th congress , authorizing language in the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 , §548 ) , extends the authorization of the regional center pilot program through september 30 , 2012 .

the senate - passed version of the act had included language to permanently reauthorize the eb - 5 regional center pilot program , but this language was not included in the conference agreement .

on july 22 , 2009 , the senate judiciary committee held a hearing to assess the regional center pilot program , with some members expressing support for the program's permanent authorization .

some legislation has also proposed modifying the qualifying criteria as a targeted area to lower the threshold for investment amounts in some geographic regions as a means of enticing more applications by potential immigrant investors .

there are currently no other programs for targeting investments by immigrant investors to the united states .

additional investor visa issues that could surface may relate to temporary investors .

in terms of nonimmigrant visas , the danish government has been lobbying the united states to grant e - 2 treaty investor visas to danish nationals .

originally , this provision was granted to the danes on may 2 , 2001 as part of a protocol to the treaty granting nationals of denmark e - 1 nonimmigrant trader visa eligibility .

the protocol was never ratified , however , due to congressional objections over the inclusion of immigration provisions in a trade agreement .

subsequently , representative sensenbrenner introduced h.r .

3647 in the 109 th congress , which was passed in the house on november 16 , 2005 , and would have allowed nationals of denmark to enter and operate in the united states as investors under e - 2 treaty investor nonimmigrant visas .

currently , danish nationals are only allowed e - 1 treaty trader visas .

denmark is one of four countries whose nationals are eligible for e - 1 treaty trader visas , but not e - 2 treaty investor visas ( see appendix a ) .

appendix a. e - class visa privileges by year of attainment appendix b .

immigrant investor pilot program projects there are currently numerous targeted economic regions set up for the regional center pilot program for the eb - 5 visa category .

these targeted areas have focused on different types of investments in order to achieve economic benefits for the given region .

below are descriptions of a couple of the projects that are currently in place under the regional center pilot program and the results these projects are producing .

the south dakota international business institute ( sdibi ) , dairy economic development region ( dedr ) is the only regional targeting center currently run by a state government .

approved in june 2005 , this regional center was the result of a state - wide effort to find an improved method of attracting foreign capital to south dakota .

from the state's perspective , the eb - 5 pilot investor program offered a more promising solution than the e - 2 nonimmigrant visa , since officials could offer investors the benefit of lpr status .

additionally , the job - creation criterion of the eb - 5 visa aligned well with the state's focus on job creation from foreign investments ( as opposed to isolated capital injections ) .

in its application for regional center designation , the state said it would focus its efforts on attracting dairy farm investors .

uscis agreed to the designation on the condition that south dakota would allow for limited partnerships of foreign investors with domestic farmers .

as a result , south dakota currently has enterprises fully owned and operated by foreign investors , as well as limited partnerships .

since the regional designation took effect , south dakota has attracted 60 foreign investors to its dairy industry ( with an additional 10 applications still pending ) .

these foreign investors have injected approximately $30 million into the south dakota economy , with an additional $6 million in matching funds coming from local farmers .

furthermore , this combined $36 million in invested funds has resulted in almost $90 million in bank financing for the various dairy investment projects .

as a direct consequence of these foreign investments , 240 additional jobs have been created and 20,000 additional cows have been brought to south dakota .

using the rims ii multipliers for investment and employment , the foreign investments from eb - 5 immigrants have resulted in a total of 638 additional jobs and over $360 million in additional funds to the regionally targeted economy .

according to sdibi / dedr director joop bollen , the pilot program has afforded south dakota "a tremendous opportunity," not only because of the direct investments and multiplier effects , but because of the other investments made by the foreign investors .

according to director bollen , the attraction of foreign investors has had significant spillover effects into the restaurant and meat packing industries .

as a result , sdibi / dedr hopes to focus on attracting additional investments for its meat packing plants .

as such , director bollen stated that it was of paramount concern to the sdibi / dedr that uscis have sufficient resources to quickly adjudicate eb - 5 immigrant visa petitions .

if the adjudication process is too long , director bollen stated , then the opportunity cost may make a south dakota dairy investment unappealing to foreign investors .

canam enterprises is a private financial advising group which serves to structure , promote and administer the philadelphia industrial development center ( pidc ) regional center .

the group works in conjunction with the city of philadelphia through the pidc to facilitate the city development ( mainly in the city's shipyard area ) and provide investor credibility .

this public / private partnership was developed to aid the transition of philadelphia from a manufacture - based to a service based economy .

the main strategy has been to use collateralized loans to attract investments in industries that provide long - term full time employment .

by doing so the city hopes that investors will wish to invest in other projects and sectors of the city's economy .

when the philadelphia naval base was closed as part of the base closures of the 1970s , the base was handed over to the pidc for transformation to civilian use .

despite the city's efforts the shipyard was unable to remain competitive in the ship construction industry .

however , with the passage of requirements following the exxon valdez oil spill ( and the ongoing regulations from the jones - shafroth act ) , the civilian shipbuilding industry in the united states became economically viable again .

the federal government and the city of philadelphia combined to invest over $400 million into the philadelphia shipyard .

additionally norwegian shipbuilding companies were brought in as investors in the shipyard and provided valuable training and human capital to the shipyard .

since production restarted , eb - 5 investors have become increasingly important for providing funds to remove production bottlenecks .

a recent example includes the use of eb - 5 funds for the development of a more advanced painting technology for the ships .

philadelphia is one of the regional centers that has been most successful in attracting foreign investors through the eb - 5 visa .

there are approximately 60 eb - 5 visa investors in philadelphia who have invested a total of $75 million into the city .

additionally , there are around 30 petitions that are under review for other investment projects .

the lead official at canam enterprises told crs that while they believe the funds have been important to the city , the human capital the investors bring is equally important .

this official stated that the investors being brought to the united states represented highly competent entrepreneurs , who not only made investments in the city beyond their initial investment , but also facilitated greater economic activity through exchanges with their existing foreign networks .

