the kingdom of saudi arabia's relations with the united states , its stability , and its future trajectory are subjects of continuing congressional interest .

in particular , saudi leadership transitions , trends in global oil prices , saudi budget pressures and reform plans , aggressive transnational terrorist threats , assertive saudi foreign policies , and saudi - iranian tensions have fueled recent congressional discussions .

u.s. - saudi security cooperation and u.s. concern for the continuing global availability of saudi energy supplies continue to anchor official bilateral relations as they have for decades .

in this context , the trump administration's efforts to reinvigorate u.s. - saudi relations have drawn increased public attention and have generated debate .

previously , the obama administration had differed with saudi leaders over iran , the iranian nuclear program , and conflicts in syria , iraq , and yemen .

amid some continuing differences on these issues , bilateral ties have been defined since 2017 by arms sale proposals , yemen - related security cooperation , and shared concerns about iran , al qaeda , and the islamic state organization ( is , aka isil / isis or the arabic acronym da'esh ) .

from 2012 through 2016 , the obama administration notified congress of proposed foreign military sales to saudi arabia with a potential value of more than $45 billion .

president donald trump and saudi officials announced agreement on some of these sales and others during the president's may 2017 trip to the kingdom , as part of a package that may potentially be worth more than $110 billion .

this package of previously discussed and newly proposed defense sales is intended to address saudi needs for maritime and coastal security improvements , air force training and support , cybersecurity and communications upgrades , missile and air defenses , and enhanced border security and counterterrorism capabilities ( see " arms sales , security assistance , and training " below and appendix b ) .

king salman bin abd al aziz al saud ( age 82 ) succeeded his late half - brother king abdullah bin abd al aziz following the latter's death in january 2015 .

king salman later announced dramatic changes to succession arrangements left in place by king abdullah , surprising observers of the kingdom's politics .

king salman first replaced his half - brother crown prince muqrin bin abd al aziz with their nephew , prince mohammed bin nayef bin abd al aziz , who was then interior minister and counterterrorism chief .

the king then named his own son , prince mohammed bin salman bin abd al aziz , then 29 , as deputy crown prince and defense minister .

in june 2017 , prince mohammed bin nayef was relieved of his positions and prince mohammed bin salman ( age 33 ) was elevated further to the position of crown prince , placing him in line to succeed his father ( see figure 1 , figure 2 , and " leadership and succession " below ) .

both princes are members of the generation of grandsons of the kingdom's late founder , king abd al aziz bin abd al rahman al saud ( aka ibn saud ) .

the succession changes and crown prince mohammad bin salman's efforts to assert his role as the shaper of the kingdom's national security and economic policies have resulted in an apparent consolidation of authority under one individual and sub - branch of the family that is unprecedented in the kingdom since its founding .

shifts in saudi foreign policy toward a more assertive posture — typified by the kingdom's military operations in neighboring yemen and a series of regional moves intended to counteract iranian initiatives — have accompanied the post - 2015 leadership changes .

saudi leaders launched military operations in yemen following the early 2015 ouster of yemen's transitional government by the zaydi shia ansar allah ( aka houthi ) movement and backers of the late former yemeni president ali abdullah saleh ( see " conflict in yemen " below ) .

a u.s. - facilitated , saudi - led coalition air campaign has conducted strikes across the country since late march 2015 , coupled with a joint saudi and emirati ground campaign aimed at reversing houthi gains and compelling them to negotiate with u.n. - recognized transition leaders .

concerns about yemeni civilian deaths in saudi airstrikes , the operation's contribution to grave humanitarian conditions , and gains by al qaeda and islamic state supporters have led some members of congress and u.s. officials to urge all parties to seek a prompt settlement .

president obama maintained u.s. logistical support for saudi operations in yemen but decided in 2016 to reduce u.s. personnel support and limit certain u.s. arms transfers .

president trump has chosen to proceed with precision guided munition technology sales that the obama administration deferred .

in september 2018 , the trump administration certified conditions set by congress on saudi actions in yemen and renewed calls for a political solution .

a u.s. state department travel advisory issued in april 2018 warns that "rebel groups operating in yemen have fired long - range missiles into saudi arabia , specifically targeting populated areas and civilian infrastructure" and that "rebel forces in yemen fire artillery at saudi border towns and launch cross - border attacks against saudi military personnel. .

u.s. support to the kingdom's operations in yemen and saudi use of u.s. - origin weaponry has drawn new attention to congressionally reviewed arms sales and questions of authorization .

in the 114 th congress , some members scrutinized proposed sales of thousands of guided air - to - ground munitions and tanks to saudi arabia in the context of concerns about the saudi military's conduct in yemen ( see appendix d below ) .

in the 115 th congress , legislation has been enacted that prohibits the obligation or expenditure of u.s. funds for in - flight refueling operations of saudi and saudi - led coalition aircraft that are not conducting select types of operations if certain certifications cannot be made and maintained ( section 1290 of the fy2019 national defense authorization act , p.l .

115-232 , appendix d ) .

the provision is subject to an administration national security waiver .

a similar measure would place conditions on the transfer of any air - to - ground munitions to saudi arabia ( s.j.res .

40 ) , and , in june 2017 , the senate narrowly voted to reject a motion to further consider a joint resolution of disapproval ( s.j.res .

42 ) on proposed sales of precision guided munitions to the kingdom .

the house and senate also have considered resolutions ( h.con.res .

81 and s.j.res .

54 ) that would direct the president to end u.s. military support for saudi operations in yemen unless congress specifically authorizes the continuation of such support .

inside the kingdom , arrests of islamic state ( is ) supporters have continued since 2014 , as islamic state affiliates have claimed responsibility for a series of deadly attacks against saudi security forces and members of the kingdom's shia minority across the country ( see " the islamic state's campaign against the kingdom " below ) .

saudi authorities report having disrupted planned is attacks on government targets in 2017 and counted 34 terrorist attacks in 2016 , including an attempted is - claimed suicide bombing against the u.s. consulate general in jeddah .

saudi leaders and their is adversaries have reiterated their hostility toward each other since 2015 , with saudi leaders proposing new transnational counterterrorism cooperation and is leaders redeclaring war against the royal family , condemning official saudi clerics , and urging attacks inside the kingdom ( see " terrorism threats and bilateral cooperation " ) .

the current u.s. state department travel advisory for saudi arabia warns that "terrorist groups continue plotting possible attacks" and that "terrorists may attack with little or no warning. .

since 2011 , significant shifts in the political and economic landscape of the middle east have focused international attention on saudi domestic policy issues and reinvigorated social and political debates among saudis ( see " domestic issues " below ) .

these regional shifts , coupled with ongoing economic , social , and political changes in the kingdom , may make sensitive issues such as political reform , unemployment , education , human rights , corruption , religious freedom , and extremism more prominent in u.s. - saudi relations than in the past .

u.s. policy initiatives have long sought to help saudi leaders address economic and security challenges in ways consistent with u.s. interests .

recent joint u.s. - saudi diplomatic efforts to strengthen economic , educational , and interpersonal ties have focused on improving opportunities for the kingdom's young population .

tens of thousands of saudi students continue to pursue higher education in the united states , although numbers have declined in response to saudi government funding changes .

some nongovernment observers have called for a reassessment of u.s. - saudi relations amid the kingdom's ongoing military campaign in yemen .

they cite concern about human rights conditions in the kingdom , as well as resurgent questions about the relationship between religious proselytization by some saudis and the appeal of violent islamist extremism .

u.s. officials have called publicly for the kingdom to seek a negotiated settlement in yemen , allow peaceful expressions of dissent at home , and help fight extremism abroad .

any more strident official u.s. criticisms of the kingdom's policies traditionally remain subjects of private diplomatic engagement rather than official public discussion .

saudi concerns about u.s. leadership and policies in the middle east grew during the administrations of presidents george w. bush and barack obama , in parallel to u.s. concerns about saudi priorities and choices .

in particular , saudi leaders at times signaled their displeasure with u.s. policy approaches to egypt , israel and the palestinians , bahrain , iraq , syria , and iran .

saudi officials also opposed the changes to u.s. sovereign immunity law that were made by the 114 th congress through the justice against sponsors of terrorism act ( s. 2040 , p.l .

114-222 , aka jasta ) and have sought their amendment or repeal .

saudi official public responses to the joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) nuclear agreement with iran were initially relatively neutral , emphasizing elements of an agreement with iran that saudi arabia would support rather than expressing saudi endorsement of the jcpoa as negotiated and agreed .

king salman eventually endorsed the jcpoa during his september 2015 visit to washington , dc , but later called for the agreement to be reexamined and welcomed president trump's decision to withdraw the united states from the agreement .

saudi officials have engaged in civil nuclear cooperation talks with the united states and other countries since 2017 ( see " potential u.s. - saudi nuclear cooperation " ) .

policy differences and specific current disagreements notwithstanding , u.s. and saudi officials have long favored continuity over dramatic strategic shifts , despite some saudis' and americans' calls for fundamental changes to the bilateral relationship .

the trump administration , like its predecessors , engages the saudi government as a strategic partner to promote regional security and global economic stability .

the saudi government appears to view the united states as an important security partner .

at the end of president trump's may 2017 visit , the u.s. and saudi governments agreed to "a new strategic partnership for the 21 st century in the interest of both countries by formally announcing a joint strategic vision. .

with a new generation of saudi leaders assuming prominent positions in the kingdom and chaotic conditions persisting in the middle east region , some change in u.s. - saudi relations may prove inevitable .

the trump administration has thus far partnered with king salman and crown prince mohammed bin salman on their domestic policy initiatives and their approaches to iran , yemen , syria , and iraq .

the success or failure of these initiatives may have considerable significance for the bilateral relationship and consequences for international security for years to come .

saudi arabia is a monarchy governed in accordance with a 1992 basic law , and its legal system is largely rooted in the hanbali school of sunni islamic law as interpreted and applied by state - appointed religious judges .

an appointed , 150-member national shura council provides limited oversight and advisory input on some government decisions , and municipal councils with both appointed and elected members serve as fora for public input into local governance .

political decisionmaking in the kingdom long reflected a process of consensus - building among a closed elite presided over by senior members of the ruling al saud family .

in recent years , decisionmaking appears to have become more centralized under the authority of crown prince mohammed bin salman , with the apparent blessing of the king .

members of the conservative salafist sunni religious establishment have long shaped government decisionmaking on social and legal issues .

some representatives of this community have endorsed swift and dramatic changes to some social policies since 2015 , while others have been imprisoned for alleged foreign ties and possibly for opposing change .

the crown prince has presided over efforts ostensibly designed to root out corruption among elites , including prominent businessmen and members of the royal family .

these efforts may also have the effect of contributing to the centralization of power .

rumored discontent among other royal family members has not manifested in demonstrable public efforts to resist or undermine the crown prince's agenda .

at present , the balances of power , interests , and influence among the rising generation of leaders in the royal family are relatively opaque and appear to be evolving .

over time , saudi leaders have sought to manage vocal and public demands from the country's relatively young population for improved economic opportunities , limited political participation , and improved social conditions .

efforts to do so have been balanced with the royal family's commitments to protect the kingdom's conservative islamic traditions and address a host of regional and domestic security threats .

security forces monitor and tightly limit political and social activism in a domestic security environment that has been defined since the mid - 1990s by persistent terrorist threats and to a lesser extent since 2011 by anxiety about potential unrest and economic stagnation .

relations between some members of the shia minority population ( ~10% - 15% ) and the government remain tense , amid periodic localized confrontations between security forces , demonstrators , and armed youth in the oil - rich eastern province .

efforts to improve sectarian relations are complicated by anti - shia terrorism , official discrimination , and official saudi concerns about perceived iranian efforts to destabilize the kingdom by agitating saudi shia .

high prices in international oil markets amplified oil export earnings for most of the period from 2005 to 2014 , generating significant fiscal surpluses and leaving the country with sizeable foreign reserves and low levels of official debt .

after 2011 , the government launched large social spending programs to improve housing and infrastructure , raise public sector wages , expand education , and ease the burdens of unemployment .

this spending created new fiscal burdens , and state oil revenues decreased more than nonoil revenues grew from 2014 through 2017 .

at present , saudi leaders are simultaneously managing ambitious and politically sensitive fiscal consolidation and economic transformation initiatives .

the saudi arabian government states that it views al qaeda , al qaeda affiliates , the islamic state ( aka isis / isil or the arabic acronym da'esh ) , other salafist - jihadist groups , and their supporters as direct threats to saudi national security .

the u.s. government has described the saudi government as "a strong partner in regional security and counterterrorism efforts," and has reported that the saudi government has taken increased action since 2014 to prevent saudis from travelling abroad in support of extremist groups or otherwise supporting armed extremists .

in 2016 , the saudi ministry of interior reported that there were "2,093 saudis fighting with terrorist organizations in conflict zones , including isis , with more than 70 percent of them in syria. .

saudi and u.s. officials agree that the islamic state and al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) — based in yemen and led by saudi nationals — pose continuing terrorist threats to the kingdom .

from 2014 through 2017 , the aggressive expansion of the islamic state in neighboring iraq and in syria and the group's attacks inside saudi arabia created alarm in the kingdom .

following the january 2016 execution by the saudi government of dozens of convicted aqap suspects , including some prominent ideologues , al qaeda leader ayman al zawahiri released a statement condemning the kingdom and calling for revenge .

some observers , including some members of congress , have expressed concern about the apparent strengthening of aqap during the course of the ongoing conflict in yemen .

persistent terrorist threats appear to be one factor that has led the saudi government to seek stronger partnerships with the united states .

since 2017 , saudi officials have announced plans to contribute to stabilization efforts in syria and have reengaged with iraqi leaders in line with u.s. preferences .

saudi leaders also seek support from their regional neighbors and from the united states to confront what they describe as efforts by iran and their hezbollah allies to destabilize yemen through support for the ansar allah / houthi movement ( see " conflict in yemen " below ) .

u.s. training and security support to saudi arabia remains overwhelmingly saudi funded via foreign military sales and other contracts , reflecting saudi ability to pay for costly programs ( and limiting opportunities for congress to affect cooperation through appropriations legislation ) .

saudi arabia receives roughly $10,000 per year in international military education and training ( imet ) assistance authorized by the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

this nominal amount makes saudi arabia eligible for a discount on training that it purchases through the foreign military sales program .

the bush administration requested limited imet funding for saudi arabia from fy2003 through fy2009 , and the obama administration similarly requested annually that congress appropriate a small amount of imet assistance .

successive administrations have argued that the discount supports continued saudi participation in u.s. training programs , which in turn supports the maintenance of important military - to - military relationships and improves saudi capabilities .

president trump's fy2018 budget request sought $10,000 in imet for saudi arabia , but for fy2019 did not specifically request the funds ( without explanation ) .

the senate appropriations committee report on the fy2019 state department and foreign operations appropriations bill ( s. 3108 , s.rept .

115-282 ) recommends that $10,000 in imet assistance be provided for saudi arabia .

in some past years , congress enacted prohibitions on imet and other foreign assistance to the kingdom in annual appropriations legislation , subject to waiver provisions .

the george w. bush and obama administrations subsequently issued national security waivers enabling the assistance to continue .

saudi officials were privately critical of the congressional prohibitions and appear to prefer to avoid contentious public debate over u.s. foreign assistance , arms sales , and security cooperation .

in 2016 , the senate appropriations committee narrowly rejected a proposed committee amendment to the senate version of the fy2017 foreign operations appropriations act ( s. 3117 ) that sought to condition the provision of fy2017 imet assistance to saudi arabia on certification of yemen - and terrorism - related criteria .

saudi arabia was the largest u.s. trading partner in the middle east by overall value in 2017 .

according to the u.s. international trade administration , saudi exports to the united states in 2017 were worth more than $18.8 billion ( down from the 2008 value of $54.8 billion ) .

in 2017 , u.s. exports to saudi arabia were valued at more than $16.3 billion ( up more than $6 billion since 2009 ) .

to a considerable extent , the high value of u.s. - saudi trade is dictated by u.s. imports of hydrocarbons from saudi arabia and u.s. exports of weapons , machinery , and vehicles to saudi arabia .

fluctuations in the volume and value of u.s. - saudi oil trade account for declines in the value of saudi exports to the united states in some recent years .

declines in global oil prices from 2014 through 2017 and increases in u.s. domestic oil production had pronounced effects on the value of saudi exports to the united states .

according to the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , as of september 2018 , saudi arabia was the second - largest source of u.s crude oil imports , providing an average of 948 thousand barrels per day of the 7.6 million barrels per day ( mbd ) in gross u.s. crude imports , behind canada .

close u.s. - saudi security cooperation continues in parallel with work to overcome u.s. - saudi differences of opinion on some regional security threats .

the latter years of president obama's administration were characterized by reports of tension between u.s. and saudi leaders on key issues , most notably the conflict in syria , iran's nuclear program , and u.s. policy toward egypt .

many of those issues — in addition to political - military developments in yemen and campaigns against the islamic state and other violent extremists — remain prominent on the u.s. - saudi policy agenda and were identified as issues of interest during president trump's may 2017 visit to the kingdom and crown prince mohammed bin salman's march 2018 visit to the united states .

president trump and king salman bin abd al aziz agreed to a "strategic partnership for the 21 st century" during the president's may 2017 trip to riyadh .

king salman and president obama had previously formed such a partnership in september 2015 .

president trump and king salman further agreed to a "joint strategic vision for the kingdom of saudi arabia and the united states of america" and announced plans for a "strategic joint consultative group" that is intended to meet "at least once a year , alternating between the two countries" to review bilateral cooperation .

king salman and crown prince mohammad bin salman have actively pursued saudi interests across the middle east since 2015 , challenging iran , reopening dialogue with iraq , seeking to isolate qatar , and fighting an ongoing war in yemen .

this saudi activism in regional affairs has created new questions for the trump administration and congress to consider , including with regard to defense cooperation .

as described above , saudi arabia has close defense and security ties with the united states anchored for decades by long - standing military training programs and supplemented by high - value weapons sales , critical infrastructure security cooperation , and counterterrorism initiatives .

joint security ties would be difficult and costly for either side to fully break or replace .

while saudi and u.s. officials have taken steps to maintain and deepen these ties , differences in preferred tactics and methods may continue to complicate bilateral coordination on regional security issues , including on iran and action against the islamic state and other terrorist groups .

u.s. willingness to arm and train saudi security forces may reduce potential burdens on u.s. forces , but may also more deeply entangle the united states in dilemmas or disputes in cases where u.s. - equipped or - trained saudi forces are deployed .

in recent years , u.s. policymakers have engaged with an emerging class of saudi leaders during a particularly challenging and tumultuous period for the kingdom and its neighbors .

islamic state attacks , leadership transition and consolidation in the kingdom , the collapse of the saudi - backed transitional government in neighboring yemen , oil market trends , russian military intervention in syria , and iranian nuclear policy and regional activism have all created pressure on saudi leaders and tested u.s. - saudi relations .

saudi arabia's pursuit of an independent and assertive course on regional security issues and its leaders' ambitious plans to transform the kingdom's economy and fiscal base reflect these concerns and offer both new opportunities for u.s. - saudi partnership and shared risks .

over time , saudi and u.s. officials have periodically attempted to articulate a shared "strategic vision" that includes , but extends beyond , defense and counterterrorism partnership .

as the kingdom repositions itself as a hub for global investment , commercial ties and investment opportunities may forge new bonds between saudis and americans , even if u.s. firms may not enjoy the privileged role they once held in the increasingly open saudi market .

in june 2017 , former u.s .

ambassador to saudi arabia joseph westphal identified education and judicial reform as potential areas for expanded u.s. - saudi cooperation .

changes to succession arrangements have elevated crown prince mohammed bin salman and raised the prospect that , while still in his 30s , he could succeed his father and potentially remain as monarch for decades .

the crown prince's economic and social reform proposals would overturn decades of precedent , and he has taken dramatic steps against high - profile individuals accused of corruption and / or abuse of power , including fellow royal family members .

the changes unfolding may eliminate uncertainty about the consolidation of power among the next generation of saudi leaders , but also may signal an end to the system of ostensibly consensus - based rule among the al saud family that has prevailed since the 1960s .

successive u.s .

administrations have cultivated ties to different royal actors and security entities in saudi arabia in an effort to build a broad - based partnership with different power centers .

consolidated control could alter the dynamics of u.s. - saudi cooperation , particularly with regard to saudi purchases of military equipment .

alternatively , if the crown prince's initiatives stall or fail , recent events could mark the beginning of a more volatile period in the kingdom and in u.s. - saudi relations , with varying and potentially serious economic and security consequences .

if past patterns in the bilateral relationship prevail , leaders on both sides may seek to maintain u.s. - saudi solidarity , while managing points of friction and resisting calls from some parties on both sides for a more fundamental reevaluation of a productive , if imperfect , partnership .

congress may continue to shape bilateral relations through its oversight of u.s. - saudi security cooperation and its engagement on regional economic and diplomatic policy issues .

appendix a .

historical background the modern kingdom of saudi arabia is the third state established in the arabian peninsula since the end of the 18 th century based on the hereditary rule of members of the al saud family .

in the mid - 18 th century , a local alliance developed between the al saud and the members of a puritanical sunni islamic religious movement led by a cleric named mohammed ibn abd al wahhab .

alliances between the al saud family and supporters of abd al wahhab ( referred to by some as wahhabis ) built two states in the arabian peninsula during the next century .

each eventually collapsed under pressure from outside powers and inter - and intrafamily rivalries .

during the first quarter of the 20 th century , an al saud chieftain named abd al aziz ibn abd al rahman al saud ( commonly referred to as ibn saud ) used force to unify much of the arabian peninsula under a restored al saud state .

ibn saud's forces overcame numerous tribal rivals with the support of an armed wahhabi contingent known as the ikhwan ( or brotherhood ) , and , at times , with the financial and military backing of the british government .

by 1932 , king abd al aziz and his armies had crushed an ikhwan revolt , consolidated control over most of the arabian peninsula , and declared the establishment of the kingdom of saudi arabia .

six of ibn saud's sons — kings saud , faisal , khaled , fahd , abdullah , and salman — have succeeded him as rulers of the saudi kingdom during the subsequent eight decades .

this era has been dominated by the development and export of the kingdom's massive oil resources , the resulting socioeconomic transformation of the country , and accompanying religious and cultural debates spurred by rapid change .

during this period , al saud rulers have managed a complex consensus - based system of governance , balancing the various interests of tribal , religious , regional , political , and economic constituencies .

a series of agreements , statements by successive u.s .

administrations , arms sales , military training arrangements , and military deployments have demonstrated a strong u.s. security commitment to the saudi monarchy since the 1940s .

that security commitment was built on shared economic interests and antipathy to communism and was tested by regional conflict during the cold war .

it has survived the terrorism - induced strains of the post - cold war era relatively intact , and has continued as new arms sales to saudi arabia — the largest in u.s. history — are implemented .

transition to a new generation of leadership in the al saud family , evolution in the saudi economy , and instability in the regional security environment may continue to create challenges and opportunities for the u.s. - saudi relationship .

appendix b .

proposed major u.s. defense sales to saudi arabia appendix c. saudi arabia and inquiries into the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 the report of the congressional joint inquiry into intelligence community activities before and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , released in december 2002 , brought attention to the alleged role of saudi arabia in supporting terrorism .

in the 900-page report , a chapter on alleged foreign support for the september 11 hijackers was redacted virtually in its entirety — part four of the report , often referred to as "the 28 pages" ( actually 29 ) — because executive branch officials determined at the time that its public release was contrary to u.s. national security interests .

the congressional joint inquiry's report stated that the committee had "made no final determinations as to the reliability or sufficiency of the information regarding these issues [alleged foreign support for the hijackers] that was found contained in fbi and cia documents .

it was not the task of this joint inquiry to conduct the kind of extensive investigation that would be required to determine the true significance of such alleged support to the hijackers. .

u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies subsequently investigated information in the redacted portion of the report further .

some information reportedly remains under investigation .

in the years since , speculation and periodic media reporting focused on the degree to which the redacted pages may have addressed the question of whether or not there was some degree of official saudi complicity in the september 11 attacks .

for years , some people who claimed to have read the formerly classified sections of the report said it addressed some saudi nationals' links with individuals involved in the attacks .

in 2003 , the saudi government appealed to u.s. authorities to publish the redacted pages so as to enable saudi arabia to rebut related allegations .

on april 19 , 2016 , president barack obama stated that he had asked director of national intelligence james clapper to review the redacted pages of the congressional joint inquiry's report for potential release .

on july 15 , 2016 , the senate select committee on intelligence released a declassified version of part four of the congressional joint inquiry as well as two declassified pages from the executive summary of the september 2005 joint fbi - cia intelligence report assessing the nature and extent of saudi government support of terrorism .

the latter report focused in part on investigating information discussed in the 2002 joint inquiry and was originally submitted as required by the classified annex of the intelligence authorization act for fy2004 .

the "28 pages" of the congressional joint inquiry released in 2016 address a number of reports that individual saudi nationals had contact with and may have provided assistance to some of the september 11 , 2001 , hijackers .

specifically , the pages discuss information that suggested that ( emphasis added ) "…while in the united states , some of the september 11 hijackers were in contact with , and received support or assistance from , individuals who may be connected to the saudi government .

there is information , primarily from fbi sources , that at least two of those individuals were alleged by some to be saudi intelligence officers .

the joint inquiry's review confirmed that the intelligence community also has information , much of it which has yet be independently verified , indicating that individuals associated with the saudi government in the united states may have other ties to al - qa'ida and other terrorist groups. .

as noted above , the pages of the 2002 report discuss allegations that were then under consideration and not investigatory conclusions of law enforcement or intelligence officials .

the declassified pages from the september 2005 fbi - cia report state that , "there is no evidence that either the saudi government or members of the saudi royal family knowingly provided support for the attacks of 11 september 2001 or that they had foreknowledge of terrorist operations in the kingdom or elsewhere. .

the executive summary of the joint fbi - cia report further states that "there is evidence that official saudi entities , [redacted portion] , and associated nongovernmental organizations provide financial and logistical support to individuals in the united states and around the world , some of whom are associated with terrorism - related activity .

the saudi government and many of its agencies have been infiltrated and exploited by individuals associated with or sympathetic to al - qa'ida. .

the 2004 final report of the bipartisan national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( aka "the 9 / 11 commission" ) states that the commission "found no evidence that the saudi government as an institution or senior saudi officials individually funded [al qaeda]. .

the report also states that saudi arabia "was a place where al qaeda raised money directly from individuals and through charities," and indicates that "charities with significant saudi government sponsorship" may have diverted funding to al qaeda .

in july 2016 , saudi foreign minister adel al jubeir argued that the pages' release exonerated the saudi government with regard to allegations that it supported or had foreknowledge of the september 11 attacks , saying that "when the appropriate agencies , the 9 / 11 commission and the fbi and cia investigated those leads and came out with their conclusions they said that 'there's no there there.' .

the saudi embassy in washington , dc , has consistently responded to news reports about the so - called 28 pages' contents by citing some of the findings of later investigations and noting the dismissal of some lawsuits against the kingdom .

appendix d. legislative developments developments in the 114 th congress when the obama administration informally notified congress of a proposed sale of precision guided munitions ( pgms ) to saudi arabia , some senators sought to delay its formal notification .

after the formal notification in november 2015 , senate foreign relations committee leaders jointly requested that the administration notify congress 30 days prior to associated shipments .

no related joint resolutions of disapproval of this proposed sale were introduced during the 30-calendar - day consideration period outlined in the aeca ( 22 u.s.c .

2776 ) , but the delay and additional notification request demonstrated congressional concern .

then , in april 2016 , legislation was introduced that sought to place conditions on future proposed sale notifications , previously approved sales , or transfers of pgms to saudi arabia ( s.j.res .

32 and h.j.res .

90 ) .

proposed amendments to fy2017 defense legislation would have added some similar conditions on the use of funds to implement sales of pgms ( fy2017 national defense authorization act , s. 2943 ) or prohibited the transfer of cluster munitions to saudi arabia ( defense appropriations act , h.r .

5293 ) .

the senate did not consider the pgm amendment submitted in conjunction with its consideration of the fy2017 ndaa , but the house narrowly defeated the saudi cluster munitions prohibition amendment in a june 2016 house floor vote .

saudi use of u.s. cluster munitions in yemen has been reported , and unnamed u.s. officials have indicated that the obama administration placed a hold on further cluster munitions transfers .

in august 2016 , the obama administration notified congress of a proposed sale of m1a2s tanks to saudi arabia , and some lawmakers wrote to request that president obama withdraw the proposal , citing concerns about yemen .

in september 2016 , joint resolutions of disapproval of the proposed tank sale were introduced in the senate ( s.j.res .

39 ) and house ( h.j.res .

98 ) .

u.s. tanks form the core of the royal saudi land forces fleet , and a series of contracts concluded since 2006 has seen saudi m1 series tanks first sold to the kingdom in the 1990s upgraded to the m1a2s standard .

on september 21 , 2016 , the senate voted to table a motion to discharge the senate foreign relations committee from further consideration of s.j.res .

39 ( 71-27 , record vote 145 ) .

in the wake of an october 2016 saudi airstrike on a funeral hall in sana'a that killed 140 people , the obama administration announced that it was initiating a review of u.s. security assistance to saudi arabia .

in december 2016 , press reports cited obama administration officials as stating that a planned commercial sale of precision guided munitions technology , including more than 16,000 air - to - ground munitions kits , would not proceed and that u.s. intelligence sharing would be further limited in favor of enhanced training for the saudi air force .

developments in the 115 th congress the trump administration has attempted to balance its condemnation of the houthis and their iranian backers with more direct calls for the coalition to ease its restrictions on access to yemen , limit civilian casualties , and pursue negotiations .

some lawmakers have suggested that u.s. arms sales and military support to the coalition have enabled alleged violations of international humanitarian law , while others have argued that u.s. support to the coalition improves its effectiveness and helps minimize civilian casualties .

some senators have focused on yemen - related questions in considering nominations , some members of both chambers have conducted enhanced oversight , and congress has considered but has not enacted proposals to curtail or condition u.s. defense sales to saudi arabia or to prohibit the use of funds for coalition support operations .

legislation seeking to place conditions on future transfers or sales of precision guided munitions technology was modified and reintroduced in the 115 th congress ( s.j.res .

40 and h.j.res .

104 ) and sought to condition the sale or transfer of munitions on a presidential certification that the saudi government and coalition were taking "all feasible precautions" to protect civilians , "demonstrable efforts" to facilitate flows of aid and goods , and "effective measures" to target islamic state and aqap terrorists .

neither resolution has been considered , but their formulations have influenced other legislation , including section 1290 of the fy2019 ndaa , which requires a similar set of certifications as a condition for the use of fy2019 defense funding for refueling support to saudi and coalition aircraft engaged in certain missions in yemen .

on march 19 , 2017 , just prior to his visit to the kingdom , president trump notified congress that he is proceeding with three proposed direct commercial sales of precision guided munitions technology deferred by the obama administration , subject to congressional review .

the proposed sales would include equipment and services related to joint direct attack munitions ( jdams ) , paveway laser - guided munitions kits , and programmable bomb fuzes .

pursuant to section 36 ( c ) of the arms export control act , the executive branch may proceed with a proposed direct commercial sale case 30 days after formally notifying congress .

legislation in the house ( h.j.res .

102 ) and senate ( s.j.res .

42 ) was proposed to disapprove of the three proposed sales .

on june 13 , the senate voted to reject a motion to discharge the senate foreign relations committee from further consideration of s.j.res .

42 ( 47-53 , record vote 143 ) .

on march 20 , 2018 , the senate voted to table a motion to discharge the senate foreign relations committee from further consideration of s.j.res .

54 , a joint resolution that would direct the president to remove u.s. forces from "hostilities in or affecting" yemen ( except for those u.s. forces engaged in counterterrorism operations directed at al qaeda or associated forces ) .

in may , the senate foreign relations committee reported s.j.res .

58 to the senate ; it would prohibit the obligation or expenditure of u.s. funds for in - flight refueling operations of saudi and saudi - led coalition aircraft that are not conducting select types of operations if certain certifications cannot be made and maintained at 30- , 180- , and 360-day intervals .

the joint resolution identified several certification criteria , although , reported as amended by the committee , it would enable the secretary of state to waive the certification requirement for national security purposes if the secretary provides an unclassified explanatory justification to the appropriate committees .

the joint resolution also would require a report on , among other things , united states objectives in yemen and a detailed strategy to accomplish those objectives .

the senate armed services committee incorporated the provisions of the senate foreign relations committee - reported text of s.j.res .

58 as section 1266 of the version of the fy2019 john s. mccain national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) that it reported to the senate on june 5 , 2018 ( s. 2987 ) .

the provision was modified further and passed by both the house and senate as section 1290 of the conference version of the fy2019 ndaa ( p.l .

115-91 ) .

the potential restrictions on the use of u.s. funds for in - flight refueling of coalition aircraft do not apply to certain types of operations , including missions related to al qaeda and the islamic state or "related to countering the transport , assembly , or employment of ballistic missiles or components in yemen. .

under the modified version , the administration must certify that the saudi and emirati governments are undertaking an urgent and good faith effort to support diplomatic efforts to end the civil war in yemen ; appropriate measures to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in yemen by increasing access for yemenis to food , fuel , medicine , and medical evacuation , including through the appropriate use of yemen's red sea ports , including the port of hudaydah , the airport in sana'a , and external border crossings with saudi arabia ; and demonstrable actions to reduce the risk of harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure resulting from military operations of the government of saudi arabia and the government of the united arab emirates in yemen , including by ( 1 ) complying with applicable agreements and laws regulating defense articles purchased or transferred from the united states , and ( 2 ) taking appropriate steps to avoid disproportionate harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure with specific regard to saudi arabia , the administration also must certify that "the government of saudi arabia is undertaking appropriate actions to reduce any unnecessary delays to shipments associated with secondary inspection and clearance processes other than unvim. .

the administration may waive the certification requirement if certain explanatory submissions are made .

reporting and strategy submission requirements also were included in the final version .

on september 12 , 2018 , secretary of state mike pompeo announced that the saudi and emirati governments are "undertaking demonstrable actions to reduce the risk of harm to civilians" in yemen .

senator robert menendez , the ranking member on the senate foreign relations committee , has refused to consent to formal congressional notification of a potential u.s. sale of precision guided munitions to saudi arabia and the united arab emirates .

in a june 28 letter to secretary of state pompeo and secretary of defense mattis , senator menendez said , i am not confident that these weapons sales will be utilized strategically as effective leverage to push back on iran's actions in yemen , assist our partners in their own self - defense , or drive the parties toward a political settlement that saves lives and mitigates humanitarian suffering… .

even worse , i am concerned that our policies are enabling perpetuation of a conflict that has resulted in the world's worst humanitarian crisis .

several senators also submitted an amendment to the fy2019 defense department appropriations act ( h.r .

6157 ) that would have prohibited the use of funds made available by the act to support the saudi - led coalition operations in yemen until the secretary of defense certified in writing to congress that the coalition air campaign "does not violate the principles of distinction and proportionality within the rules for the protection of civilians. .

the provision would not have applied to support for ongoing counterterrorism operations against al qaeda and the islamic state in yemen .

the amendment was not considered after an objection on the senate floor .

