the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) is an interagency committee that serves the president in overseeing the national security implications of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in the economy .

since its inception , cfius has operated at the nexus of shifting concepts of national security and major changes in technology , especially relative to various notions of national eco nomic security , and a changing global economic order that is marked in part by emerging economies such as china that are playing a more active role in the global economy .

as a basic premise , the u.s. historical approach to international investment has aimed to establish an open and rules - based international economic system that is consistent across countries and in line with u.s. economic and national security interests .

this policy also has fundamentally maintained that fdi has positive net benefits for the u.s. and global economy , except in certain cases in which national security concerns outweigh other considerations and for prudential reasons .

recently , some policymakers argued that certain foreign investment transactions , particularly by entities owned or controlled by a foreign government , investments with leading - edge or foundational technologies , or investments that may compromise personally identifiable information , are affecting u.s. national economic security .

as a result , they supported greater cfius scrutiny of foreign investment transactions , including a mandatory approval process for some transactions .

some policymakers also argued that the cfius review process should have a more robust economic component , possibly even to the extent of an industrial policy - type approach that uses the cfius national security review process to protect and promote certain industrial sectors in the economy .

others argued , however , that the cfius review process should be expanded to include certain transactions that had not previously been reviewed , but that cfius' overall focus should remain fairly narrow .

established by an executive order of president ford in 1975 , cfius initially operated in relative obscurity .

according to a treasury department memorandum , the committee was established in order to "dissuade congress from enacting new restrictions" on foreign investment , as a result of growing concerns over the rapid increase in investments by organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) countries in american portfolio assets ( treasury securities , corporate stocks and bonds ) , and to respond to concerns of some that much of the opec investments were being driven by political , rather than by economic , motives .

thirty years later in 2006 , public and congressional concerns about the proposed purchase of commercial port operations of the british - owned peninsular and oriental steam navigation company ( p&o ) in six u.s. ports by dubai ports world ( dp world ) sparked a firestorm of criticism and congressional activity during the 109 th congress concerning cfius and the manner in which it operated .

as a result of the attention by the public and congress , dp world officials decided to sell off the u.s. port operations to an american owner .

on december 11 , 2006 , dp world officials announced that a unit of aig global investment group , a new york - based asset management company with large assets , but no experience in port operations , had acquired the u.s. port operations for an undisclosed amount .

the dp world transaction revealed that the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks fundamentally altered the viewpoint of some members of congress regarding the role of foreign investment in the economy and the potential impact of such investment on u.s. national security .

some members argued that this change in perspective required a reassessment of the role of foreign investment in the economy and of the implications of corporate ownership on activities that fall under the rubric of critical infrastructure .

the emergence of state - owned enterprises as commercial economic actors has raised additional concerns about whose interests and whose objectives such firms are pursuing in their foreign investment activities .

more than 25 bills were introduced in the second session of the 109 th congress that addressed various aspects of foreign investment following the proposed dp world transaction .

in the first session of the 110 th congress , congress passed , and president bush signed , the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 ( finsa ) ( p.l .

110-49 ) , which altered the cfius process in order to enable greater oversight by congress and increased transparency and reporting by the committee on its decisions .

in addition , the act broadened the definition of national security and required greater scrutiny by cfius of certain types of foreign direct investment .

not all members were satisfied with the law: some members argued that the law remained deficient in reviewing investment by foreign governments through sovereign wealth funds ( swfs ) .

also left unresolved were issues concerning the role of foreign investment in the nation's overall security framework and the methods that are used to assess the impact of foreign investment on the nation's defense industrial base , critical infrastructure , and homeland security .

president ford's 1975 executive order established the basic structure of cfius , and directed that the "representative" of the secretary of the treasury be the chairman of the committee .

the executive order also stipulated that the committee would have "the primary continuing responsibility within the executive branch for monitoring the impact of foreign investment in the united states , both direct and portfolio , and for coordinating the implementation of united states policy on such investment. .

in particular , cfius was directed to ( 1 ) arrange for the preparation of analyses of trends and significant developments in foreign investment in the united states ; ( 2 ) provide guidance on arrangements with foreign governments for advance consultations on prospective major foreign governmental investment in the united states ; ( 3 ) review investment in the united states which , in the judgment of the committee , might have major implications for u.s. national interests ; and ( 4 ) consider proposals for new legislation or regulations relating to foreign investment as may appear necessary .

president ford's executive order also stipulated that information submitted "in confidence shall not be publicly disclosed" and that information submitted to cfius be used "only for the purpose of carrying out the functions and activities" of the order .

in addition , the secretary of commerce was directed to perform a number of activities , including ( 1 ) obtaining , consolidating , and analyzing information on foreign investment in the united states ; ( 2 ) improving the procedures for the collection and dissemination of information on such foreign investment ; ( 3 ) observing foreign investment in the united states ; ( 4 ) preparing reports and analyses of trends and of significant developments in appropriate categories of such investment ; ( 5 ) compiling data and preparing evaluation of significant transactions ; and ( 6 ) submitting to the committee on foreign investment in the united states appropriate reports , analyses , data , and recommendations as to how information on foreign investment can be kept current .

the executive order , however , raised questions among various observers and government officials who doubted that federal agencies had the legal authority to collect the types of data that were required by the order .

as a result , congress and the president sought to clarify this issue , and in the following year president ford signed the international investment survey act of 1976 .

the act gave the president "clear and unambiguous authority" to collect information on "international investment. .

in addition , the act authorized "the collection and use of information on direct investments owned or controlled directly or indirectly by foreign governments or persons , and to provide analyses of such information to the congress , the executive agencies , and the general public. .

by 1980 , some members of congress raised concerns that cfius was not fulfilling its mandate .

between 1975 and 1980 , for instance , the committee met only 10 times and seemed unable to decide whether it should respond to the political or the economic aspects of foreign direct investment in the united states .

one critic of the committee argued in a congressional hearing in 1979 that , "the committee has been reduced over the last four years to a body that only responds to the political aspects or the political questions that foreign investment in the united states poses and not with what we really want to know about foreign investments in the united states , that is: is it good for the economy ? .

from 1980 to 1987 , cfius investigated a number of foreign investment transactions , mostly at the request of the department of defense .

in 1983 , for instance , a japanese firm sought to acquire a u.s. specialty steel producer .

the department of defense subsequently classified the metals produced by the firm because they were used in the production of military aircraft , which caused the japanese firm to withdraw its offer .

another japanese company attempted to acquire a u.s. firm in 1985 that manufactured specialized ball bearings for the military .

the acquisition was completed after the japanese firm agreed that production would be maintained in the united states .

in a similar case in 1987 , the defense department objected to a proposed acquisition of the computer division of a u.s. multinational company by a french firm because of classified work conducted by the computer division .

the acquisition proceeded after the classified contracts were reassigned to the u.s. parent company .

in 1988 , amid concerns over foreign acquisition of certain types of u.s. firms , particularly by japanese firms , congress approved the exon - florio amendment to the defense production act , which specified the basic review process of foreign investments .

the statute granted the president the authority to block proposed or pending foreign "mergers , acquisitions , or takeovers" of "persons engaged in interstate commerce in the united states" that threatened to impair the national security .

congress directed , however , that the president could invoke this authority only after he had concluded that ( 1 ) other u.s. laws were inadequate or inappropriate to protect the national security ; and ( 2 ) "credible evidence" existed that the foreign interest exercising control might take action that threatened to impair u.s. national security .

this same standard was maintained in an update to the exon - florio provision in 2007 , the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 , and in firrma .

after three years of often contentious negotiations between congress and the reagan administration , congress passed and president reagan signed the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 .

during consideration of the exon - florio proposal as an amendment to the omnibus trade bill , debate focused on three controversial issues: ( 1 ) what constitutes foreign control of a u.s .

firm ? .

 ; ( 2 ) how should national security be defined ? .

 ; and ( 3 ) which types of economic activities should be targeted for a cfius review ? .

of these issues , the most controversial and far - reaching was the lack of a definition of national security .

as originally drafted , the provision would have considered investments which affected the "national security and essential commerce" of the united states .

the term "essential commerce" was the focus of intense debate between congress and the reagan administration .

the treasury department , headed by secretary james baker , objected to the exon - florio amendment , and the administration vetoed the first version of the omnibus trade legislation , in part due to its objections to the language in the measure regarding "national security and essential commerce. .

the reagan administration argued that the language would broaden the definition of national security beyond the traditional concept of military / defense to one which included a strong economic component .

administration witnesses argued against this aspect of the proposal and eventually succeeded in prodding congress to remove the term "essential commerce" from the measure and narrow substantially the factors the president must consider in his determination .

the final exon - florio provision was included as section 5021 of the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 .

the provision originated in bills reported by the commerce committee in the senate and the energy and commerce committee in the house , but the measure was transferred to the senate banking committee as a result of a dispute over jurisdictional responsibilities .

through executive order 12661 , president reagan implemented provisions of the omnibus trade act .

in the executive order , president reagan delegated his authority to administer the exon - florio provision to cfius , particularly to conduct reviews , undertake investigations , and make recommendations , although the statute itself does not specifically mention cfius .

as a result of president reagan's action , cfius was transformed from an administrative body with limited authority to review and analyze data on foreign investment to an important component of u.s. foreign investment policy with a broad mandate and significant authority to advise the president on foreign investment transactions and to recommend that some transactions be suspended or blocked .

in 1990 , president bush directed the china national aero - technology import and export corporation ( catic ) to divest its acquisition of mamco manufacturing , a seattle - based firm producing metal parts and assemblies for aircraft , because of concerns that catic might gain access to technology through mamco that it would otherwise have to obtain under an export license .

part of congress's motivation in adopting the exon - florio provision apparently arose from concerns that foreign takeovers of u.s. firms could not be stopped unless the president declared a national emergency or regulators invoked federal antitrust , environmental , or securities laws .

through the exon - florio provision , congress attempted to strengthen the president's hand in conducting foreign investment policy , while limiting its own role as a means of emphasizing that , as much as possible , the commercial nature of investment transactions should be free from political considerations .

congress also attempted to balance public concerns about the economic impact of certain types of foreign investment with the nation's long - standing international commitment to maintaining an open and receptive environment for foreign investment .

furthermore , congress did not intend to have the exon - florio provision alter the generally open foreign investment climate of the country or to have it inhibit foreign direct investment in industries that could not be considered to be of national security interest .

at the time , some analysts believed the provision could potentially widen the scope of industries that fell under the national security rubric .

cfius , however , is not free to establish an independent approach to reviewing foreign investment transactions , but operates under the authority of the president and reflects his attitudes and policies .

as a result , the discretion cfius uses to review and to investigate foreign investment cases reflects policy guidance from the president .

foreign investors also are constrained by legislation that bars foreign direct investment in such industries as maritime , aircraft , banking , resources , and power .

generally , these sectors were closed to foreign investors prior to passage of the exon - florio provision in order to prevent public services and public interest activities from falling under foreign control , primarily for national defense purposes .

in 1992 , congress amended the exon - florio statute through section 837 ( a ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1993 ( p.l .

102-484 ) .

known as the "byrd" amendment after the amendment's sponsor , senator byrd , the provision requires cfius to investigate proposed mergers , acquisitions , or takeovers in cases where two criteria are met: ( 1 ) the acquirer is controlled by or acting on behalf of a foreign government ; and ( 2 ) the acquisition results in control of a person engaged in interstate commerce in the united states that could affect the national security of the united states .

this amendment came under scrutiny by the 109 th congress as a result of the dp world transaction .

many members of congress and others believed that this amendment required cfius to undertake a full 45-day investigation of the transaction because dp world was "controlled by or acting on behalf of a foreign government. .

the dp world acquisition , however , exposed a sharp rift between what some members apparently believed the amendment directed cfius to do and how the members of cfius interpreted the amendment .

in particular , some members of congress apparently interpreted the amendment to direct cfius to conduct a mandatory 45-day investigation if the foreign firm involved in a transaction is owned or controlled by a foreign government .

representatives of cfius argued they interpreted the amendment to mean that a 45-day investigation was discretionary and not mandatory .

in the case of the dp world acquisition , cfius representatives argued they had concluded as a result of an extensive review of the proposed acquisition prior to the case being formally filed with cfius and during the then - existing 30-day review that the dp world case did not warrant a full 45-day investigation .

they conceded that the case met the first criterion under the byrd amendment , because dp world was controlled by a foreign government , but that it did not meet the second part of the requirement , because cfius had concluded during the 30-day review that the transaction "could not affect the national security. .

the intense public and congressional reaction that arose from the proposed dubai ports world acquisition spurred the bush administration in late 2006 to make an important administrative change in the way cfius reviewed foreign investment transactions .

cfius and president bush approved the acquisition of lucent technologies , inc. by the french - based alcatel sa , which was completed on december 1 , 2006 .

before the transaction was approved by cfius , however , alcatel - lucent was required to agree to a national security arrangement , known as a special security arrangement , or ssa , that restricts alcatel's access to sensitive work done by lucent's research arm , bell labs , and the communications infrastructure in the united states .

the most controversial feature of this arrangement was that it allowed cfius to reopen a review of a transaction and to overturn its approval at any time if cfius believed the companies "materially fail to comply" with the terms of the arrangement .

this marked a significant change in the cfius process .

prior to this transaction , cfius reviews and investigations were portrayed and considered to be final .

as a result , firms were willing to subject themselves voluntarily to a cfius review , because they believed that once an investment transaction was scrutinized and approved by the members of cfius the firms could be assured that the investment transaction would be exempt from any future reviews or actions .

this administrative change , however , meant that a cfius determination may no longer be a final decision , and it added a new level of uncertainty to foreign investors seeking to acquire u.s. firms .

a broad range of u.s. and international business groups objected to this change in the bush administration's policy .

in the first session of the 110th congress , representative maloney introduced h.r .

556 , the national security foreign investment reform and strengthened transparency act of 2007 , on january 18 , 2007 .

the house financial services committee approved it on february 13 , 2007 , with amendments , and the full house amended and approved it on february 28 , 2007 , by a vote of 423 to 0 .

on june 13 , 2007 , senator dodd introduced s1610 , the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 ( finsa ) .

on june 29 , 2007 , the senate adopted s. 1610 in lieu of h.r .

556 by unanimous consent .

on july 11 , 2007 , the house accepted the senate's version of h.r .

556 by a vote of 370-45 and sent the measure to president bush , who signed it on july 26 , 2007 .

on january 23 , 2008 , president bush issued executive order 13456 implementing the law .

finsa made a number of major changes , including: codified the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) , giving it statutory authority .

made cfius membership permanent and added the secretary of energy , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) , and secretary of labor as ex officio members with the dni providing intelligence analysis ; also granted authority to the president to add members on a case - by - case basis .

required the secretary of the treasury to designate an agency with lead responsibility for reviewing a covered transaction .

increased the number of factors the president could consider in making his determination .

required that an individual no lower than an assistant secretary level for each cfius member must certify to congress that a reviewed transaction has no unresolved national security issues ; for investigated transactions , the certification must be at the secretary or deputy secretary level .

provided congress with confidential briefings upon request on cleared transactions and annual classified and unclassified reports .

as indicated in figure 2 below , the cfius foreign investment review process is comprised of an informal step and three formal steps: a declaration or written notice ; a national security review ; and a national security investigation .

depending on the outcome of the reviews , cfius may forward a transaction to the president for a presidential determination .

firrma increases the allowable time for reviews and investigations: ( 1 ) 30 days to review a declaration or written notification to determine of the transaction involves a foreign person in which a foreign government has a substantial interest ; ( 2 ) a 45-day national security review ( from 30 days ) , including an expanded time limit for analysis by the director of national intelligence ( from 20 to 30 days ) ; ( 3 ) a 45-day national security investigation , with an option for a 15 day extension for "extraordinary circumstances ; " and a 15-day presidential determination ( unchanged ) .

neither congress nor the administration has attempted to define the term "national security. .

treasury department officials have indicated , however , that during a review or investigation each cfius member is expected to apply that definition of national security that is consistent with the representative agency's specific legislative mandate .

the concept of national security was broadened by p.l .

110-49 to include , "those issues relating to 'homeland security,' including its application to critical infrastructure. .

as presently construed , national security includes "those issues relating to 'homeland security,' including its application to critical infrastructure," and "critical technologies. .

firrma broadens cfius' role by explicitly including for review certain real estate transactions in close proximity to a military installation or u.s. government facility or property of national security sensitivities ; any noncontrolling investment in u.s. businesses involved in critical technology , critical infrastructure , or collecting sensitive data on u.s. citizens ; any change in foreign investor rights ; transactions in which a foreign government has a direct or indirect substantial interest ; and any transaction or arrangement designed to evade cfius .

while specific countries are not singled out , firrma allows cfius to potentially discriminate among foreign investors by country of origin in reviewing certain investment transactions .

greater scrutiny could be directed on transactions tied to certain countries , pending specific criteria defined by regulations .

firrma provides a "sense of congress" concerning six additional factors that cfius and the president may consider to determine if a proposed transaction threatens to impair u.s. national security .

these include: 1 .

covered transactions that involve a country of "special concern" that has a demonstrated or declared strategic goal of acquiring a type of critical technology or critical infrastructure that would affect u.s. leadership in areas related to national security ; 2 .

the potential effects of the cumulative control of , or pattern of recent transactions involving , any one type of critical infrastructure , energy asset , critical material , or critical technology by a foreign government or person ; 3 .

whether any foreign person engaged in a transaction has a history of complying with u.s. laws and regulations ; 4 .

control of u.s. industries and commercial activity that affect u.s. capability and capacity to meet the requirements of national security , including the availability of human resources , products , technology , materials , and other supplies and services ; 5 .

the extent to which a transaction is likely to expose personally identifiable information , genetic information , or other sensitive data of u.s. citizens to access by a foreign government or person that may exploit that information to threaten national security ; and 6 .

whether a transaction is likely to exacerbate or create new cybersecurity vulnerabilities or is likely to result in a foreign government gaining a significant new capability to engage in malicious cyber - enabled activities .

according to the annual report filed by cfius , cfius activity dropped sharply in 2009 as a result of tight credit markets and hesitation by banks to fund acquisitions and takeovers during the global financial crisis , but rebounded in 2010 , as indicated in table 2 .

during the eight - year period 2008-2015 ( the latest years for which such data are available ) , foreign investors sent 925 notices to cfius of plans to acquire , take over , or merge with a u.s. firm .

in comparison , the commerce department reports there were over 1,800 foreign investment transactions in 2015 , slightly less than half of which were acquisitions of existing u.s. firms .

acquisitions , however , accounted for 96% of the total annual value of foreign direct investments .

of the investment transactions notified during the 2008-2015 period , about 4% were withdrawn during the initial 30-day review ; about 36% of the total notified transactions required a 45-day investigation .

also , of the transactions investigated , about 6% were withdrawn before a final determination was reached .

as a result , of the 925 proposed investment transactions notified to cfius during this period , 822 transactions , or 89% of the transactions , were completed .

as noted earlier in this report , but not in the 2017 cfius report , a presidential decision was made in six cases to date .

the cfius report indicates that 43% of foreign investment transactions notified to cfius from 2008 to 2015 were in the manufacturing sector .

investments in the finance , information , and services sectors accounted for another 31% of the total notified transactions , as indicated in table 3 .

within the manufacturing sector , 43% of all investment transactions notified to cfius between 2013 and 2015 were in the computer and electronic products sectors , a share that rose to 49% in 2015 .

the next three sectors with the highest number of transactions were the transportation equipment sector , which was recorded at 12% in the 2013-2015 period and in 2015 , the machinery sector , which fell from 13% in the 2013-2015 period to 12% in 2015 , and the electrical equipment and computer sector , which fell from 11% of manufacturing transactions in 2013-2015 to 3% in 2015 .

within the finance , information , and services sector , professional services accounted for 20% of transactions 2015 , down from 37% recorded in the 2013-2015 period .

notified transactions in publishing ( 21% ) , telecommunications ( 17% ) , and real estate ( 10% ) comprised the next most active sectors .

table 4 shows foreign investment transactions by the home country of the foreign investor and the industry composition of the investment transactions .

according to data based on notices provided to cfius by foreign investors , chinese investors were the most active in acquisitions , takeovers , or mergers during the 2013-2015 period , accounting for 19% of the total number of transactions .

the united kingdom and canada join china as the top three countries of origin for investors providing notifications to cfius .

for china and the uk , investment notifications were concentrated in the manufacturing , finance , information , and services sectors , although nearly one - fifth of chinese transactions were in the mining , construction , and utilities sectors .

the ranking of countries in table 4 differs in a number of important ways from data published by the bureau of economic analysis on the cumulative amount , or the total book value , of foreign direct investment in the united states , which places the united kingdom , japan , the netherlands , germany , canada , and switzerland as the most active countries of origin for foreign investment in the united states .

table 5 provides information on notified foreign investment transactions by in critical technology classified by types of foreign investment .

according to cfius , the committee reviewed 130 transactions in 2015 ( 126 transactions were reported by cfius for the data in table 5 ) involving acquirers from 32 countries to determine if it could detect a coordinated strategy .

solo acquisitions accounted for 86% of the total number of transactions .

according to cfius , the largest number of transactions in critical technology occurred in the information technology and the aerospace & defense sectors .

the cfius annual report also provides some general information on the total number of cases in which it applied legally binding mitigation measures .

the report did not list any specific cases or measures , but it did indicate that cfius applied mitigation measures to 40 cases in the 2013-2015 period .

according to the cfius report , in 2015 cfius agencies negotiated , and parties adopted , mitigation measures for 11 covered transactions .

these mitigation measures have included a number of different approaches , including ensuring that only authorized persons have access to certain technologies and information .

establishing a corporate security committee and other mechanisms to ensure compliance with all required actions , including the appointment of a u.s. government - approved security officer or member of the board of directors and requirements for security policies , annual reports , and independent audits .

establishing guidelines and terms for handling existing or future u.s. government contracts , u.s. government customer information , and other sensitive information .

ensuring only u.s. citizens handle certain products and services , and ensuring that certain activities and products are located only in the united states .

notifying security officers or relevant u.s. government parties in advance of foreign national visits to the u.s. business for approval .

security protocols to ensure the integrity of goods or software sold to the u.s. government .

notifying customers regarding the change of ownership .

assurances of continuity of supply for defined periods , and notification and consultation prior to taking certain business decisions , with certain rights in the event that the company decides to exit a business line .

established meetings to discuss business plans that might affect u.s. government or national security considerations .

exclusion of certain sensitive assets from the transaction .

providing the u.s. government with the right to review certain business decisions and object if they raise national security concerns .

cfius also implemented procedures to evaluate and ensure that parties to an investment transaction remain in compliance with any risk mitigation measures that were adopted to gain approval of the investment .

these procedures include the following: periodic reporting to u.s. government agencies by the companies .

on - site compliance reviews by u.s. government agencies .

third party audits when provided for by the terms of the mitigation measures .

investigations and remedial actions if anomalies or breaches are discovered or suspected .

assigning staff responsibilities to monitor compliance .

designating tracking systems to monitor required reports .

instituting internal instructions and procedures to ensure that in - house expertise is drawn upon to analyze compliance with measures .

the u.s. policy approach to international investment generally aimed to establish an open and rules - based system that is consistent across countries and in line with u.s. interests as the largest global foreign direct investor and largest recipient of foreign direct investment .

in addition , u.s. foreign direct investment policy has been founded on the concept that the net benefits of such investment are positive and benefit both the united states and the foreign investor , except in certain circumstances concerning risks to national security and for prudential reasons .

even in these cases , however , the u.s. approach generally has been to limit any market distorting impact of the national security review process .

under the cfius statute , congress set a legal standard for the president to meet before he could block or suspend investment transactions: no other laws apply , and he determines that there is "credible evidence" that the action does not simply affect national security , but that it "threatens to impair the national security," or that it poses a risk to national security in 2018 , congress and the trump administration amended the cfius statute through the foreign investment risk review modernization act ( firrma ) to address a broader range of issues concerning foreign direct investment in the u.s. economy .

in part , the motivation for the change in the cfis statute reflects differing views of the role cfius should play in overseeing foreign investment transactions and the concept of national security , particularly as it relates to national economic interests .

in some ways , current discussions regarding the role of cfius mirror previous debates over a working set of parameters that establish a functional definition of the national economic security implications of foreign direct investment and expose differing assessments of the economic impact of foreign investment on the u.s. economy and differing political and philosophical convictions .

previous congressional efforts to amend the cfius statute were driven in large part by national security concerns related to a particular foreign investment transaction , such as the dubai ports transaction .

more recently , concerns have arisen from a combination of issues , including ( 1 ) an increase in foreign investment activity by chinese state - owned firms ; ( 2 ) the perception that such investment is part of a government - coordinated approach that serves official strategic purposes , rather than purely commercial interests ; and ( 3 ) that investments by chinese firms are receiving government support through subsidized financing or other types of government support that give chinese firms an "unfair" competitive advantage over other private investors .

while members of congress and others have expressed concerns over investments by chinese entities , the broader issue of the role of foreign investment in the economy and the interaction between foreign investment and national security predate the creation of cfius .

such concerns arguably are heightened by a changing global economic order that is marked by rising emerging economies such as china and india that are more active internationally and changing notions of national economic interests .

changes to cfiuis through firrma broaden cfius' mandate beyond the original narrow focus on the national security implications of individual investment transactions to a more comprehensive assessment of the impact of a combination of transactions .

in addition , cfius is now required to analyze the impact of certain types of real estate transactions and the potential impact of foreign investment in start - up companies with potentially foundational technologies .

these issues and others raise questions for congress to consider , including: through firrma , congress expanded the role of cfius in protecting u.s. national security interests .

what rubric should cfius use to weigh national security interests against economic interests , particularly at the state and local levels that seek foreign investment to support local jobs and tax revenues ? .

the united states is the single largest recipient of foreign investment and the largest overseas direct investor in the world .

how should congress assess the role of cfius in protecting u.s. national security interests while supporting the stated policy of the united states to support international efforts to maintain policies that accommodate foreign direct investment ? .

in any year , the level of foreign investment activity is driven in large part by broad economic fundamentals , including merger and acquisition ( m&a ) activity .

as a result , cfius' activities could vary substantially from year to year , depending on forces outside its control .

how should congress evaluate cfius' activities given these circumstances ? .

congress has expressed its concerns through firrma about foreign access to critical technologies through investments and acquisitions developed by u.s. firms .

how can cfius satisfy congressional concerns about the potential loss of leading - edge technologies while avoiding potential conflicts that inhibit the development of new technologies by start - up firms ? .

in response to firrma , treasury department regulations identify 27 industries as critical industries for consideration by cfius and the president in deciding to block or suspend a foreign investment transaction .

how should cfius weigh concerns over foreign investments concentrated in certain industries relative to capital needs and requirements in fast - growing industries that may rely on foreign funds in order to expand ? .

what rubric is cfius using to determine how much foreign investment in an industry is considered too concentrated ? .

without providing a definition of national security , congress has directed cfius to protect the united states against investments that threaten to impair the national security .

what rubric should cfius use to evaluate the national security implications of such items as personally identifiable information ? .

