agreements for the first loan guarantees for nuclear power plants under the energy policy act of 2005 were signed february 20 , 2014 , by energy secretary ernest moniz .

the federal loan guarantees total $6.5 billion for two reactors being constructed at the vogtle nuclear plant in waynesboro , ga. southern company , the plant's lead owner , estimated that its $3.46 billion share of the loan guarantee would reduce its present - value financing costs by up to $250 million .

the guaranteed loans are to be issued by the u.s. treasury's federal financing bank .

the plant owners were not charged an upfront fee for the loan guarantees but are paying interest above the applicable treasury rate .

the department of energy's ( doe's ) fy2015 funding request for nuclear energy research and development , submitted to congress in early march 2014 , totaled $863.4 million .

including advanced reactors , fuel cycle technology , infrastructure support , and safeguards and security , the total nuclear energy request is $25.0 million ( 2.9% ) below the fy2014 funding level .

the house approved its fy2015 energy and water appropriations bill ( h.r .

4923 ) on july 10 , 2014 , with $826.7 million for nuclear energy .

the senate subcommittee on energy and water development appropriations recommended $777.0 million on july 24 , 2014 .

pending enactment of full - year appropriations , fy2015 funding for these programs is being provided by a continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-164 ) .

the first construction starts for new u.s. nuclear power reactors since the 1970s officially took place in march 2013 in south carolina and georgia .

pouring of the first "safety related" concrete , which marks the start of reactor construction , was completed on march 11 , 2013 , for v.c .

summer unit 2 in cayce , sc , and three days later for vogtle unit 3 in georgia .

the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) had issued combined construction permits and operating licenses ( cols ) for two new reactors at the vogtle site on february 9 , 2012 , and for two identical reactors at the summer plant on march 30 , 2012 .

each of the new westinghouse ap1000 reactors , scheduled for completion between 2017 and 2019 , is expected to cost from $5 billion to $7 billion .

nrc approved a design certification september 16 , 2014 , for ge - hitachi's economic simplified boiling water reactor ( esbwr ) , following nine years of review .

like the westinghouse ap1000 , the esbwr includes "passive" safety features that are designed to protect the reactor core from overheating after an accident .

nrc is currently reviewing two cols that would use the esbwr design: fermi 3 in michigan and north anna 3 in virginia .

four u.s. reactors were permanently closed during 2013 , and the shutdown of a fifth unit was announced for late 2014 .

crystal river 3 in florida was retired in february 2013 because of cracks in its concrete containment structure .

the single - unit kewaunee plant in wisconsin closed in may 2013 because regional electricity prices had dropped below the reactor's generating costs .

san onofre 2 and 3 in california closed in june 2013 because of faulty steam generators ( unit 1 had been shut previously ) .

and the owner of the single - unit vermont yankee plant announced in august 2013 that the reactor would permanently close in the fourth quarter of 2014 for economic reasons .

all of those units had substantial time remaining on their initial 40-year operating licenses or had received or applied for 20-year license extensions from nrc .

the shutdowns prompted widespread discussion about the future of other aging u.s. reactors .

continued operation of "at risk" nuclear generating capacity could be encouraged by regulations proposed by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) on june 2 , 2014 , to reduce carbon emissions at existing power plants .

the epa proposal would require states to reduce the "carbon intensity" ( carbon emissions per megawatt - hour of electrical generation ) of their existing fossil fuel - fired generating plants by 2030 .

the proposed standards assume that states will prevent the premature retirement of up to 6% of their existing nuclear capacity and also complete five reactors currently under construction .

states could also respond to the standards by encouraging construction of additional reactors or the expansion of generating capacity at existing nuclear plants , among many other options .

on march 12 , 2012 , nrc issued its first nuclear plant safety requirements based on lessons learned from the march 2011 fukushima disaster in japan .

nrc ordered u.s. nuclear plant operators to begin implementing safety enhancements related to power blackouts , reactor containment venting , and monitoring the water levels of reactor spent fuel pools .

the fukushima nuclear plant was hit by an earthquake and tsunami that knocked out all electric power at the six - reactor plant , resulting in the overheating of the reactor cores in three of the units and a heightened overheating risk at several spent fuel storage pools at the site .

the overheating of the reactor cores caused major hydrogen explosions and releases of radioactive material to the environment .

nrc's response to the accident has been the subject of continuing congressional oversight .

after halting work on a long - planned nuclear waste repository at yucca mountain in nevada , doe issued a strategy for the management and disposal of used nuclear fuel and high - level waste in january 2013 .

the doe strategy calls for a new nuclear waste management entity to develop consent - based storage and disposal sites .

a pilot interim spent fuel storage facility would be opened by 2021 and a larger - scale storage facility , which could be an expansion of the pilot facility , would begin receiving waste by 2025 .

a geologic disposal facility would open by 2048 — 50 years after the initial planned opening date for the yucca mountain repository .

legislation to redirect the nuclear waste program along similar lines was introduced by senator wyden on june 27 , 2013 ( s. 1240 ) .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ruled on august 13 , 2013 , that nrc must continue work on the yucca mountain license application as long as funding is available .

the court determined that nrc has at least $11.1 million in previously appropriated funds for that purpose .

in its fy2015 energy and water development appropriations bill , the house voted to provide doe $150.0 million and nrc $55.0 million for yucca mountain licensing activities .

no funding was included in the draft bill approved by the senate subcommittee .

pursuant to a court ruling , doe stopped collecting nuclear waste fees from nuclear power generators on may 16 , 2014 , eliminating about $750 million in annual revenues for the waste disposal program .

the nuclear waste policy act requires the secretary of energy to adjust the fees as necessary to cover the waste program's anticipated costs , but the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ruled that doe's current waste plans are too vague to allow a reasonable estimate to be calculated and that doe must therefore stop collecting the fee .

nrc approved a final rule august 26 , 2014 , on continued storage of spent nuclear fuel .

the rule responds to a federal circuit court ruling on june 8 , 2012 , that struck down nrc's waste confidence decision , which contains the agency's formal findings that waste generated by nuclear power plants will be disposed of safely .

the court ruled that the waste confidence decision required an environmental review under the national environmental policy act and that nrc needed to consider the possibility that a permanent waste repository would never be built and examine potential problems with waste storage pools .

in approving the storage rule , nrc ended its suspension of final licensing decisions for new reactors , spent fuel storage facilities , and license renewals .

after nearly 30 years in which no new orders had been placed for nuclear power plants in the united states , a series of license applications that began in 2007 prompted widespread speculation about a u.s. "nuclear renaissance. .

the renewed interest in nuclear power largely resulted from the improved performance of existing reactors , federal incentives in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) , the possibility of carbon dioxide controls that could increase costs at fossil fuel plants , and volatile prices for natural gas — the favored fuel for new power plants for the past two decades .

four of the proposed new u.s. reactors received licenses from the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) in early 2012 .

nrc approved combined construction permit and operating licenses ( cols ) for southern company to build and operate two new westinghouse ap1000 reactors at the vogtle nuclear power plant in georgia on february 9 , 2012 .

on march 30 , 2012 , nrc approved cols for two additional ap1000 reactors at the existing v.c .

summer nuclear plant in south carolina .

pouring of the first "safety related" concrete , which marks the start of reactor construction , was completed on march 11 , 2013 , for summer unit 2 and three days later for vogtle unit 3 ( after several years of site preparation , component fabrication , and other preliminary work ) .

however , the future of all other proposed new u.s. reactors is uncertain .

high construction cost estimates — a major reason for earlier reactor cancellations — continue to undermine nuclear power economics .

a more recent obstacle to nuclear power growth has been the development of vast reserves of domestic natural gas from previously uneconomic shale formations , which has held gas prices low and reduced concern about future price spikes .

moreover , it is unclear at this point how much incentive might be provided to nuclear power by potential u.s. carbon controls .

four u.s. reactors were permanently closed during 2013 , and the shutdown of a fifth unit was announced for late 2014 .

crystal river 3 in florida was retired in february 2013 because of cracks in its concrete containment structure .

the single - unit kewaunee plant in wisconsin closed in may 2013 because regional electricity prices had dropped below the reactor's generating costs .

san onofre 2 and 3 closed in june 2013 because of faulty steam generators ( unit 1 had been shut previously ) .

and the owner of the single - unit vermont yankee plant announced in august 2013 that the reactor would permanently close in the fourth quarter of 2014 for economic reasons .

all of those units had substantial time remaining on their initial 40-year operating licenses or had received or applied for 20-year license extensions from nrc .

the shutdowns prompted widespread discussion about the future of other aging u.s. reactors .

the march 11 , 2011 , earthquake and tsunami that severely damaged japan's fukushima daiichi nuclear power plant could also affect plans for new u.s. reactors , although u.s. nuclear power growth was already expected to be modest in the near term .

following the fukushima accident , preconstruction work was suspended on two planned reactors at the south texas project .

tokyo electric power company ( tepco ) , which owns the fukushima plant , had planned to invest in the south texas project expansion , but tepco's financial condition plunged after the accident .

new u.s. safety requirements resulting from the fukushima disaster could raise investor concerns about higher costs .

on the other hand , after the accident the obama administration reiterated its support for nuclear power expansion as part of its clean energy policy .

the recent applications for new power reactors in the united states followed a long period of declining nuclear generation growth rates .

until the cols were issued for the vogtle and summer projects , no nuclear power plants had been ordered in the united states since 1978 , and more than 100 reactors had been canceled , including all ordered after 1973 .

the most recent u.s. nuclear unit to be completed was the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) watts bar 1 reactor , ordered in 1970 and licensed to operate in 1996 .

but largely because of better operation and capacity expansion at existing reactors , annual u.s. nuclear generation has risen by about 20% since the startup of watts bar 1 .

the u.s. nuclear power industry currently comprises 100 licensed reactors ( excluding the four permanently closed in 2013 ) at 62 plant sites in 31 states and generates about 19% of the nation's electricity .

tva's board of directors voted august 1 , 2007 , to resume construction on watts bar 2 , which had been suspended in 1985 ; the renewed construction project was to cost about $2.5 billion and be completed in 2013 .

however , tva announced on april 5 , 2012 , that completing watts bar 2 would cost up to $2 billion more than expected and take until 2015 .

at tva's request , nrc in march 2009 reinstated the construction authorization for the two - unit bellefonte ( al ) nuclear plant , which had been deferred in 1988 and canceled in 2006 .

the tva board voted on august 18 , 2011 , to complete construction of bellefonte 1 after the watts bar 2 project is finished .

completing bellefonte 1 was projected at that time to cost $4.9 billion , with operation to begin by 2020 .

citing lower electricity sales , tva on june 12 , 2013 , announced sharp cutbacks at the bellefonte site .

annual electricity production from u.s. nuclear power plants is much greater than that from oil and hydropower and other renewable energy sources .

nuclear generation has been overtaken by natural gas in recent years , and it remains well behind coal , which accounted for about 39% of u.s. electricity generation in 2013 .

nuclear plants generated more than half the electricity in four states in 2012 — new hampshire , new jersey , south carolina , and vermont — and 12 states generated 25% - 50% of their electricity from nuclear power .

the 789 billion net kilowatt - hours of nuclear electricity generated in the united states during 2013 was about the same as the nation's entire electrical output in the early 1960s , when the oldest of today's operating u.s. commercial reactors were ordered .

reasons for the 30-year halt in u.s. nuclear plant orders included high capital costs , public concern about nuclear safety and waste disposal , and regulatory compliance issues .

high construction costs may pose the most serious obstacle to nuclear power expansion .

construction costs for reactors completed since the mid - 1980s ranged from $2 billion to $6 billion , averaging more than $3,900 per kilowatt of electric generating capacity ( in 2011 dollars ) , far higher than commercial fossil fuel technologies .

the nuclear industry predicts that new plant designs could be built for less than that if many identical plants were built in a series , but current estimates for new reactors show little if any reduction in cost .

in contrast , average u.s. nuclear plant operating costs per kilowatt - hour dropped substantially since 1990 , and expensive downtime has been steadily reduced .

licensed u.s. commercial reactors generated electricity at an average of 90% of their total capacity in 2013 , according to the energy information administration ( eia ) .

seventy - three commercial reactors have received 20-year license renewals from the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , giving them up to a total of 60 years of operation .

license renewals for 19 additional reactors are currently under review , and more are anticipated , according to nrc .

however , as noted above , three reactors that have received license renewals , vermont yankee , crystal river , and kewaunee , are being permanently closed for economic reasons .

the nuclear power industry contends that support from the federal government would be needed for "a major expansion of nuclear energy generation. .

significant incentives for building new nuclear power plants were included in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 , p.l .

109-58 ) , signed by president bush on august 8 , 2005 .

these include production tax credits , loan guarantees , insurance against regulatory delays , and extension of the price - anderson act nuclear liability system ( discussed in the previous section on " nuclear accident liability " ) .

relatively low prices for natural gas — nuclear power's chief competitor — and rising estimated nuclear plant construction costs have decreased the likelihood that new reactors would be built without federal support .

any regulatory delays and increased safety requirements resulting from the fukushima accident could also pose an obstacle to nuclear construction plans .

as a result , numerous bills have been introduced in recent years to strengthen or add to the epact05 incentives ( see " legislation in the 113 th congress " at the end of this report ) .

nuclear power critics have denounced the federal support programs and proposals as a "bailout" of the nuclear industry , contending that federal efforts should focus instead on renewable energy and energy efficiency .

the obama administration's fy2015 funding request for nuclear energy research and development totaled $863.4 million .

including advanced reactors , fuel cycle technology , infrastructure support , and safeguards and security , the total nuclear energy request was $25.0 million ( 2.9% ) below the fy2014 funding level .

doe's fy2015 nuclear r&d budget justification described the following major goals for the program: improve the safety , reliability , and economics of nuclear power plants ; implement a "consent based" strategy for developing nuclear waste storage and disposal facilities ; develop improved waste management and fuel cycle technologies ; and understand and minimize the risks of nuclear proliferation and terrorism .

doe's office of nuclear energy would lead a major initiative announced in the fy2015 budget request to commercialize the brayton cycle for commercial power plants .

called supercritical transformational electric power generation ( step ) , the initiative was proposed to be a joint effort by doe's nuclear energy , fossil energy , and renewable energy programs .

the brayton cycle uses supercritical gas to drive electric generators rather than the steam cycle that dominates the industry today .

doe's budget justification predicted that brayton - cycle power plants could reach efficiencies of up to 50% , compared with 33% for steam - cycle plants .

the step program is to reach a 50-50 cost sharing agreement with the private sector in fy2015 to develop a 10 megawatt ( electric ) brayton cycle pilot plant .

funding for the step initiative , provided within the nuclear energy budget , would total $27.5 million in fy2015 .

the house appropriations committee had recommended $899.0 million for nuclear energy , $35.6 million above the administration request .

however , an amendment on the house floor ( h.amdt .

979 ) reduced the nuclear total by $73.3 million to provide more funding for the corps of engineers .

the amendment did not specify how the reduction would be allocated among nuclear energy programs .

the senate subcommittee draft report recommended $777.0 million for nuclear energy programs , $86.4 million below the request .

the draft rejected the administration's $97 million request for small modular reactor licensing support and cut the $100.5 million request for reactor concepts r&d by 45% .

the house appropriations committee report agreed with the administration's $27.5 million request for the step initiative and authorized doe to "modify" the 50% cost - sharing goal for qualifying pilot plants .

the draft senate report also recommended the full step request but cautioned that the program should "be limited in scope , schedule , and cost. .

one of the most controversial aspects of nuclear power is the disposal of radioactive waste , which can remain hazardous for thousands of years .

each nuclear reactor produces an annual average of about 20 metric tons of highly radioactive spent nuclear fuel , for a nationwide total of about 2,000 metric tons per year .

u.s. reactors also generated an average of about 75,000 cubic meters of low - level radioactive waste per year during the past decade , including contaminated components and materials resulting from reactor decommissioning .

the federal government is responsible for permanent disposal of commercial spent fuel ( paid for with a fee on nuclear power production ) and federally generated radioactive waste , while states have the authority to develop disposal facilities for most commercial low - level waste .

under the nuclear waste policy act ( nwpa , 42 u.s.c .

10101 , et seq .

 ) , spent fuel and other highly radioactive waste is to be isolated in a deep underground repository , consisting of a large network of tunnels carved from a geologic formation that has remained stable for hundreds of thousands of years .

as amended in 1987 , nwpa designated yucca mountain in nevada as the only candidate site for the national repository .

the act required doe to begin taking waste from nuclear plant sites by 1998 — a deadline that even under the most optimistic scenarios will be missed by more than 20 years .

doe filed a license application with nrc for the proposed yucca mountain repository in june 2008 .

the obama administration "has determined that developing the yucca mountain repository is not a workable option and the nation needs a different solution for nuclear waste disposal," according to the doe fy2011 budget justification .

to develop alternative waste management strategies , the administration established the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future , which issued its final report to the secretary of energy on january 26 , 2012 .

the blue ribbon commission recommended that future efforts to develop nuclear waste facilities follow a "consent based" approach and be carried out by a new organization , rather than doe .

the commission said the new nuclear waste entity should have "assured access" to the nuclear waste fund , which holds fees collected from nuclear power plant operators to pay for waste disposal .

under nwpa , those funds cannot be spent without congressional appropriations .

doe released its strategy for the management and disposal of used nuclear fuel and high - level radioactive waste in january 2013 in response to the blue ribbon commission report .

the strategy calls for a pilot interim storage facility for spent fuel from closed nuclear reactors to open by 2021 and a larger storage facility , possibly at the same site , to open by 2025 .

a site for a permanent underground waste repository would be selected by 2026 , and the repository would open by 2048 .

storage and disposal sites would be selected by a new waste management organization through a consent - based process , as recommended by the blue ribbon commission .

doe's office of nuclear energy ( ne ) currently is responsible for civilian waste management activities .

ne's fuel cycle r&d program ( discussed in the "nuclear power research and development" section above ) includes funding under the used nuclear fuel disposition subprogram to begin implementing the doe waste management strategy .

doe requested $79.0 million for the used fuel subprogram in fy2015 , $19.0 million above the fy2012 funding level , and no funding for yucca mountain .

in approving the energy and water development appropriations bill for fy2014 ( h.r .

2609 ) , the house appropriations committee excoriated the obama administration's termination of the yucca mountain project as "blatant political maneuverings. .

the house - passed fy2015 energy and water bill included $150.0 million for doe and $55.0 million for nrc to continue yucca mountain licensing activities .

the house provided no funding to implement doe's alternative nuclear waste management strategy .

the senate appropriations subcommittee recommended $119.0 million in fy2015 for used fuel and did not mention yucca mountain .

the subcommittee's draft bill included a provision from the previous year that would authorize doe to conduct a pilot program to develop one or more high level radioactive waste storage facilities , with the consent of state , local , and tribal governments .

senator wyden , along with senators murkowski , feinstein , and alexander , introduced legislation june 27 , 2013 , to redirect the nuclear waste program ( s. 1240 ) along the lines recommended by the blue ribbon commission .

the bill would establish an independent nuclear waste administration to develop nuclear waste storage and disposal facilities .

siting of such facilities would require the consent of the affected state , local , and tribal governments .

the nuclear waste administration could spend nuclear waste fees collected after the bill's enactment without the need for further appropriation .

fee collection would halt after 2025 if a waste facility had not been opened .

the energy and natural resources committee held a hearing on the bill july 30 , 2013 .

doe had filed a license application with nrc for the proposed yucca mountain repository in june 2008 but filed a motion to withdraw the application on march 3 , 2010 .

an nrc licensing panel rejected doe's withdrawal motion june 29 , 2010 , on the grounds that nwpa requires full consideration of the license application by nrc .

the full nrc commission deadlocked on the issue september 9 , 2011 , leaving the licensing panel's decision in place and prohibiting doe from withdrawing the yucca mountain application .

however , the commission ordered at the same time that the licensing process be suspended because of "budgetary limitations. .

no funding was provided in fy2012 or fy2013 or requested for fy2014 or fy2015 to continue yucca mountain licensing activities .

however , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ruled on august 13 , 2013 , that nrc must continue work on the yucca mountain license application as long as funding is available .

the court determined that nrc had at least $11.1 million in previously appropriated funds for that purpose .

nwpa required doe to begin taking waste from nuclear plant sites by january 31 , 1998 .

nuclear utilities , upset over doe's failure to meet that deadline , have won two federal court decisions upholding the department's obligation to meet the deadline and to compensate utilities for any resulting damages .

utilities have also won several cases in the u.s. court of federal claims .

doe estimates that liability payments would eventually exceed $20 billion if doe were to begin removing waste from reactor sites by 2020 , the previous target for opening yucca mountain .

 ( for more information , see crs report r42513 , u.s .

spent nuclear fuel storage , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33461 , civilian nuclear waste disposal , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r40996 , contract liability arising from the nuclear waste policy act ( nwpa ) of 1982 , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

pursuant to a court ruling , doe reportedly stopped collecting nuclear waste fees from nuclear power generators on may 16 , 2014 , eliminating about $750 million in revenues for the waste disposal program .

nwpa requires the secretary of energy to adjust the fees as necessary to cover the waste program's anticipated costs , but the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ruled that doe's current waste plans are too vague to allow a reasonable estimate to be calculated and that doe must therefore stop collecting the fee .

nrc approved a final rule august 26 , 2014 , on continued storage of spent nuclear fuel .

the rule responds to a federal circuit court ruling on june 8 , 2012 , that struck down nrc's waste confidence decision , which contained the agency's formal findings that waste generated by nuclear power plants will be disposed of safely .

the court ruled that the waste confidence decision required an environmental review under the national environmental policy act and that nrc needed to consider the possibility that a permanent waste repository would never be built and to examine potential problems with waste storage pools .

the waste confidence decision , first issued in 1984 and since updated twice , resulted from a 1979 federal circuit court ruling that required nrc to determine whether waste from nuclear facilities would be safely managed after their licenses expired .

after the waste confidence decision was struck down in 2012 , nrc suspended final licensing decisions for new reactors , spent fuel storage facilities , and license renewals .

upon approving the continued storage rule to replace the waste confidence decision , nrc ended its licensing suspension .

renewed interest in nuclear power in much of the world has led to increased concern about nuclear weapons proliferation , because technology for making nuclear fuel can also be used to produce nuclear weapons material .

of particular concern are uranium enrichment , a process to separate and concentrate the fissile isotope uranium - 235 , and nuclear spent fuel reprocessing , which can produce weapons - useable plutonium .

the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) conducts a safeguards program that is intended to prevent civilian nuclear fuel facilities from being used for weapons purposes , but not all potential weapons proliferators belong to the system , and there are ongoing questions about its effectiveness .

several proposals have been developed to guarantee nations without fuel cycle facilities a supply of nuclear fuel in exchange for commitments to forgo enrichment and reprocessing , which was one of the original goals of the bush administration's global nuclear energy partnership , now called the international framework for nuclear energy cooperation .

several situations have arisen throughout the world in which ostensibly commercial uranium enrichment and reprocessing technologies have been subverted for military purposes .

in 2003 and 2004 , it became evident that pakistani nuclear scientist a.q .

khan had sold sensitive technology and equipment related to uranium enrichment to states such as libya , iran , and north korea .

although pakistan's leaders maintain they did not acquiesce in or abet khan's activities , pakistan remains outside the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) and the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) .

iran has been a direct recipient of pakistani enrichment technology .

iaea's board of governors found in 2005 that iran's breach of its safeguards obligations constituted noncompliance with its safeguards agreement , and referred the case to the u.n. security council in february 2006 .

despite repeated calls by the u.n. security council for iran to halt enrichment and reprocessing - related activities , and imposition of sanctions , iran continues to develop enrichment capability at natanz and at a site near qom disclosed in september 2009 .

iran insists on its inalienable right to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy , pursuant to article iv of the npt .

interpretations of this right have varied over time .

international talks with iran over its nuclear program are ongoing .

the case of iran raises perhaps the most critical current question for strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime: how can access to sensitive fuel cycle activities ( which could be used to produce fissile material for weapons ) be circumscribed without further alienating non - nuclear weapon states in the npt ? .

leaders of the international nuclear nonproliferation regime have suggested ways of reining in the diffusion of such inherently dual - use technology , primarily through the creation of incentives not to enrich uranium or reprocess spent fuel .

the international community is in the process of evaluating those proposals and may decide upon a mix of approaches .

at the same time , there is debate on how to improve the iaea safeguards system and its means of detecting diversion of nuclear material to a weapons program in the face of expanded nuclear power facilities worldwide .

 ( for more information , see crs report rl34234 , managing the nuclear fuel cycle: policy implications of expanding global access to nuclear power , coordinated by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the following tables summarize current funding for doe nuclear energy programs and nrc .

the sources for the funding figures are administration budget requests and committee reports on the energy and water development appropriations acts , which fund doe and nrc .

the house passed its version of the fy2015 energy and water bill ( h.r .

4923 , h.rept .

113-486 ) on july 10 , 2014 .

the senate subcommittee on energy and water development appropriations approved a draft fy2015 bill and report on july 24 , 2014 .

pending enactment of full - year appropriations , fy2015 funding for these programs is being provided by a continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-164 ) .

energy freedom and economic prosperity act .

terminates nuclear energy production tax credit , among other provisions .

house bill introduced january 15 , 2013 ; referred to committee on ways and means .

senate bill introduced may 1 , 2014 ; referred to committee on finance .

nuclear disaster preparedness act .

requires the president to issue guidance for federal response to nuclear disasters , covering specific topics listed in the bill .

introduced april 24 , 2013 ; referred to committee on transportation and infrastructure .

no more excuses energy act of 2013 .

includes provisions to prohibit nrc from considering nuclear waste storage when licensing new nuclear facilities , and to establish a tax credit for obtaining nuclear component manufacturing certification .

introduced may 21 , 2013 ; referred to multiple committees .

energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2014 .

provides funding for doe nuclear programs and nrc .

house bill introduced july 2 , 2013 ; reported as original measure by committee on appropriations july 2 , 2013 ( h.rept .

113-135 ) ; passed house july 10 , 2013 , by vote of 227-198 .

senate bill introduced june 27 , 2013 ; reported as original measure by committee on appropriations june 27 , 2013 ( s.rept .

113-47 ) .

fy2014 energy and water development funding provided by division d of p.l .

113-76 , consolidated appropriations act , 2014 .

nuclear power licensing reform act of 2013 .

requires evacuation planning within 50 miles of u.s. nuclear power plants and that reactor license renewals be subject to the same standards that would apply to new reactors .

introduced july 17 , 2013 ; referred the committee on energy and commerce .

requires nrc to distribute safety - related fines collected from nuclear facilities to the counties in which the facilities are located to maintain radiological emergency preparedness plans .

introduced july 30 , 2013 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

dry cask storage act .

requires spent fuel at nuclear power plants to be moved from spent fuel pools to dry casks after it has sufficiently cooled .

costs of the fuel transfers would be offset by a reduction in nuclear waste fees owed to the federal government .

introduced october 28 , 2013 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

requires congressional approval of u.s. peaceful nuclear cooperation agreements with countries that do not agree to forgo enrichment and reprocessing .

introduced december 12 , 2013 ; referred to committees on foreign affairs and rules .

energy exploration and production to achieve national demand ( expand ) act .

among other provisions , repeals nuclear production tax credit , authorizes expedited nuclear licensing procedures , requires nrc to develop "technology neutral" guidelines for licensing advanced nuclear plants , requires an accelerated schedule for the next generation nuclear plant , and limits fees for uranium mining on federal lands .

introduced january 16 , 2014 ; referred to multiple committees .

establishes a green bank to finance clean energy , including nuclear projects .

both bills introduced april 30 , 2014 ; house bill referred to committee on ways and means and to energy and commerce for specific provisions ; senate bill referred to committee on finance .

department of energy research and development act of 2014 .

authorizes doe research and development programs , including nuclear energy .

introduced june 13 , 2014 ; referred to committee on science , space , and technology .

energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2015 .

provides appropriations for doe nuclear programs and nrc .

introduced june 20 , 2014 ; reported as an original measure june 20 , 2014 , by the committee on appropriations ( h.rept .

113-486 ) .

passed house july 10 , 2014 , by vote of 253-170 .

american energy opportunity act of 2014 .

among other provisions , establishes the carbon free technology and nuclear energy reserve that could be used to offset the cost of loan guarantees for commercial nuclear power plants , the disposition and recycling or reprocessing of spent fuel from nuclear power plants , and the financing of long - term safe storage of spent fuel .

introduced june 24 , 2014 ; referred to multiple committees .

consolidate heavy - handed and outdated programs act of 2014 .

consolidates nuclear energy programs under a new department of energy and the environment .

introduced july 31 , 2014 ; referred to multiple committees .

nuclear waste administration act of 2013 .

establishes an independent nuclear waste administration to develop nuclear waste storage and disposal facilities .

siting of such facilities would require the consent of the affected state , local , and tribal governments .

the nuclear waste administration could spend nuclear waste fees collected after the bill's enactment without the need for further appropriation .

fee collection would halt after 2025 if a waste facility had not been opened .

introduced june 27 , 2013 ; referred to committee on energy and natural resources .

full committee hearing held july 30 , 2013 .

nuclear regulatory commission reorganization plan codification and complements act .

specifies functions and authorities of the chairman and commissioners of nrc .

specifies that any commissioner may request a vote on whether a particular issue should be reserved for the chairman or handled by the full commission .

introduced september 18 , 2013 ; referred to committee on environment and public works .

safe and secure decommissioning act of 2014 .

prohibits nrc from waiving emergency preparedness and security requirements at nuclear reactors that are undergoing decommissioning until all of such a reactor's spent nuclear fuel has been transferred from storage pools into dry casks .

introduced may 13 , 2014 ; referred to committee on environment and public works .

dry cask storage act of 2104 .

requires each nuclear reactor to submit a plan to nrc for tranferring spent fuel currently stored in pools to dry casks within seven years .

after the seven year period , additional spent fuel must be transferred to dry casks within a year after it has been determined to be sufficiently cool .

emergency planning zones must be expanded from 10 to 50 miles in radius around any reactor that is determined by nrc to be out of compliance with its spent fuel transfer plan .

introduced may 13 , 2014 ; referred to committee on environment and public works .

nuclear plant decommissioning act of 2014 .

provides for consultation with state and local governments , and the consideration of state and local concerns , during nrc approval of post - shutdown decommissioning activities reports , and requires reactors undergoing decommissioning to comply with state laws and standards .

senate bill introduced may 13 , 2014 ; referred to committee on environment and public works .

house bill introduced may 15 , 2014 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

