the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) provides nonreciprocal , duty - free tariff treatment to certain products imported into the united states from designated beneficiary developing countries ( bdcs ) .

the united states , the european union ( eu ) , and other developed countries have implemented similar programs since the 1970s in order to promote economic growth in developing nations .

currently , 121 developing countries and territories are gsp beneficiary developing countries ( bdcs ) .

the gsp program provides duty - free entry into the united states for over 3,500 products ( based on 8-digit u.s. harmonized tariff schedule tariff lines ) from bdcs , and duty - free status to an additional 1,500 products from 44 gsp beneficiaries additionally designated as least - developed beneficiary developing countries ( ldbdcs ) .

in 2017 , products valued at about $21.2 billion ( imports for consumption ) entered the united states duty - free under the program , out of total imports from gsp countries of about $220 billion .

total u.s. imports from all countries amounted to about $2.3 trillion in 2017 .

this report briefly summarizes recent gsp developments .

it provides a brief history , economic rationale , legal background , and comparison of preferential trade programs worldwide and describes the u.s. implementation of the gsp program .

on march 23 , 2018 , president trump signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

division m , title v of the act extended the gsp program until december 31 , 2020 .

the program was also retroactively renewed for all gsp - eligible entries between december 31 , 2017 ( the previous expiration date ) , and april 22 , 2018 , the effective date of the current gsp renewal reauthorization .

the gsp reauthorization also made certain technical modifications to competitive need limits and waivers , and required the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) to submit an annual report to congress on efforts to ensure that gsp countries are meeting the eligibility criteria for the program .

u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) will issue automatic refunds of duties paid during the gsp program lapse if ( 1 ) importer of record ( ior ) information is current , ( 2 ) entries continued be flagged as gsp - eligible imports ( with the special program indicator ( spi ) "a," ) during the program lapse , and ( 3 ) the importer is a member of cbp's automated clearinghouse ( ach ) program .

if the importer did not fulfill these criteria , a refund request may be submitted in a letter , as a post - summary correction ( psc ) , or as a protest .

the request must include all importer of record ( ior ) information ; the import entry number , line number , and u.s. harmonized tariff schedule ( htsus ) number ; the amount of the estimated total refund ; and a signed statement that the goods are eligible for gsp .

the basic principle behind gsp trade programs worldwide is to provide developing countries with unilateral preferential market access to developed - country markets in order to spur economic growth in poorer countries .

the preferential access is in the form of lower tariff rates ( or as in the u.s. case , duty - free status ) for certain products that are determined not to be "import sensitive" in the receiving country market .

the program concept was first adopted internationally in 1968 by the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) at the unctad ii conference .

congress first authorized the u.s. generalized system of preferences scheme in title v of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) , as amended .

p.l .

93-618 gave the president the authority to grant duty - free treatment under the gsp for eligible products imported from any beneficiary developing country ( bdc ) or any least - developed beneficiary developing country ( ldbdc ) , provided the president with economic criteria in deciding whether to take any such action , and specified certain other criteria for designating eligible countries and products .

gsp country eligibility changes or changes in product coverage are made at the discretion of the president , drawing on the advice of the itc and the ustr .

the tpsc , an executive branch interagency body chaired by the office of the ustr , serves as the interagency policy coordination mechanism for matters involving gsp .

the gsp subcommittee of the tpsc conducts an annual review in which petitions related to gsp country and product eligibility are assessed , and makes recommendations to the full tpsc , which , in turn , passes these recommendations to the ustr .

the statutory goals of the u.s. gsp program are to ( 1 ) promote the development of developing countries ; ( 2 ) promote trade , rather than aid , as a more efficient way of promoting economic development ; ( 3 ) stimulate u.s. exports in developing country markets ; and ( 4 ) promote trade liberalization in developing countries .

it is difficult to assess whether or not the program alone has achieved these goals , however , because the gsp is only one of many such initiatives used by the united states to assist poorer countries .

economic success within countries is also related to internal factors , such as governance , stability , wise policy decisions , availability of infrastructure to foster industry , and legal / financial frameworks that encourage foreign investment .

external macroeconomic factors , including global economic growth , worldwide economic shocks , exchange rates , and regional stability may also influence the growth of developing countries .

what follows , therefore , are general comments , rather than hard data , about the impact of gsp on developing countries , and possible economic effects on the u.s. market .

the positions of various stakeholders regarding the value of the program are also discussed .

supporters of the gsp program include beneficiary developing country governments and exporters , u.s. importers , and u.s. manufacturers who use inputs entering under gsp in downstream products .

some members of congress favor gsp renewal , because they believe it is an important development and foreign policy tool .

opposing the program are some u.s. producers who manufacture competing products and some in congress who favor more reciprocal approaches to trade policy .

what follows is a thematic approach to the major topics of discussion in the gsp renewal debate .

in previous years , members have suggested various reforms of the gsp program .

possible options include supporting reciprocal tariff and market access benefits through ftas , renewing the gsp for least - developed beneficiaries only , extending the program in a modified form , or letting the program lapse altogether .

although the gsp is a nonreciprocal tariff preference , any changes to the program may need to be considered in light of the requirements of the wto enabling clause , as it has been interpreted by the wto appellate body .

at a minimum , the united states may need to notify — and possibly consult with — other wto members regarding any withdrawal or modification of gsp benefits , as required by paragraph 4 of the enabling clause .

the united states could also pursue a wto waiver were any modifications of the gsp program considered not to comport fully with u.s. wto obligation .

some u.s. policymakers have suggested that some developing countries might benefit more through wto multilateral negotiations , ftas , or some form of agreement that could also provide reciprocal trade benefits and improved market access for the united states .

arguably , this was one of the policy arguments for the eu's pursuit of economic partnership agreements with many of its former gsp beneficiaries .

since tariff concessions under these agreements would probably apply to more sectors of the economy than gsp , such agreements could increase the likelihood of across - the - board economic stimulation in developing countries .

each one of the united states' current fta partners , with the exception of canada and australia , was at one time a beneficiary of the gsp program .

some in congress have expressed the possibility of modifying the gsp so that the benefits apply primarily to least - developed beneficiaries .

assuming that many least - developed african beneficiaries would continue to receive the gsp preference under agoa , other ldcs that might benefit from an ldc - only gsp program are afghanistan , bhutan , burma , burundi , cambodia , congo ( kinshasa ) , haiti , kiribati , nepal , samoa , somalia , south sudan , the solomon islands , timor - leste , tuvalu , vanuatu , and yemen .

of these countries , in 2017 , the ldcs that made the most use of the program by value were cambodia ( $402 million ) , burma ( $93.9 million ) , congo ( kinshasa , $46.8 million ) , nepal ( $8.6 million ) , the solomon islands ( $2.2 million ) , samoa ( $1.4 million ) , burundi ( $1.3 million ) , and haiti ( $1.2 million ) .

u.s. efforts through trade capacity building could help ldcs take greater advantage of the preference .

congress could modify the gsp , as it applies to all bdcs .

some of these options could have the effect of expanding the gsp program , while others could serve to restrict its application .

below are some examples of potential modifications .

were congress to expand or enhance application of the gsp , the following options could be considered: expand the list of tariff lines permitted duty - free access .

allow some import - sensitive products to receive preferential access .

increase flexibility of rules of origin requirements .

for example , allow more gsp beneficiaries to cumulate inputs with other beneficiaries to meet the 35% domestic content requirement .

eliminate competitive need limitations for bdcs , or raise the thresholds that trigger them .

the following is a list of possible approaches if congress desired to extend the program but restrict imports under gsp: consider mandatory graduation for "middle income" countries , similar to eu gsp changes , or strengthen the language giving the president authority to graduate countries based on competitiveness .

reconsider criteria for graduation of countries from gsp or direct greater enforcement of the eligibility criteria .

strengthen provision that allows graduation of individual industry sectors within beneficiary countries .

modify the rule - of - origin requirement for qualifying products to require that a greater percentage of the direct costs of processing operations ( currently 35% ) originate in beneficiary developing countries .

lower the threshold at which the president may ( or must ) withdraw , suspend , or limit the application of duty - free treatment of certain products ( cnls ) .

require the president to more frequently and actively monitor ( currently an annual process ) the economic progress of beneficiary countries , as well as compliance with gsp criteria .

add additional eligibility criteria ; for example , to include movement toward more reciprocal tariff treatment , sustainable development , or environmental preservation .

appendix a. gsp implementation and renewal appendix b. gsp beneficiary countrie .

