constituents often turn to members of congress for assistance in securing changes to zip code boundaries , usually because their mailing addresses do not correspond to the geographic and political boundaries of their municipalities' jurisdictions .

this report explains why zip code boundaries often are not aligned with geographic political jurisdiction boundaries , describes some problems that may occur because of the misalignment , and discusses efforts by the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) and congress to address these problems .

the post office department ( now the u.s .

postal service ) began dividing large cities into delivery zones in 1943 , inserting two digits between the city and the state in the lower address line .

in 1963 , the whole country was divided into five - digit postal delivery codes — termed zip codes by the post office .

these codes corresponded to the post offices where final sorting of mail was done and from which letter carriers were dispatched to make deliveries .

the term zip code , originally trademarked and always capitalized , was an acronym for "zoning improvement plan. .

mass mailers were first required to use zip codes in 1967 , and today their use is ubiquitous .

almost all mail is sorted by machines , and the basis for this sorting is a zip code .

zip codes have expanded through the years to 9 digits ( zip+4 ) in 1983 and to 11 digits in 1991 .

most customers know only their five - digit zip codes .

the first number in the zip code represents a general geographic area of the nation — moving from a "0" for places in the east to a "9" for locations in the west .

the second and third numbers indicate regions of the united states , while the fourth and fifth digits route the mail to specific post offices .

for example , the zip code for alturas , the county seat of modoc county in the northeastern corner of california , is 96101 .

the 9 directs the mail to the west .

the 61 directs mail to the processing facility in reno , nv , which is the distribution point for some california post offices such as alturas , cedarville ( 96104 ) , fort bidwell ( 96112 ) , and likely ( 96116 ) .

reno is also the processing facility for zip codes in nevada beginning with 894 , 895 , and 897 .

the four final zip code numbers , which were added in 1983 "allow mail to be sorted to a specific group of streets or to a high - rise building. .

a host of zip code misalignment problems were aired in a 1990 hearing of a house postal subcommittee .

ten members of congress described zip code alignment problems in their districts , and similar statements were received from many local governments , as well as the national league of cities .

the hearing in the 101 st congress considered three bills ( h.r .

2380 , h.r .

2902 , and h.r .

4827 ) that would have allowed local governments , rather than the postal service , to determine local addresses or zip code boundaries as a solution to the widespread problems .

usps expressed strong opposition to these bills and said that depriving usps of control over "the most basic tool of the postal trade — the mailing address" would be "disastrous. .

a usps boundary survey found that more than 11 million deliveries were served by carriers who cross municipal boundaries , and estimated that if delivery boundaries were realigned to match municipal boundaries , 1,600 new postal facilities and 10,500 new carriers would be needed .

also to be considered was the availability of additional zip codes in certain large areas .

at of the end of 1989 , 924 of the 1,000 possible three - digit combinations already had been assigned ; in 20 areas , 90 or more of the 100 possible zip codes already had been assigned ; and in houston , all 100 possible zip codes had been used .

these arguments may have proved persuasive because the legislation never advanced , and neither have similar bills introduced in later congresses .

at the hearings , however , usps also earned some criticism because of its "peremptory denials" of local suggestions or requests for zip code changes that were variously characterized as "cold and haughty," "cursory," "unresponsive," "stonewalling," and "uncaring. .

the government accountability office ( gao , then the general accounting office ) examined postal case files on 26 municipal requests for zip code changes , only 2 of which were approved by usps .

gao reported that usps not only could do a better job of providing facts and reasoning to explain its decisions in individual change requests , but also could "do more to ... resolve problems caused by conflicts between municipal and zip code boundaries. .

the most common form of request to the postal service ( and to members of congress ) is for "a new zip code" for a specific area .

most postal patrons may not realize that a new , unique zip code usually accompanies the creation of a new delivery post office .

they also may not realize that a delivery post office ( as opposed to a retail station ) is a major investment , requiring substantial space , loading docks , sorting equipment , access to major transportation routes , and negotiations with several unions over work assignments .

usps , however , believes that such requests "are fundamentally identity issues" and are made because customers perceive a new zip code as "the only means of achieving postal identity. .

in fact , other options are often available and much simpler to achieve .

sometimes fairly minor adjustments in carrier routes can be made that will solve at least part of a community's boundary problem .

a compromise solution that does not involve changing usps delivery structure is to allow customers to use an alternative city name in the last line of their addresses , while not changing the zip code .

this situation most often occurs when one or more communities fall within the boundaries of a single zip code .

when a large portion of the mail was sorted manually , the use of an alternate city name could have caused mis - sorting and delayed mail .

today , however , almost all mail is sorted by computerized processing equipment .

this alternative can help ameliorate community identity issues , but may not address whether certain non - usps services — like ambulances — can properly locate a home .

usps advises that an alternate city name should not be written in an address until usps has added it into the ams .

usps sorting technology currently reads all lines of the address to obtain the delivery point barcode , and use of an unapproved alternative city name could hinder delivery .

usps routinely has worked with large - scale mailers to improve their address files , sorting — in most cases — to 11 digits rather than five digits .

as noted earlier in the report , in 1983 , the zip code was expanded to nine digits ( zip +4 ) .

the 10 th and 11 th zip code numbers , created in 1991 , allow mail sent by large - scale mailers to be sorted "directly to a residence or business. .

if a mailer seeks such usps assistance , usps may refine municipal mailing lists to conform to political jurisdictions and eliminate errors based on the less sophisticated use of the five - digit code .

when a member's office receives a request for assistance in persuading usps to create a new zip code , it may be helpful to ascertain at the outset the underlying reason for the request .

if the constituents are complaining about poor delivery service , then the postal service is more likely to address the complaints expeditiously , determine if they have merit , and seek solutions .

if population growth or obsolescence of a delivery facility is leading to service problems , usps will attempt to resolve the problems , including those prompted by confusion over zip code boundaries .

often , the zip code modification request may have little to do with delivery service , but stems from community identity issues .

constituents are frequently unaware of the boundary review process .

in many cases , constituents or municipal officials may have approached a letter carrier or local postmaster and been told that an adjustment would be disruptive , costly , and impractical .

usps internal policies ( as described above ) quite firmly state that a cursory , negative response to a request for a zip code modification is no longer permissible .

even if an accommodation cannot be reached , usps officials are required to explain fully the reasons for the refusal , based on a comprehensive review of operational and cost data .

occasionally , members will be asked to introduce legislation to force usps to establish zip code boundaries in statute .

only once has such piece of legislation become law .

the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-435 ; 120 stat .

3261 ) required usps to assign "a single unified zip code to serve , as nearly as practicable , each of the following communities: 1 .

auburn township , ohio 2 .

hanahan , south carolina 3 .

bradbury , california 4 .

discovery bay , california" those zip codes are currently active , according to usps .

finally , usps advises that a constituent should not substitute the preferred city name before the zip code in an address line , without receiving usps approval to do so .

usps mail processing equipment has internal checks that compare the zip code with the proper city name ; if the two do not match , default sequences come into play , and mail very likely will be directed to the wrong delivery post office , certainly causing delay and possibly causing the mail to be returned as undeliverable .

