this report begins with an inventory of basic information: definitions and guides to histories of the growth of open access publishing and citation archives and descriptions of selected major open access activities .

it moves on to summarize major points of difference between proponents and opponents of nongovernmental open access publishing and databases , and then highlights federal , including national institutes of health ( nih ) , open access activities and contentious issues surrounding these developments .

the report also briefly describes open access developments in the united kingdom ( where a number of governmental and nongovernmental initiatives have occurred ) and in the international arena .

finally , controversial issues which could receive attention the 110 th congress are summarized .

the "open access movement" is said to have begun in 1966 .

the term describes a variety of activities that includes access to archives of indexed citations of articles , access to separate journal articles that were published in traditional , subscriber - pays journals , and access to free , online journals .

according to a may 23 , 2005 wall street journal article,"[c]urrently , the open - access movement makes up between 1% and 2% of the market , experts say .

while that number seems small , the concept is assuming an important role channeling academic discontent" about the rising costs of journals .

in traditional , subscriber - pays publishing , the publisher , who holds the copyright to an article , pays most printing and distribution costs and , in order to read an article , the journal subscriber pays fees , whether for hard - copy or online versions .

sometimes an author is required to pay printing page charges for complex graphics or color presentations. .

open access " publishing generally means that the author or publisher , who holds the copyright to an article , grants all users unlimited , free access to , and license to copy and distribute , a work published in an open access journal ( which may be published initially electronically or in hard - copy ) .

users can also make copies for their personal use , if authorship is properly attributed .

open access publishing often requires an author to pay for publishing or posting of a paper .

estimates of fees charged vary , but generally range from about $500 to $4,000 .

these charges may be paid by individual authors , or by institutions , pursuant to institutional subscription contracts with open access journals that cover publication charges for all authors affiliated with that institution .

typically , open access publishers require that a complete version of the work and related materials be deposited electronically in an online database that permits open access , distribution , interoperability ( allowing users to extract and use the data in other research ) , and long - term archiving .

in " free access " publishing neither an author nor a reader pays for articles to be published or posted on the internet , but other open access features may not be mandatory .

a few commercial publishers have adopted some open access features in their business models .

however , the fundamental difference is that traditional publishers generally require readers to pay to read or print an article , or to search indexes of abstracts or citations .

open access publishers generally do not require readers to pay for these services .

some traditional publishers say they already provide open access in that they may make papers freely available online — but this is usually a year or two after publication .

the publishers still hold copyright , and they may or may not allow the author to post his or her published articles in an open access repository or database , or on the author's own website .

the scope of open access repositories or archives varies .

some contain published journal articles or nonpublished "grey literature" in all fields of science or in specific scientific disciplines .

some archive a specific researchers' preprints , articles , or research reports ; or , as in the case of the national institutes of health model , articles , data , or other materials funded by an agency , but prepared for publication by traditional publishers .

some open access repositories archive only citations for articles or other materials ; some archive both citations and full text materials ; some allow free downloading and some do not .

a variety of nongovernmental open access publishing activities is illustrated next with summaries of some current major open access information systems or publishers .

these are categorized by general type , including commercial open access systems , academic - sponsored systems , and subject or disciplinary systems .

nih's pubmed central ( pmc ) system is described in detail in the section of this report that focuses on nih .

controversies arise because developments in open access systems and policies seem to have outpaced society's ability to design equitable and efficient mechanisms and economic reward structures to manage transitions between traditional and open access publishing and archiving .

there is evidence that greater acceptance of online and open access publishing is "forcing traditional journals to address fundamental financial and philosophical challenges," which has generated heated discussions in the scientific publishing community .

major arguments made by supporters of open access publishing ( largely scientists , librarians , and some non - profit publishers ) are that it rides the new wave of inevitable changes in publishing and electronic dissemination of information due to development of the internet , hastens scientific progress , gives access to more readers , promotes economic development , and , in the case of federally funded research , provides citizens with ready access to the results of research and development that their taxes funded .

opponents of open access publishing ( primarily traditional publishers and major scientific associations ) cite such issues as the doubtful permanence of electronic archives , questions of copyright ownership and reductions to traditional publishers' profits , costs to researchers who have to pay to have their manuscripts published in open access journals , the possibly dubious quality of articles published , questions about peer review processing and quality , perceptions of the academic community and the academic reward system which appear to give more status to articles published in traditional , subscriber - pays journals , and so forth .

see the appendix for a list of additional issues raised about the impact of open access publishing on the academic community , scholarship , and teaching .

the following sections elaborate on some of these issues .

on june 26 , 2003 , representative martin o. sabo introduced the "public access to science act" ( h.r .

2613 , 108 th congress ) , which would have denied copyright protection to publications resulting from federally funded basic scientific research in order to encourage free dissemination of research results to the public .

no action was taken on this bill .

in addition to nih's public access policy and pmc , other federal agencies have engaged in open access activities .

several federal agencies publish free , open access , peer reviewed , internet accessible journals .

these journals include emerging infectious diseases , by the centers for disease control and prevention ; and agricultural research and the journal of agricultural research , maintained by the u.s. department of agriculture and the national agricultural library .

others have free , searchable , electronically available repositories that include abstracts , links to full - text articles , and other research reports , some of which may be read online .

however , some agencies have confronted serious obstacles to maintaining such systems and have been forced to terminate them .

below is an overview of agency activities and a review of some of the general issues raised about federal involvement in open access publishing and databases .

several international organizations and other countries are examining wider implementation of open access publishing .

following the release in 2003 of the "berlin declaration" which called for open access to knowledge and its signing by representatives of selected european universities , research groups , and government sectors , the european union began a study on changes in markets for scientific and technical publishing in europe .

among its topics of inquiry is the subject of "open access to research findings for all and the need to reconcile authors' rights and the economic interests of publishers. .

the report , study on the economic and technical evolution of the scientific publication markets in europe , january 2006 , endorsed but did not require open access to publicly funded research .

in 2004 , the organization for economic cooperation and development's ( oecd ) science ministers declared their commitment to a "... principle that research data from public funding should be openly available" on the rationale that providing such access promotes long - term economic benefits , more informed governmental decisionmaking , and hastens the advancement of scientific research .

the ministers asked oecd to develop guidelines to "facilitate optimal cost - effective access to digital research data from public funding ..." that would be balanced in terms of opening access while recognizing "the need for restriction of access in some instances to protect social , scientific , and economic interests. .

the guidelines will be released after approval by the oecd council .

the 2004 oecd work was based , in part , on a report that was funded by the u.s. national science foundation .

according to the report's authors , "the ultimate goal ... is to make data sharing and the principle of open access the rule rather than the exception. .

another oecd report published on september 2 , 2005 , as digital broadband content: scientific publishing .

it reiterated the view that governments should increase access to findings from publicly funded research to maximize social returns on public investments and presented examples and comprehensive pro and con analyses of currently used business models of open access publishing and open access archives .

it also summarized the pros and cons of "hybrid" business models which distribute publishing costs among authors and users .

one example is a ... two - part tariff for author fees ... with fees levied for submission and publication serving to reduce the tendency for multiple and speculative submission of papers for publication , and enabling journals to cover the costs of quality through support for higher rejection rates .

such as model might also serve to increase revenue certainty for publishers of open access author pays variant journals and , by reducing the cost of publication in them , enable them better to compete for authors with subscription - based journals .

however , user resistance would be a strong possibility compared with simpler author pays models .

the report also proposed variations of another hybrid model involving "... segmentation of a journal into subscription and open access on an article - by - article basis , according to the author's preference and willingness / ability to pay. .

apparently a number of publishers have already adopted such practices , and the oecd report concluded "such a model may be a useful way for a journal title to migrate from a subscription model to an open access model over time , with the pace and direction of change dictated by author preferences. .

as noted above , there has been considerable governmental and nongovernmental activity to promote open access publishing in the united kingdom .

some scientific and medical researchers in britain took steps to make research results freely available via the british open access publisher , biomedcentral .

subsequently , in 2004 , the science and technology committee of britain's house of commons issued a report endorsing open access to research results by proposing to require authors to deposit their published papers in online archives and journals using an author pays model and eliminating subscription fees .

it also recommended that government agencies mandate that government - funded researchers put their articles into the archives and that the government pay some publishing fees .

in november 2004 the u.k. government ( the department of trade and industry ) rejected the proposal , maintaining there is no indication that access to scientific journals is impeded under current publishing methods , and that according to the government , "the true costs of open - access publishing are still not clear ..." and "it is 'not obvious ... that the 'author pays' business model would give better value for money than the current one...." in june 2005 , the united kingdom research councils ( rcuk ) , the main british supporter of publicly funded research , "which distribute[s] most government science funding," issued for comment a draft policy which mandates researchers it funds to archive their journal articles and conference papers "in a free public archive 'at the earliest opportunity , wherever possible at or around the time of publication.' .

but the rules may allow publishers to continue to embargo archiving articles until many months after publication , since the council says "its mandate is 'subject to copyright and licensing arrangements' that can restrict what authors do. .

costs of publishing in "author pays" journals would be covered by the research councils' funding grant "subject to justification of cost - effectiveness. .

the british government said it would review its policy options on this issue taking into consideration the draft rcuk policy and any changes to it , as well as other information .

the executive board of the rcuk issued a policy statement in the summer of 2006 , saying that "...all peer - reviewed journal papers produced by publicly funded research must be made available for free soon after they're completed. .

but "exactly what that means was not specified , and rcuk left each research council to set its own rules. .

rcuk also said it would assess the results of a two - year analysis of the impact of mandating open access and review the policies in 2008 .

the wellcome trust , a large british medical foundation , recently announced that it requires all papers produced with its support "... to be submitted to the nih archive or to the british equivalent that is being developed. .

the british royal society , an advisory body to the government , which also publishes seven peer - reviewed journals , whose papers can be accessed without charge a year after publication , issued a position paper opposing the rcuk policy .

it cited , in particular , the lack of assessment about cost effectiveness of institutional archives , subject - based repositories , and self - archiving ; the potential for the proposed policy to threaten survival of some existing journals ; and the problems observed with quality control of articles appearing in some open access publications .

apparently some learned societies fear that libraries will cancel subscriptions to their professional societies' publications .

other foreign and international organization open access activities are summarized in julie m. esanau and paul f. uhlir , eds. , open access and the public domain in digital data an information for science , proceedings of an international symposium , published by u.s. national committee for codata , national academies press , washington , d.c. , 2004 .

policies for open access journals and citation repositories are evolving and contentious issues may be raised during the 109 th congress .

those that have implications for academic institutions are discussed in the appendix .

other policy issues and questions are emerging , including the following .

assessment of which federal agencies , in addition to nih , would seek to archive and provide free public access to manuscripts or articles reporting the results of research that they supported .

analysis of which agencies might seek to provide access to manuscripts or articles , using government purpose license or nonexclusive right to use published articles , regardless of copyright ownership .

comparison of the quality of peer review processes and of peer reviewed articles that are published in traditional , subscriber - pays and open access journals .

monitoring of whether academic reward systems react differently to articles published by traditional publishers or open access publishers and assessing the implications for professional advancement of researchers and teachers in academic promotion and tenure systems .

assessing the positive and negative impacts on the speed and quality of scientific research , knowledge synthesis , and knowledge accumulation flowing from open access publishing and open access citation / abstract archives in comparison with traditional publishing and archival methods .

analysis of publisher actions to identify whether or not authors who seek copyright agreement terms allowing them to post manuscripts in pmc are penalized .

assessment of rates of voluntary participation by nih - funded authors in the public access policy and determination of whether there are any negative impacts — from research sponsors or the scientific community — on nih - funded authors who may not submit articles for dissemination in pmc .

determination if federal open access databases and archival repositories should be limited to providing access only to publications that result from federally funded r&d .

assessment of proposals for governmental citation archives to link to publisher's websites to read published articles , as opposed to posting articles on a free access government system .

follow - up to congressional mandates that nih monitor the implementation of its public access policy , that it work with traditional , subscriber - pays publishers to monitor the impacts and costs of open access archiving of text on pmc , as it posts what is estimated to be thousands ( possibly 60,000 ) of additional articles on the system , and that it work with publishers to monitor impacts on the integrity of peer review processes .

 ( the nih director estimated that the added costs for posting all nih - funded research studies on pubmed central ' s digital library at around $2 to $4 million annually .

according to nih , agency - supported research resulted in 60,000 to 65,000 published papers in 2003. ) .

with respect to pubchem , assessing cooperation between nih and private groups on clarifying the possible overlap between nih's archive and that of private activities , including the american chemical society's chemical abstracts service .

analysis of the impacts on biomedical research in general and on nih's research and its strategically planned genomic research initiatives if the scope of pubchem were to be limited .

determining whether federal regulations for support of contracts and grants will continue to allow agencies to pay individual authors or academic institutions for the costs of publishing articles in open access journals as part of the research process , especially if open access publishing becomes more widespread and a substantial portion of the scientific and technical publishing market .

a related issue is determining the possible effects on research support funding .

given that federal research sponsors allow some journal publishing and subscription costs to be counted as part of the costs to conduct federally sponsored research , comparing the actual total costs to the government for publishing and reading of scientific articles published traditionally as opposed to those published using open access models .

analysis of the role that the federal government should play in funding the start - up of nongovernmental citation archives and repositories for scientific and technical articles , if the government also initiates governmental activities with similar purposes .

economic analysis of the impacts on the commercial publishing industry ( revenues , employment , sustainability , etc. ) .

if open access publishing and archiving activities continue to expand .

examination of the extent to which professional scientific societies utilize the profits from publishing to support their activities and of alternative sources of funding for these activities .

continuing questions relating to controversial issues about open access publishing were raised by andy gass and helen doyle , "the reality of open - access journal articles," chronicle of higher education , february 18 , 2005 .

they conclude that although there are problems , support is growing in academia for open access journals .

remaining questions include: what will become of the market for secondary filters of primary research articles , services like biomed central's faculty of 1000 , which highlight important papers published in a wide swath of journals ? .

will fee - for - access ventures that collect open - access articles become a new cash cow for publishers ? .

at present , faculty members offer their recommendations to the filtering services free , and publishers sell their aggregated opinions to institutions — will established professors go on contributing their free labor to such entrepreneurial enterprises ? .

how will the role of the research library change , as open - access scholarly communication becomes more widely practiced ? .

to what extent will librarians be freed from the burdens of subscription management ? .

many university libraries now encourage open access by subsidizing a portion of the publication charges in open - access venues for authors affiliated with the university , through channels like our employer's institutional membership program .

will those subsidies continue ? .

if so , will they continue to be paid from libraries' budgets , or will they come from research budgets — a source that would be more consistent with the view of open - access proponents that costs of publication should be part of the costs of conducting research ? .

or will external granting agencies , many of which already pay scientists' page charges and color - illustration fees , assume the full costs of their investigators' open - access publications ? .

will libraries continue to serve as intermediaries through which researchers find open - access information , as well as that available only through subscription , and how ? .

those questions relate not just to academic libraries , but to the mission of colleges and universities .

the time has come for a comprehensive review of how best to pay for the dissemination of professors' work .

how will reduced legal barriers to reusing articles — a stipulation of most formal definitions of open access — affect teaching , research , and other scholarly activities ? .

there are , of course , good precedents for having few or no legal restrictions on the reuse of scholarly work: every article published by an employee of the nih is in the public domain .

some more - restrictive open - access licenses now available , like the creative commons attribution license in use for articles from our employer and from biomed central , permit users to reproduce scholarly work in any medium , for any purpose , as long as the author receives proper credit .

what kinds of educational tools will such licenses make possible ? .

for example , will we see a proliferation of online articles enhanced with explanatory links and informational sidebars , which make scientific discoveries more comprehensible to a wide audience ? .

will such resources be produced by commercial enterprises ? .

by nonprofit organizations ? .

or by networks of volunteers , as is the case with open - source computer software ? .

will open - access articles enable more researchers from less - developed countries to work on the frontiers of science ? .

given that all credible open - access journals waive publication fees for authors who can't afford to pay them , increased availability — and therefore knowledge — of the literature might well allow scientists in the developing world to increase their output of cutting - edge work .

would that change , in turn , help resolve the "10 / 90 gap" — the unfortunate reality that less than 10 percent of the global expenditure on medical research goes to study the predominant health needs of 90 percent of the world's population ? .

most important , what kinds of discoveries might result from searchable , open archives of peer - reviewed , full - text scientific literature ? .

the aggregation of gene sequences in a single , freely accessible information space ( genbank ) has spawned entire fields of research ; will open access to journal articles have a similar effect on areas of work that could benefit from "mining" full texts and figures ? .

clearly , comprehensive collections of open - access literature would make it much easier to systematically review published medical studies .

will open - access literature lead to frequent discoveries of correlations between phenomena previously thought to be unrelated ? .

will it spark more open access to data sets and databases of laboriously compiled and annotated information ? .

the potential for open access to lead to new discoveries is its single most compelling asset , though one that is frequently overlooked .

