secretary of agriculture mike johanns , at a public meeting on january 31 , 2007 , described the administration's 65 recommendations for a new farm bill .

these recommendations were published by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) in a report subsequently transmitted to congress titled 2007 farm bill proposals .

the report and related usda materials are available on the department's website at http: / / www.usda.gov / wps / portal / ! ut / p / _s.7_0_a / 7_0_1ob ? navid=farm_bill_forums .

in the following pages , congressional research service analysts summarize current policy and programs , describe the usda recommendations , and pose questions related to the policy , program , and / or budgetary impact of the recommendations .

the organization of this report parallels that of the usda report .

the usda report presumes a new five - year farm bill covering the 2008-2012 time frame .

however , consistent with u.s. government annual baseline budgeting , the spending authority and spending outlay estimates of the administration's farm bill are projected for 10 years .

the 2002 farm bill mandated support for a group of commodities ( grains , oilseeds , cotton , sugar , and milk ) that long have received support , and it added six more commodities ( dry peas , lentils , small chick peas , wool , mohair , and honey ) to the list .

the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) pays the costs of commodity support under a $30 billion line of credit from the u.s. treasury .

congress annually appropriates funds to the ccc that are used to pay down its loans from the treasury .

commodity support expenditures are estimated to have averaged about $12.6 billion per year over the six - year life of the current farm bill ( fy2002-fy2007 ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) forecasts that future spending for commodity support under current law would amount to about $7 billion per year over the next five years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) .

the decline from past spending levels is due to current and anticipated high market prices for supported crops well into the future .

usda ' s proposed 2007 farm bill outlines modifications to the commodity programs that are claimed to save $4.494 billion from the office of management and budget ( omb ) 10-year current services baseline of $74.566 billion for commodity support .

in addition to the financial savings , the modifications to current law , according to the secretary of agriculture , are designed to make the programs "more market - oriented , more predictable , less market distorting and better able to withstand challenge" in the world trade organization .

before the 1985 farm bill , few conservation programs existed and only two , the agricultural conservation program and watershed and flood prevention operations , would be considered large by today's standards .

in total , conservation programs were funded at less than $1 billion annually .

the current conservation portfolio includes more than 20 distinct programs with annual spending of about $5.2 billion .

most are enacted through recent farm bills with mandatory funding supplied by usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

the 2002 farm bill authorized large increases in mandatory funding for several agricultural conservation programs .

the two largest , the conservation reserve program ( crp ) and the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) , make up almost 55% of the $5.2 billion in current annual spending .

the administration ' s proposed 2007 farm bill has outlined an overall increase in funding for agricultural conservation programs , which the administration estimates is $7.825 billion over the 10-year current services baseline of $48.698 billion .

much of this additional funding is attributed to an increase in the proposed consolidated environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) and an increase in the acreage limit for the wetlands reserve program ( wrp ) .

many of the administration's proposed changes would consolidate existing programs , with the goal of increasing administrative efficiencies and reducing participant confusion .

1 .

several program consolidation changes are proposed .

what level of savings can be expected by these consolidations and are there any specific plans for using those "savings ? .

2 .

given the continued growth of the conservation effort , what additional evaluation measures , if any , are planned to keep congress informed about accomplishments and spending efficiencies ? .

3 .

based on the administration's budget plan and the farm bill proposal , there may appear to some to be inconsistencies within working lands conservation programs .

the administration proposed increasing funding for csp and eqip by a combined $475 million annually in the farm bill proposal .

the fy2008 budget proposal , meanwhile , proposes to reduce both csp and eqip .

eqip is authorized at $1.27 billion and the president's budget requests $1.0 billion ( a $270 million reduction ) .

csp is estimated by the cbo at $451 million and the president's budget requests $316 million ( a $135 million difference ) .

would the proposed increases in mandatory conservation programs authorized by the farm bill supersede the cuts in those same programs if the administration's budget were adopted ? .

how should the differences between the farm bill and the budget proposal be interpreted ? .

farm bills typically authorize multi - year funding for usda agricultural trade programs ( direct export subsidies , export credit guarantees , foreign food aid , and export market development ) and address new issues that have arisen as u.s. agricultural exporters seek to sell their products overseas .

the administration proposes three revisions to the permanently authorized farm loan programs of the usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) .

fsa is a lender of last resort , providing direct and guaranteed loans to farmers unable to secure credit elsewhere .

the general intention of the farm bill proposal is to enhance loan availability for beginning and socially disadvantaged classes of farmers and ranchers , and to increase the maximum size of individual direct loans , which effectively have been reduced by inflation .

the cost of these changes against the budget baseline is zero because the programs are funded by annual discretionary appropriations .

the statutory changes in eligibility and loan size may affect the distribution of program benefits and how far a dollar of appropriation goes , but appropriators will continue to control the actual level of spending .

first , the administration proposes to target more of the fsa direct loan portfolio to beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers .

currently , the law requires a certain percentage of the loan authority to be reserved for beginning farmers and ranchers for a specific length of the fiscal year , and funds are disbursed across states by expected need .

after the targeting period ends , any remaining funds are pooled across states and allocated to other qualified farmers .

the administration proposes to double the targeting percentage for direct operating loans from 35% to 70% , and increase the targeting of direct farm ownership loans from 70% to 100% .

new re - pooling procedures at the end of the targeting period would redistribute funds first to targeted groups of farmers in other states before other farmers .

second , the administration proposes to enhance the beginning farmer down payment program to make it easier for beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers to buy property .

it would ( a ) lower the interest rate charged from 4% to 2% , ( b ) eliminate the $250,000 cap on the value of property that may be acquired , ( c ) decrease the producer contribution from 10% to 5% , ( d ) defer payments for the first year , and ( e ) add socially disadvantaged farmers to the list of eligible applicants .

third , the administration proposes to raise the current $200,000 borrower limit on direct farm ownership loans and $200,000 limit on direct farm operating loans to a combined $500,000 limit on both types of loans .

the current limits were established in 1984 and 1978 , respectively , and have been eroded in terms of purchasing power by inflation in the price of land and inputs .

limits on guaranteed loans were increased in 1998 , indexed for inflation , and combined across ownership and operating loans .

1 .

the proposed $500,000 combined limit on direct farm operating and farm ownership loans is not indexed for inflation .

however , the limit on guaranteed loans dating from 1998 is indexed for inflation .

what is the rationale for indexing guaranteed loans and not direct loans ? .

2 .

farmers may have more flexibility with the combined $500,000 cap , but the total is nonetheless only slightly higher than the current $400,000 total across the two types of loans .

given the increase in land prices and input costs since the mid 1980's , is a 25% increase in the combined loan cap sufficient ? .

3 .

the 2002 farm bill required a study of the effectiveness of the delivery of usda's direct and guaranteed loan program .

the issue was whether the direct loan program was still needed , given shifts in many different government loan programs toward guaranteed loans , including at fsa .

the administration's fy2008 budget for rural development calls for cutting direct loans in the rural housing program .

why does the usda believe direct farm loans are still necessary but not direct rural housing loans ? .

4 .

what has been usda's experience with the pilot program to guarantee contract land sales as established under the 2002 farm bill ( 7 u.s.c .

1936 ) ? .

the program was authorized as a pilot through fy2007 , and was to guarantee loans made by a private seller of a farm to a qualified beginning farmer on a contract land sale basis .

how would usda rate the success of this program ? .

why is usda not requesting its reauthorization ? .

5 .

does the administration have a position on expanding the lending authority of the farm credit system ( fcs ) , a policy fcs supports but commercial bankers oppose ? .

three agencies established by the agricultural reorganization act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-354 ) are responsible for usda's rural development mission area: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) .

an office of community development provides community development support through rural development's field offices .

the mission area also administers the rural portion of the empowerment zones and enterprise communities initiative , the rural economic partnership zones , and the national rural development partnership .

the 2002 farm bill reauthorized ongoing usda programs in agricultural research , education , extension , and agricultural economics through fy2007 , and extended reforms in this mission area that were enacted in 1998 as part of the agricultural research , extension , and education reform act ( p.l .

105-185 ) .

the agencies that comprise usda's research , extension , and economics ( ree ) mission area are the agricultural research service ( ars ) , the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) , the economic research service ( ers ) , and the national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) .

ars is usda's intramural research agency , comprising more than 100 laboratories nationwide .

csrees distributes annual appropriations to support extramural agricultural research and extension at the land grant colleges of agriculture in the states and u.s. territories .

ers conducts economic research , and nass is the primary usda statistical agency .

the usda's forest service manages the national forest system , funds and conducts forestry research , and provides forestry assistance .

most federal forestry programs are permanently authorized .

past farm bills have generally addressed cooperative assistance programs administered by the forest service's state & private forestry ( s&pf ) branch .

the administration ' s 2007 farm bill proposes four new programs: ( 1 ) comprehensive statewide forest planning ; ( 2 ) competitive landscape - scale forestry grants ; ( 3 ) a 10-year , $150 million forest wood - to - energy technology development program ; and ( 4 ) financial and technical assistance to communities for acquiring , planning for , and conserving community forests .

the administration has not proposed reauthorizing the forest land enhancement program ( flep ) .

flep ( a combination of two previously existing landowner assistance programs ) was enacted in the 2002 farm bill with mandatory funding of $100 million over the six - year life of the law .

subsequently , at the request of the administration , funding authority was reduced to $49.5 million .

title ix of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) represented the first - ever energy title in a farm bill and included nine provisions addressing agriculture - based renewable energy systems .

usda ' s proposed 2007 farm bill outlines modifications to programs that expand federal research on renewable fuels and bioenergy ; and re - authorizes , revises , and expands programs intended to provide assistance for the advancement of renewable energy production and commercialization .

however , several expiring provisions from the 2002 farm bill are not mentioned .

these include the biorefinery grants ( section 9003 ) , the biodiesel fuel education program ( section 9004 ) , the energy audit and renewable energy development program ( section 9005 ) , the memorandum of understanding between the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of energy concerning hydrogen and fuel cell technologies ( section 9007 ) , and cooperative research and development on carbon sequestration ( section 9009 ) .

it is also noteworthy that several of these same provisions went unfunded during the life of the 2002 farm bill .

1 .

is it usda's intention that expiring provisions in the 2002 farm bill be dropped from future legislation ? .

these provisions were never funded or implemented during the past five years .

would the usda support funding these expiring provisions if they are reauthorized by congress ? .

2 .

what progress has been made to improve coordination between usda and the department of energy ? .

is there still room for major improvements or are the two departments already fairly efficient in coordinating energy development activities ? .

the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized so it does not require renewal in the 2007 farm bill .

major enhancements to the program have been authorized in legislation on several occasions since 1980 ( usually outside of the farm bill process ) .

most recently , the agriculture risk protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) put $8.2 billion in new federal spending measures over a five - year period into the program primarily through more generous premium subsidies to help make the program more affordable to farmers and increase farmer participation .

since 2000 , the federal subsidy to the crop insurance program has averaged about $3.3 billion per year .

although the scope of crop insurance has widened significantly over the past 25 years and premium subsidies have increased , the stated goal of eliminating disaster payments has not been achieved .

until the 2005 crop , congress provided ad hoc disaster payments to farmers in virtually every year since 1988 that witnessed substantial weather - related crop losses .

the disaster assistance has been made available regardless of whether a producer had an active crop insurance policy .

the administration's farm bill proposal contains several crop insurance recommendations intended to enhance participation ; address issues of waste , fraud and abuse ; reduce costs ; and reduce the need for emergency supplemental disaster payments .

one of the more significant proposed changes to the program would be to allow participating farmers to purchase insurance for the portion of their production that is part of their deductible , and not currently covered by crop insurance .

under this supplemental deductible coverage , a producer could purchase an additional policy , and a payment would be made when losses in the producer's county exceed a certain threshold .

the administration also recommends several cost - saving measures to the program including reducing premium subsidies by 2 to 5 percentage points , charging premiums for the catastrophic level of coverage ( which currently is premium - free ) , and requiring the private insurance companies ( which now sell and service the policies ) to absorb more of the cost of the program .

finally , farmers would be required to purchase crop insurance as a prerequisite for participating in the farm commodity support programs .

1 .

the estimated annual average cost of the supplemental deductible coverage that the administration proposes is $35 million .

over the last twenty years , congress has provided an average of about $2 billion per year in supplemental disaster payments .

how would this proposed program preclude the pressure for congress to enact multi - billion dollar disaster payment programs each year ? .

2 .

what effect would the administration proposals to reduce the federal cost of the crop insurance program by increasing farmer - paid premiums have on farmer participation in the program ? .

3 .

a 1994 crop insurance act required the purchase of a crop insurance policy as a prerequisite for participating in the farm commodity programs .

farm groups were strongly opposed to this provision and fought successfully to have it eliminated in the 1996 farm bill .

what reaction might be expected from farm groups to the current proposal for mandatory linkage ? .

"section 32" is a permanent appropriation that since 1935 has earmarked the equivalent of 30% of annual customs receipts to support the farm sector through a variety of activities .

today , most of this appropriation ( now approximately $7 billion yearly ) is transferred to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) account that funds child nutrition programs .

however , a smaller — but still significant — amount of section 32 money is set aside each year to purchase non - price - supported commodities directly and provide them to schools and other feeding sites .

some of these purchases are "entitlement" commodities that are required to be made under the school lunch act .

others are "bonus" commodities , acquired through emergency surplus removal activities .

the total value of both types of commodities now exceeds $900 million per year .

the purchases are made by usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) .

included within these combined ( "mandated" and "bonus" ) section 32 totals , fruit and vegetable purchases over the last five years have averaged $308 million per year , according to usda .

1 .

usda proposes to increase purchases of fruits and vegetables using section 32 authority by at least $200 million per year , but the farm bill budget indicates no score above the omb baseline .

why is this proposal not reflected in the administration's fy2008 budget ? .

in other words , how does the administration propose to cover the cost of these increased fruit and vegetable purchases ? .

2 .

if new spending would not be created , which activities or food purchases would be reduced to pay for these increases ? .

for example , section 32 is now also used to purchase animal products including meats , poultry , and seafood .

would the administration proposal result in fewer purchases of these products ? .

if not , why ? .

3 .

the department routinely has funds remaining in the section 32 account at the end of each fiscal year , which are "carried over" into the next fiscal year to be used in section 32 .

what is this level of unobligated funds , on average , and does usda intend to reduce the size of this carryover to pay for new fruit and vegetable purchases ? .

if so , won't that leave even less carryover in future years ? .

4 .

does this proposal call for any new legislative authority , and if not , how can congress be assured that the initiative would be carried out by future administrations ? .

5 .

how does the department currently determine what proportions of its section 32 commodity acquisitions go to various domestic nutrition programs , and how would it do so for the proposed increases ? .

6 .

how does this proposal differ from the separate administration initiative providing for $50 million yearly in other new fruit and vegetable purchases for domestic nutrition programs ? .

how would it be funded ? .

7 .

why does the department need , and use , such broad legislative authority to administer section 32 programs , particularly "bonus" surplus removals ? .

the administration ' s 2007 farm bill proposal recommends considerably more funding for research and marketing programs , to support the continuing growth of the organic farming sector .

1 .

how is the department proposing to provide this new mandatory funding ? .

2 .

usda's farm bill initiative states that gaps in the organic regulations may need to be addressed in order to better support enforcement activity .

but more enforcement would also require more personnel and resources .

how would the department provide funding for the increased program oversight and enforcement that could be necessary as the number of certified operations increases ? .

