congress has long been concerned about the well - being of youth .

the nation's future depends on young people today to leave school prepared for college or the workplace and to begin to make positive contributions to society .

some youth , however , face barriers to becoming contributing taxpayers , workers , and participants in civic life .

these youth have characteristics or experiences that put them at risk of developing problem behaviors and outcomes that have the potential to harm their community , themselves , or both .

poor outcomes often develop in home and neighborhood environments that do not provide youth with adequate economic and emotional supports .

groups of vulnerable ( or "at - risk" ) youth include emancipating foster youth , runaway and homeless youth , and youth involved in the juvenile justice system , among others .

like all youth , vulnerable youth face a difficult transition to adulthood ; however , their transition is further complicated by a number of challenges , including family conflict and obstacles to securing employment that provides adequate wages , health insurance , and potential for upward mobility .

the federal government has not adopted a single overarching federal policy or legislative vehicle that addresses the challenges at - risk youth experience in adolescence or while making the transition to adulthood .

rather , federal youth policy today has evolved from multiple programs established in the early 20 th century and expanded through great society initiatives .

these programs , concentrated in six areas — workforce development , education , juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , social services , public health , and national and community service — provide vulnerable youth with opportunities to develop skills that will assist them in adulthood .

despite the range of federal services and activities for vulnerable youth , many of the programs have not been developed into a coordinated system of support .

in response , federal policymakers have periodically undertaken efforts to develop a comprehensive federal policy around youth .

congress has passed legislation ( the tom osborne federal youth coordination act , p.l .

109-365 ) that authorizes the federal government to establish a youth council to improve coordination of federal programs serving youth .

the youth council has not been established , but in 2008 , the interagency working group on youth programs was convened .

the working group is made up of multiple federal departments and agencies , and has worked to address common goals for youth .

in the past three decades , congress has also considered other legislation ( the youth community development block grant of 1995 and the younger americans act of 2000 ) to improve the delivery of services to vulnerable youth and provide opportunities to these youth through policies with a "positive youth development" focus .

this report first provides an overview of the youth population and the increasing complexity of transitioning to adulthood for all adolescents .

it also provides a separate discussion of the concept of "disconnectedness," as well as the protective factors youth can develop during childhood and adolescence that can mitigate poor outcomes .

further , the report describes the evolution of federal youth policy , focusing on three time periods , and provides a brief overview of current federal programs targeted at vulnerable youth .

 ( table a - 1 at the end of the report , enumerates the objectives and funding levels of such programs .

note that the table does not enumerate all programs that target , even in small part , vulnerable or disconnected youth. ) .

the report then discusses the challenges of coordinating federal programs for youth , as well as federal legislation and initiatives that promote coordination among federal agencies and support programs with a positive youth development focus .

not all vulnerable youth experience negative outcomes .

however , reviews of social science literature have identified multiple factors that can influence whether youth face negative outcomes in adolescence and as they transition to adulthood .

such factors include the following: poverty: poverty is linked to a number of potential future problems among youth , including chronic health conditions , low educational attainment , and engagement in delinquent behaviors .

family instability: children who grow up in two - parent families tend to have better health outcomes and more positive behaviors .

family dysfunction: two types of family dysfunction are particularly detrimental to the future well - being of children: witnessing violence against their mothers and criminal activity among their family members .

child maltreatment: abuse and neglect by their parents or other caretakers puts children at risk for many negative outcomes , including poor physical and mental health , lower cognitive functioning and educational attainment , and poor social development and behavior .

exposure to violence in the community: witnessing violence in a community is linked to several negative outcomes such as depression , aggressive behavior , anxiety , posttraumatic stress , psychological trauma , and antisocial behavior .

school resources and environment: schools with fewer resources are associated with poor academic outcomes , and schools can create environments with problematic social issues such as bullying and behavioral problems .

community resources: children who live in high - poverty neighborhoods might be less likely than their peers who live in low - poverty neighborhoods to perceive work as a common activity , and therefore less likely to succeed in school .

residential mobility: children who move frequently may experience negative outcomes , such as lower academic performance , high rates of school dropout , emotional and behavioral problems , and engaging in premarital sex .

minority status: children of color are more likely to live in high - poverty neighborhoods and to attend lower - performing schools , compared to white youth .

further , racial discrimination can hinder job opportunities for youth .

the research literature points out that children are particularly vulnerable if they experience two or more of these risk factors .

the remainder of this report describes the evolution of federal youth policy and provides an overview of current programs and initiatives that focus on vulnerable youth .

many of these initiatives promote coordination of federal youth programs and positive youth development .

the federal government has not adopted a single overarching federal policy or legislative vehicle that addresses the challenges that young people experience in adolescence or while making the transition to adulthood .

rather , federal youth policy today evolved from multiple programs and initiatives that began in the early 1900s to assist children and youth .

from the turn of the 20 th century through the 1950s , youth policy was generally subsumed under a broad framework of child welfare issues .

the children's bureau , established in 1912 , focused attention on child labor and the protection of children with special needs .

the age boundaries of "youth" were not clearly delineated , but on the basis of proposed child labor reform legislation at that time , "child" referred to those individuals age 16 and under .

also during this period , work and education support programs were created to ease the financial pressures of the great depression for older youth ( ages 16 to 23 ) , and increasingly , federal attention focused on addressing the growing number of youth classified as delinquent .

the subsequent period , spanning the 1960s and 1970s , was marked by the creation of programs that targeted youth in six policy areas: workforce development and job training , education , juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , social services , public health , and national and community service .

finally , from the 1980s until the present , many of these programs have been expanded ; others like them have been eliminated .

the federal government has also recently adopted strategies to better serve the youth population through targeted legislation and initiatives .

this report provided an overview of the vulnerable youth population and examined the federal role in supporting these youth .

although a precise number of vulnerable youth cannot be aggregated ( and should not be , due to data constraints ) , these youth are generally concentrated among seven groups: youth "aging out" of foster care , runaways and homeless youth , juvenile justice - involved youth , immigrant youth and youth with limited english proficiency ( lep ) , youth with physical and mental disabilities , youth with mental disorders , and youth receiving special education .

each of these categories is comprised of youth with distinct challenges and backgrounds ; however , many of these youth share common experiences , such as unstable home and neighborhood environments , coupled with challenges in school .

without protective factors in place , vulnerable youth may have difficulty transitioning to adulthood .

detachment from the labor market and school — or disconnectedness — is perhaps the single strongest indicator that the transition has not been made adequately .

despite the negative forecast for the employment and education prospects of vulnerable youth , some youth experience positive outcomes in adulthood .

youth who develop strong cognitive , emotional , and vocational skills , among other types of competencies , have greater opportunities to reach their goals .

advocates for youth promote the belief that all youth have assets and can make valuable contributions to their communities despite their challenges .

the federal government has not developed a single overarching policy or program to assist vulnerable youth , like the older americans act program for the elderly .

since the 1960s , a number of programs , many operating in isolation from others , have worked to address the specific needs ( i.e. , vocational , educational , social services , juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and health ) of these youth .

more recently , policymakers have taken steps toward a more comprehensive federal response to the population .

the youthbuild transfer act of 2006 moved the youthbuild program from hud to dol because the program is more aligned with dol's mission of administering workforce and training programs .

also in 2006 , the tom osborne youth coordination act was passed to improve coordination across federal agencies that administer programs for vulnerable youth and to assist federal agencies with evaluating these programs .

in february 2008 , president bush signed an executive order establishing a federal interagency working group on youth programs .

other coordinating efforts , such as the coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention and shared youth vision initiative , may have the resources and leadership to create a more unified federal youth policy , albeit the council has a primary focus on juvenile justice - involved youth .

in addition to the federal youth coordination act , the few youth - targeted acts over the over the past several years have not passed or have passed without full implementation .

the unfunded claude pepper young americans act of 1990 sought to increase coordination among federal children and youth agencies by creating a federal council on children , youth , and families that would have streamlined federal youth programs and advised the president on youth issues .

though federal legislation targeted at vulnerable young people has not been passed or implemented in recent years , executive order 13459 and current collaborations ( my brother's keeper and the coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ) appear to have begun addressing , even in small measure , the needs of this population .

