economic indicators confirm that the economy went into a recession at the close of 2007 .

although some economic indicators suggest that growth has resumed , unemployment remains high and is projected to remain so for some time .

historically , international migration ebbs during economic crises ( eg , immigration to the united states was at its lowest levels during the great depression ) .

while preliminary statistical trends hint at a slowing of migration pressures , it remains unclear how the economic recession of the past two years affected immigration .

addressing these contentious policy reforms against the backdrop of economic crisis sharpens the social and business cleavages and narrows the range of options .

even as u.s. unemployment remains at a historically high level , some employers maintain that they continue to need the "best and the brightest" workers , regardless of their country of birth , to remain competitive in a worldwide market and to keep their firms in the united states .

while support for increasing employment - based immigration may be dampened by the high levels of unemployment , proponents argue that the ability to hire foreign workers is an essential ingredient for economic growth .

those opposing increases in foreign workers assert that such expansions — particularly during a period of high unemployment — would have a deleterious effect on salaries , compensation , and working conditions of u.s. workers .

others question whether the united states should continue to issue foreign worker visas ( particularly temporary visas ) at this time and suggest that a moratorium on such visas might be prudent .

immigrant admissions and adjustments for legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status are subject to a complex set of numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , needed skills , and geographic diversity .

the ina establishes a statutory worldwide level of 675,000 lprs annually , but this level is flexible and certain categories of lprs are excluded from , or permitted to exceed , the limits .

this permanent worldwide immigrant level consists of the following components: 480,000 family - sponsored immigrants ; 140,000 employment - based preference immigrants ; and 55,000 diversity immigrants .

the employment - based preference categories are first preference : priority workers who are persons of extraordinary ability in the arts , sciences , education , business , or athletics ; outstanding professors and researchers ; and certain multinational executives and managers ; second preference : members of the professions holding advanced degrees or persons of exceptional ability ; third preference : skilled workers with at least two years training , professionals with baccalaureate degrees , and unskilled workers in occupations in which u.s. workers are in short supply ; fourth preference : special immigrants who largely consist of religious workers , certain former employees of the u.s. government , and undocumented juveniles who become wards of the court ; and fifth preference : investors who invest at least $1 million ( or less money in rural areas or areas of high unemployment ) to create at least 10 new jobs .

in 1990 , congress had amended the ina to raise the level of employment - based immigration from 54,000 lpr visas to more than 143,000 lpr visas annually .

that law also expanded two preference categories into five preference categories and reduced the cap on unskilled workers from 27,000 to 10,000 annually .

although there have been major legislative proposals since the mid - 1990s to alter employment - based immigration , these preference categories remain intact .

currently , annual admission of employment - based preference immigrants is limited to 140,000 plus certain unused family preference numbers from the prior year .

as figure 1 displays , lpr admissions for the first , second and third employment - based preferences have exceeded the ceilings several times in recent years .

although there were almost the same number of first , second , and third preference employment - based lprs in fy2007 and fy2008 ( 155,889 and 155,627 , respectively ) , the number of employment - based lprs in the extraordinary and exceptional categories rose in fy2008 , particularly among those with advanced degrees .

despite the dip to 126,874 employment - based lprs in fy2009 , the first preference extraordinary category rose slightly .

in fy2009 , the number of skilled and unskilled lprs was at its lowest level of admissions since fy1999 .

the dip and surge early in the 2000s depicted in figure 1 was not necessarily the result of labor market demand .

in 2003 , processing delays — largely due to the reorganization of immigration functions as the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established — reduced the number of lprs to only 705,827 .

because dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) was only able to process 161,579 of the potential 226,000 family - sponsored lprs in fy2003 , an extra 64,421 lpr visas rolled over to the fy2004 employment - based categories and created the spike depicted in figure 1 .

employers who seek to hire prospective immigrant workers petition with the uscis .

an eligible petitioner ( in this instance , the eligible petitioner is the u.s. employer seeking to employ the alien ) must file an i - 140 for the alien seeking to immigrate .

uscis adjudicators determine whether the prospective lpr has demonstrated that he or she meets the qualifications for the particular job as well as the ina employment - based preference category .

in terms of employment - based immigration , decisions of the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) have significantly affected the implementation of the law by offering clarification of the statutory language .

while dol draws on regulations that govern its role , the uscis is more often guided through bia decisions and procedures spelled out in the former immigration and naturalization service's operations instructions .

the ina does not delineate a standard policy to investigate and enforce violations of the lcas , and the statutory authority for such investigations and enforcement actions varies across visa categories .

the enforcement responsibilities for violations of these adverse effect provisions , however , are variously assigned to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) or the department of justice ( doj ) as well as to dol .

as discussed at the outset of this report , the ina requires the secretary of labor to certify that the employment of an employment - based lpr will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of similarly employed workers in the united states .

the dol certifying officer ( co ) who learns that an lca for an employment - based lpr is possibly fraudulent refers that case to dhs or doj for investigation .

presumably , doj and dhs could also investigate such cases as document fraud under §274c of the ina .

dol has the authority to revoke the lca if an employer is subsequently found in violation .

dol also may debar an employer for three years if the employer is found to have violated the lca requirements .

in the case of h - 1b labor attestation , however , the secretary of labor has statutory authority to investigate and enforce lca violations of h - 1b petitions , which she has delegated to the administrator of the wage and hour division ( whd ) .

more precisely , the whd is charged with investigating the complaints .

the whd administrator may assess back wages and benefits for the h - 1b worker , civil penalties against the employer , and other administrative remedies .

if an employer is found to have willfully violated the ina , the whd may conduct random investigations of that employer over the next five years .

a dol administrative law judge would decide the case if the employer charged with an h - 1b violation requests a hearing .

the whd is also responsible for informing eta and uscis of employer violations .

it is dhs , however , that has the authority to charge a fee of $500 to h - 1b ( and l visa ) employers for h - 1b visa ( and l visa ) fraud detection and prevention .

the ina provisions governing the enforcement of lcas for h - 2a workers offer yet another approach .

"the secretary of labor is authorized to take such actions , including imposing appropriate penalties and seeking appropriate injunctive relief and specific performance of contractual obligations , as may be necessary to assure employer compliance with terms and conditions of employment under this section. .

the ina authorizes appropriated funding for dol to carry out these actions .

the secretary of labor has delegated this enforcement authority to the whd .

dhs has the investigative and enforcement authorities for h - 2b labor certifications .

the ina authorizes the dhs to charge a fee of $150 to h - 2b employers for fraud detection and prevention .

the secretary of dhs may delegate to the secretary of labor , with the agreement of the secretary of labor , any of the authority given to the secretary of dhs given to impose administrative remedies ( including civil monetary penalties in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per violation ) for h - 2b violations .

the h - 2b violations cited are substantial failure to meet the lca conditions or a willful misrepresentation of a material fact in the lca .

dol recently promulgated regulations that state that dhs had formally delegated this authority to impose penalties to the whd as part of an revision in h - 2b procedures .

the new regulations have added post - adjudication audits that whd will conduct as well procedures for penalizing employers who fail to comply the lcas .

concern that certain multinational firms are hiring foreign professional workers on h - 1b and l visas to work as temporary contractors at salaries that undercut salaries of comparable u.s. workers is cited as one of the reasons congress has imposed an additional fee on companies who have more than 50% of their employees on h - 1b or l visas .

opponents to the additional fee argue that it is discriminatory because it largely affects companies based in india .

both sides agree the additional fees make it more expensive to hire temporary foreign professional workers .

the emergency border security supplemental appropriations act , 2010 ( h.r .

6080 , p.l .

111-230 ) , temporarily increases the l visa filing fee and the fraud prevention and detection fee by $2,250 for applicants that employ 50 or more employees in the united states if more than 50% of the applicant's employees are on l or h - 1b visas .

it also increases the h - 1b visa filing fee and the fraud prevention and detection fee by $2,000 for applicants that employ 50 or more employees in the united states if more than 50% of the applicant's employees are h - 1b or l visas .

the additional fees are in effect through september 30 , 2014 .

as discussed above , the filing fees are generally deposited into the examinations fee account , and the fraud prevention and detection fee are deposited into the h - 1b and l visa fraud prevention and detection fee account .

these additional fees , however , are deposited into the general fund of the treasury to offset the $600 million emergency border security funding that p.l .

111-230 provides in supplemental fy2010 appropriations .

many criticize the foreign labor certification process , both from the perspective of employers and employees ( native - born as well as foreign - born workers ) .

employers often describe frustration with the process , labeling it as unresponsive to their need to hire people expeditiously .

representatives of u.s. workers question whether it provides adequate safeguards and assert that employers find ways to "end run" the lengthy process .

others point out that certain professional employees such as l intracompany transferees with specialized knowledge or e - 3 professional workers from australia are not appreciably different from h - 1b workers , yet only employers of the latter are required to file lca attestations .

advocates for temporary foreign workers , in turn , maintain that they remain caught up in the long wait for visas to become lprs , leaving them vulnerable to exploitation by those employers who promise to petition for them .

the issues that follow are illustrative of the multifaceted aspects of this debate on the labor market test for foreign workers .

the legal entry of foreign workers into the united states has been governed by the same basic provisions since 1952 , with some policy adjustments along the way .

over a decade ago , the commission on immigration reform estimated that the labor certification process costs employers in administrative , paperwork , and legal fees a total of $10,000 per immigrant .

as is apparent in the analysis above , the current set of provisions and policies are visa - specific and yield various standards and thresholds for different occupations and sectors of the economy .

there are , however , common critiques underlying the recruitment of foreign workers with specialized expertise as well as workers with no skills .

legislation that would reform the ina may provide an opportunity to revise and update the labor market tests ; on the other hand , a consensus on the labor market tests may also be hurdle to enacting immigration reform .

