there have been sharp debates over the past three decades in congress and differencesbetween the executive and legislative branches on the appropriate level of funding for u.s. foreignpolicy programs .

these debates are continuing in 2006 as congress reviews the president's fy2007budget proposal .

the past 30 years have witnessed wide swings in the amounts of resources the united stateshas committed to advancing foreign policy and national security interests , reflecting changes inglobal challenges faced by the united states .

efforts to promote peace in the middle east , toconfront soviet influence , especially in the developing world , to support new democracies in thepost - cold war era , to fight poverty and disease affecting poor nations , to combat global terrorism,and to stabilize fragile or failed states have had a substantial impact on levels of foreign policyresources .

international affairs funding decisions , however , are influenced not only by overseasrequirements , but also by the overall u.s. budget environment and constraints that exist particularlyduring periods of deficits or when unforseen events demand reallocation of spending priorities .

congress and the executive branch have reduced foreign policy resources - - occasionally to a greaterextent than other sectors of the budget - - when fiscal austerity or domestic requirements weredeemed to be of greater importance .

likewise , during times of international crisis and especiallysince the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , international affairs spending has been one of themost rapidly increasing areas of the u.s. budget .

foreign policy spending supports a variety of u.s. government programs and activities,including foreign economic and military assistance , contributions to international organizations andmultilateral financial institutions , diplomatic operations , public diplomacy , counter - terrorism andnarcotics initiatives , and export promotion .

this report serves as a resource for the annual congressional debate on foreign policyspending , providing context and a trend analysis of the past 30 years .

it considers the full scope ofthe international affairs budget , or budget function 150 , as foreign policy spending is designatedwithin the context of the congressional budget resolution .

it also illustrates spending trends of themajor components that make up budget function 150 .

other relevant "snapshots" of internationalspending are also examined , including how foreign aid resources have been allocated across severalsub - categories and trends that are especially applicable to current funding priorities such asconfronting global health problems and increasing aid to africa .

international affairs discretionary budget authority , measured in real terms , has experiencedseveral cycles over the past three decades .

there were periods of rapid growth followed immediatelyby sharp declines during the mid - 1980s .

after several years in the late 1980s and early 1990s ofrelative stable budget levels , amounts fell - - at first gradually , and then sharply - - through fy1997 .

the foreign policy budget rose slightly in fy1998 but significantly in fy1999 and fy2000compared to amounts during the mid - 1990s .

growth in the function 150 budget continuedfollowing the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , reaching by fy2004 the highest level offoreign affairs spending in three decades .

the early - to - mid 1980s were marked by a steady increase in foreign policy spending , largelythe result of rising amounts of security aid allocated for strategic purposes in central america,pakistan , and "military base rights countries" such as the philippines .

at the same time that growthin security aid peaked in fy1985 , congress approved two major supplementals: a $2.25 billioneconomic aid package for israel , egypt , and jordan , and about $1 billion in famine relief for africa .

all of these factors combined to set foreign affairs discretionary budget authority at $38.96 billion,in fy2006 dollars , a level about 5% higher than the fy2006 amount .

absent the unique combination of these international demands that spiked aid spending infy1985 , and with intensifying pressure in washington to reduce the federal deficit , function 150discretionary spending , like other federal spending , fell abruptly in fy1986 , and declined further inthe next two years to a point more than 25% less than where the foreign policy budget had stood justthree years earlier .

the following period - - fy1988 through fy1993 - - marked a relatively stable level offoreign affairs budget authority , ranging in most years roughly between $28 and $29 billion annually,as calculated in fy2006 dollars .

to a considerable extent , this steady period can be attributed toannually negotiated budget agreements between the administration and congress for majordiscretionary spending categories , one of which was international affairs .

a small , temporaryupsurge occurred in fy1990 / 1991 , primarily the result of a supplemental appropriation for aid topanama and nicaragua , additional costs associated with the persian gulf war , includingsupplemental assistance for israel and turkey , and added expenses for u.s. agencies operating inthe gulf region .

although the foreign affairs budget had been on a long downward trend since fy1985 , thedrop in fy1994 was the first significant annual decrease in real terms since fy1988 .

the 3.8% realcut for fy1994 was followed by two years of increasingly larger reductions for foreign policyprograms .

fy1995 discretionary budget authority dropped 5.5% below fy1994 , followed by an11.3% cut in fy1996 .

reductions continued for fy1997 , although at a more modest 1.3% level .

this downward cycle reversed in fy1998 , with international affairs budget authority risingby 4% in real terms over fy1997 , followed by a far more significant rise - - 21.4% - - in foreignpolicy spending for fy1999 .

in addition to approving modest increases for programs throughout thefunction 150 account , congress further agreed to nearly $1 billion for u.s. arrearage payments tovarious international organizations and multilateral development banks , about $1.5 billion forsecurity upgrades at american embassies and missions around the world following the embassybombings in kenya and tanzania , and large supplementals for central american victims ofhurricane mitch ( $1 billion ) and for kosovo humanitarian aid relief ( $1.1 billion ) .

a similarly largesupplemental in fy2000 supporting a $1.8 billion one - time aid package in support of the wyeriver / middle east peace accord and about $1 billion for a colombian counternarcotics program , plusrising budgets for a number of regular and continuing foreign affairs programs in fy2001 keptforeign policy spending at around $27.4 billion during the fy1999-2001 period , one - quarter higherthan the low point of fy1997 .

the most defining change in u.s. foreign policy spending , however , came following theseptember 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks in the united states .

since 9 / 11 american foreign aid anddiplomatic efforts have taken on a more strategic sense of importance and have been cast frequentlyin terms of contributing to the global war on terrorism , including assistance to about 30 "front - line"states in the terrorism war - - countries that cooperate with the united states in the war on terrorismor face terrorist threats themselves .

 ( 2 ) through a series of emergency supplemental appropriations , byfy2003 congress had boosted the international affairs budget following the 9 / 11 attacks to $37.4billion , in real terms .

at roughly the same time that fighting terrorism became the leading concern of u.s. foreignpolicy , the bush administration announced other significant initiatives that have added to a growingforeign affairs budget .

the millennium challenge account ( mca ) is a new aid delivery concept,authorized by congress and established in early 2004 , that is intended to concentrate significantlyhigher amounts of u.s. resources in a few low - and lower - middle income countries that havedemonstrated a strong commitment to political , economic , and social reforms .

mca funding hadbeen expected to grow to $5 billion annually by fy2006 , although actual appropriations - - $1.77billion in fy2006 - - have been far more modest .

addressing global health problems has further become a core u.s. aid objective in recentyears .

congress created a separate appropriation account for child survival and health activitiesin the mid - 1990s and increased funding for international hiv / aids and other infectious diseaseprograms .

president bush's announcement at his 2003 state of the union message of a five - year,$15 billion effort to combat aids , malaria , and tuberculosis ( presidential emergency plan for aidsrelief - - pepfar ) has added greater emphasis to this primary foreign assistance objective andcontributed to higher international affairs spending .

resources committed to fighting terrorism and rebuilding afghanistan and iraq , plus thelaunch of the mca and pepfar initiatives pushed u.s. foreign policy spending in fy2004 to $53.8billion , in real terms , the highest level in over three decades .

even excluding the $18.45 billion foriraq reconstruction from the total , fy2004 remains one of the largest international affairs budgetsduring this period .

without the significant iraq reconstruction appropriation of fy2004 , the fy2005foreign affairs budget dropped back to $36.8 billion , although it represented an 11% increase forinternational activities other than iraq .

another large emergency supplemental for fy2005 dealingwith other foreign crises - - tsunami disaster relief , a palestinian aid package , conflict in the darfurregion of sudan , and accelerated afghan reconstruction efforts - - pushed budget function 150 toits highest level ( excluding iraq ) since fy1985 .

as overall budget pressures increased in the 109th congress and the unanticipated emergencyto address the victims and destruction of hurricane katrina , for the first time during the bushadministration , congress reduced - - by $2.1 billion or 6.4% - - the president's regular foreign policyrequest .

subsequently , however , congress approved emergency supplemental spending of $4.25billion for iraq , afghanistan , and various humanitarian crises around the world .

at $36.96 billion,the international affairs budget for fy2006 is one of the highest in three decades and is 21% higherthan the annual average over the past 30 years .

figure 1. international affairs spending key trends the $36.96 billion fy2006 foreign policy budget is the largest for all but four years during the past threedecades .

spending in fy2006 is 21% higher than the $30.48 billion annual average level since 1977. international affairs spending for fy2006 is nearly two - thirds higher than in fy1997 , when the budget reached its lowest point in30 years .

the five foreign policy budgets since 9 / 11 represent the largest sum total of any period since 1977 .

fy2004 , which includes $18.4 billion for iraq reconstruction , was by far the largest budget in 30 years .

due to embassy security and central american disaster aid supplementals , spending surged by 21% in fy1999 from the previousyear , the largest increase in a decade .

foreign policy resources declined steadily for six years following the end of the cold war .

budget reduction pressures pushed foreign policy and most federal resources down sharply during the late1980s .

large middle east and africa aid supplementals , coupled with continued growth of security assistance , pushed the fy1985 foreignpolicy budget to the highest level , except for fy2004 , over the 30 year period .

spending grew during the early 1980s largely due to increasing security aid for central america and countries that granted the u.s.military base access .

another way of analyzing trends in international affairs resources is to drawrelationships between foreign policy spending and overall funding for total federaldiscretionary programs .

this is relevant especially for the present debate overbudgetary priority - setting decisions since it is within the roughly $840 billionnon - emergency discretionary budget for fy2006 that international affairsrequirements must compete .

one of the most striking differences between measuring the internationalaffairs budget as a percent of total federal discretionary spending ( shown in figure2 ) or as the level of total dollars appropriated ( figure 1 ) is the trend for each inrecent years .

although the amount of spending for international activities has grownsignificantly since september 11 , compared to changes in the overall size of thefederal budget , the share allocated for foreign policy programs has declined ( with theexception of fy2004 and the $18.45 billion supplemental for iraq ) .

the estimatedlevel for fy2006 is 3.41% , the lowest level for any year in the last three decades andabout one - eighth less than the 3.96% annual average since fy1977 .

if , however , the"surge" in spending for iraq in fy2004 is folded into the entire post - 9 / 11 period , theannual average of the past four years equals the historic 3.96% average for theinternational affairs account .

this recent trend , which is somewhat counter - intuitive , results from evenlarger increases in u.s. government spending in non - international sectors , especiallyfor defense , homeland security , and domestic disaster relief .

defense spending,which accounted for roughly half the discretionary budget authority prior to 9 / 11,grew to more than 54% by fy2004 .

what the united states now defines as"homeland security" spending , a category that did not exist prior to 9 / 11 , has risenby about one - third .

a series of emergency supplementals - - totaling about $82.1billion - - for relief of hurricane katrina victims pushed shares for other budgetactivities , including function 150 , down for fy2005 and fy2006 .

for the period prior to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , the patterns infigures 1 and 2 for foreign policy spending are similar , although the degree of sharpgrowth and decline are muted somewhat when measuring discretionary ba as a %of total budget authority .

one of the most notable trends is the substantial continuityin the amount of the budget authority devoted to international affairs during an eightyear period , fy1988 to fy1995 .

although dollar amounts for foreign affairs mayhave risen somewhat in fy1991 due to the gulf war , and fallen through the nextfour years , function 150's proportion of total discretionary budget authority deviatedonly slightly from a sustained level of 4% annually .

in short , even though the foreignpolicy budget fell steadily in the early - to mid - 1990s , it declined at roughly the samepace as the total for all other programs funded through discretionary spending .

butin fy1996 , this 4% share that had been sustained for eight years ended , and function150's proportion fell to 3.63% .

in fy1997 and fy1998 it fell further to about 3.6%of discretionary ba .

thus , at a time when congress and the president had reducedtotal discretionary budget authority , resources for foreign policy programs declinedfaster than other federal programs .

figure 2. international affairs budget as a % of total u.s. budgetauthority key trends the fy2006 foreign policy budget's share of total federal discretionary budget authority is 3.41% , substantially smaller than the30 year annual average of 3.96% .

including the iraq reconstruction supplemental , the fy2004 5.54% share of total spending was the largest for budget function 150in three decades .

despite the significant increases in foreign policy resources since september 11 , except for fy2004 , the share of function 150 oftotal u.s. discretionary spending has declined .

this is largely due to a more rapid rise in defense and homeland security appropriations , and , in fy2005and fy2006 , relief for victims of hurricane katrina .

with the exception of the years following two large "spikes" associated with the camp david / middle east peace accord ( fy1979 ) and iraq reconstruction ( fy2004 ) , the single - year cut for foreign policy spending of 11.3% in fy1996 was the largest in three decades and nearly six timeslarger than cuts for the rest of the budget .

the largest single element of the foreign policy budget supports a broad rangeof development , humanitarian , security / economic , and military assistance programs .

in most years , foreign aid makes up about two - thirds of budget function 150 .

 ( 3 ) with such a large portion of the international affairs budget supportingforeign assistance , the patterns and trends for foreign aid are quite similar to theentire function 150 .

following the september 11 terrorist attacks , reconstructioninitiatives in afghanistan and iraq , plus more general assistance to countriessupporting u.s. efforts in the global war on terror , have pushed foreign aid spendinglevels up significantly .

during this same period , president bush launched two majoraid initiatives: the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , a fiveyear , $15 billion activity ; and the millennium challenge account , anticipated togrow to a $5 billion annual program concentrating on countries that have performedwell on governance , economic , and social measures .

combined with responses tounanticipated international emergencies in recent years , including the indian oceantsunami and conflict in the darfur region of sudan , the foreign aid budget has grown from $18.4 billion just prior to 9 / 11 to $25.2 in fy2006 ( constant dollars ) , more thana one - third increase in only four years .

fy2004 was the largest year , post - 9 / 11 , at$43.3 billion , although this included an unusually large $18.45 billion supplementalfor iraq .

prior to 9 / 11 , foreign aid spending had already been growing since fy1997when funding hit its lowest point over the past 30 years .

while resources forcontinuing foreign aid programs rose modestly during the period , levels were pushedhigher - - nearly 21% between fy1997 and fy2001 - - by a series of new initiativesand humanitarian crises .

considerable amounts were programmed for the wyeriver / middle east peace effort ; the united states cleared most of its accumulatedarrears owed to the u.n. and world bank ; the clinton administration joined otherdonors in expanding debt relief for the world's poorest nations ; and the bushadministration launched a major counter - narcotics effort in colombia - - that laterevolved into a program for the entire region - - the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) .

the united states also responded to several humanitarian emergencies,including those for the victims of hurricane mitch in central america and theviolence in kosovo .

the low point in foreign aid spending - - fy1997 - - came following a steadydecline over a decade - long period that began with passage in 1985 of thegramm - rudman - hollings deficit reduction act .

the foreign aid budget fell by nearly24% ( real terms ) between fy1985 and fy1986 , and continued to decline insubsequent years as congress and the president worked towards reducingdiscretionary spending .

with the fall of the berlin wall , the collapse of the sovietunion , and the end of the cold war , much of the rationale used for supporting u.s.foreign assistance during the previous four decades disappeared .

with the exceptionof fy1991 when congress approved additional resources for countries affected bythe persian gulf war , the foreign aid budget continued its steady decline throughfy1997 .

by that point , foreign assistance resources , in real terms , stood 54% belowlevels of a decade earlier .

the first term of the reagan administration saw a steady , large increase inforeign aid spending culminating in fy1985 when resources reached $33 billion , thethird highest single year level in the past three decades .

growth occurred not becauseof policy consensus over the importance of foreign assistance , but rather because ofsignificant policy differences between the executive and legislative branches .

earlyin the reagan administration , officials attempted to reduce multilateral developmentcontributions , while at the same time increasing strategic types of foreign assistance .

congress blocked efforts to cut multilateral and other economic aid , but alsoapproved much of the funds sought by the executive for security assistance programsin central america and aid to countries that provided u.s. access to military bases .

the peak year of fy1985 included a large supplemental package for israel , egypt,and jordan , payment of arrears owed to the world bank , and humanitarian relief forvictims of a severe famine in africa .

figure 3 .

foreign aid discretionary budget authority key trends foreign aid spending - - the combined resources for development , humanitarian , security / economic , and military assistance - - hasgrown significantly since 9 / 11 , augmented by the launch of two major aid initiatives for hiv / aids and the millennium challengeaccount .

the $25.2 billion total for fy2006 is about 9% higher than the $23.1 billion annual average since fy1977 .

fy2004 , including iraq reconstruction , was the highest foreign aid budget in 30 years .

foreign aid spending declined substantially following the collapse of the soviet union and the end of the cold war .

betweenfy1990 and fy1997 , funding for foreign assistance fell by 31% , to a 30-year low of $15.2 billion .

during the first term of the reagan administration , foreign aid grew at a steady pace .

larger contributions to the world bank,increased assistance to central america and countries providing the u.s. with military base access , famine relief in africa , and an economic stabilizationpackage for israel culminated in fy1985 with the third largest foreign aid budget in 30 years .

the following year , congress enacted the gramm - rudman - hollings deficit reduction act and foreign assistance , like most otherfederal spending programs , fell sharply .

the one - year costs of security assistance in support of the camp david accord pushed foreign aid in fy1979 to the highest point,other than fy2004 .

as noted above , foreign assistance includes a wide - breadth of programmatictools utilized in support of various , and in some cases , divergent u.s. foreign policyobjectives .

spending patterns for different components of foreign aid have variedconsiderably over the past three decades , as illustrated in the charts that follow .

although there is no precise definition of major bilateral foreign aidcategories , this discussion divides programs into four clusters: 1 ) "core" developmentassistance that generally employs long - term poverty reduction and economic growthstrategies ; 2 ) humanitarian relief activities that aim to save lives and provide basicservices immediately following a natural or man - made disaster , or support the needsof refugee populations over an extended length of time ; 3 ) political / securityeconomic aid , intended to help bolster the economies of countries of special strategicinterest to the united states or nations undergoing transitions to democratic andmarket economic systems , such as the states of the former soviet union ; and 4 ) military assistance that helps american friends and allies strengthen their defensecapabilities .

besides foreign aid , the other major component of the international affairsbudget supports diplomacy and american engagement in the internationalcommunity .

roughly one - third of the function 150 budget targets salaries andexpenses of the u.s. diplomatic corps ; the construction , maintenance , and securityof american embassies around the world ; educational and cultural exchanges,international broadcasting , and other aspects of public diplomacy ; the costs of u.s.membership in the united nations and other international organizations ; andassessed contributions to u.n. peacekeeping operations .

 ( 11 ) in additionto appropriated funds , this category also includes beginning in fy1996 fees that thestate department collects for visa processing and other services .

over time , thesehave become a source of sizable amounts of resources for the department , growingto an estimated level of nearly $1.2 billion in fy2006 .

over the past three decades , the funding level for the state department andpublic diplomacy has reflected generally an upward trend .

although there have beena few brief periods of declining resources , appropriations continually climbed to theirhighest level in fy2006 of $12.2 billion .

even without the $1.3 billionsupplemental for u.s. embassy operations in bagdad , fy2006 represents the secondlargest spending amount - - behind fy2005 - - for the state department and publicdiplomacy in 30 years .

the fy2006 total is more than 75% higher than the thirtyyear annual average of $6.9 billion .

from the outset of the george w. bush administration , then - secretary ofstate colin powell argued strongly within the executive branch and before congressthat state department resource needs had been neglected during the previous decadeand that significant increases were needed to improve technology and staffingchallenges .

the bush administration's first budget saw a jump from $8.7 billion infy2001 to $9.9 billion for fy2002 in state department and public diplomacyspending .

by fy2004 , the $10.3 billion ( excluding iraq ) was 18% higher , in realterms , than at the beginning of the bush administration .

many of the spikes in funding for the state department and public diplomacyover the past 30 years have been related to overseas security issues .

since thevietnam war , american embassies have increasingly been the targets of hostileaction .

terrorist attacks grew in number in the 1970s , the decade ending with thetaking of american hostages in tehran in 1979 .

similarly , in the early 1980s , thestate department recognized a greater need to tighten security after the 1983bombing of the u.s. marine barracks in beirut , lebanon , and the bombing of theembassy annex in beirut in 1984 .

in 1985 , a report by the advisory panel onoverseas security , headed by admiral bobby inman , set new standards for securitymeasures at u.s. facilities around the world .

in 1986 congress provided an embassysupplemental appropriation to meet those standards , and state department / publicdiplomacy resources grew to $6.7 billion , in real terms .

again in august 1998,another major attack occurred on u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania .

later thatyear , congress passed an emergency supplemental that sharply increased total statedepartment spending to $8.94 billion .

the clinton administration generally believed in a multilateral approach tohandling international problems and sought an expansion of u.n. involvement ininternational peacekeeping .

in 1994 , the administration requested supplementalfunding for u.n. peacekeeping to provide more help with cyprus and africanregional efforts , as well as angola , iraq , yugoslavia , somalia , haiti , andmozambique .

congress appropriated $670 million for the peacekeepingsupplemental in 1994 , more than doubling the international peacekeeping accountthat year .

overall this raised the state department and public diplomacy budget to$7.9 billion ( fy2006 dollars ) .

during this same period in the 1990s , both congress and the administrationstruggled to reduce the federal deficit .

some members contended that , with the endof the cold war , a peace dividend could be derived , and believed that foreign policyagency funding could be trimmed to help meet growing budget pressures .

reorganization of the international broadcasting entities , beginning in 1994 , and laterthe consolidation of the foreign policy agencies into the department of state infy1999 , reflected the mood in congress to streamline these foreign policy agencies,thereby realizing some degree of budgetary savings .

reductions in broadcasting andeducational and cultural exchange programs were especially large during themid - 1990s when funding for these programs fell by more than 30% , bringing the $6.3billion state department / public diplomacy budget in fy1996 to a six - year low .

figure 9 .

state department & public diplomacy spending key trends funding for state department personnel , embassy security , public diplomacy , and dues for international organizations has increasedsteadily over the past three decades , peaking in fy2006 at $12.2 billion ( constant dollars ) , including costs for a u.s. embassy operations iniraq .

emphasis on state department staffing and technology upgrades during the early bush administration pushed spending upwardfrom $7.8 billion in fy2000 to $9.5 billion by fy2003 .

the bombings of u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania ( 1998 ) and the inman report on embassy security standards ( 1985 ) ledto sizable supplemental spending .

during the mid - 1990 decline in overall u.s. foreign policy spending , resources for international exchange programs and broadcastingfell by over 30% .

significant contributions to un peacekeeping operations , including somalia , pushed funding for state department and publicdiplomacy to $7.9 billion in fy1994 , the highest level in 18 years .

 table 1. international affairs discretionary budgetauthority ( $s - billions ) sources: omb , house and senate appropriations committees , and crscalculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescission ofregular appropriations .

table 2. international affairs budget as a % oftotal discretionary budget authority sources: office of management and budget , congressional budget office , and crscalculations .

table 3 .

foreign assistance discretionary budgetauthority ( $s - billions ) sources: omb , house and senate appropriations committees , and crscalculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescission ofregular appropriations .

table 4 .

"core" bilateral developmentassistance discretionary budget authority ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , usaid , house and senate appropriationscommittees , and crs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriationsand 1% rescission of regular appropriations .

table 5 .

humanitarian assistance discretionarybudget authority ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , usaid , house and senate appropriationscommittees , and crs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriationsand 1% rescission of regular appropriations .

table 6 .

political / security economic aiddiscretionary budget authority ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , house and senate appropriations committees , andcrs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescissionof regular appropriations .

table 7 .

military assistance programsize ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , house and senate appropriations committees , andcrs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescissionof regular appropriations .

table 8 .

africa assistance ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , usaid , house and senate appropriationscommittees , and crs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriationsand 1% rescission of regular appropriations .

table 9 .

state department and public diplomacybudget authority and fee collections ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , house and senate appropriations committees , andcrs calculations .

fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescissionof regular appropriations .

beginning in fy1996 , figures also include fees collectedby the state department for visa processing and other services .

