after several years of steady growth , equity ( stock ) market prices began to rise rapidly in 1995 .

from the beginning of 1995 to its peak in august 2000 , the value of the standard and poor's index of the 500 largest firms had more than tripled in nominal terms ( see figure 1 ) .

the sharpest increases in equity prices were concentrated in high - tech stocks .

prices on the nasdaq , an exchange known for listing smaller high - tech firms , were six times higher at the peak than in 1995 .

during this period , extravagant claims were made about a "new economy" that defied the old economic laws , and about the easy , sure - fire way to make money through equity investments .

at the same time , many economists cautioned that the stock market was in the grips of a speculative bubble , an increase in prices unrelated to fundamental determinants of value , that would eventually burst and impoverish many of the same investors that it had hitherto made rich .

alan greenspan , then - chairman of the federal reserve , cautioned against "irrational exuberance" in the equity market in 1996 , and yale economist robert shiller released a widely read book of the same title in 2000 .

in 2000 , the trend abruptly reversed , and stock prices began a prolonged decline .

shortly thereafter , in march 2001 , the longest expansion in history ended , and the economy entered a recession .

by september 2002 , prices on the s&p 500 had fallen by nearly half from their previous peak , and prices on the nasdaq were one - quarter of their former peak .

in hindsight , it seems clear that some portion ( though not all ) of the 1990s stock market rise and subsequent decline was indeed caused by a bubble , or an increase in price that is caused by psychological factors , speculation , or error rather than economic fundamentals .

the pattern was reminiscent of the stock market crash that preceded the great depression in 1929 or the decade of economic stagnation in japan in the 1990s , although this time the effects were far more benign .

before the stock market crashed , seemingly similar events were starting to occur in housing markets , as shown in figure 2 .

after several years of solid growth , house price appreciation suddenly began accelerating in mid - 1997 , with further escalation since 2003 .

according to the house price index ( hpi ) , prices have doubled since 1997 and increased more than 50% since 2003 .

to date , the hpi has not shown any national decline in housing prices , although the market is slowing down .

in contrast , more recent data from another source suggest that house prices may have already begun to decline .

housing sales and residential investment ( house building ) have already declined at double digit rates .

mortgage deliquency rates have risen , and as a result , there was widespread financial turmoil in august 2007 that originated with subprime mortgage - backed securities .

some economists have argued that the housing market is also suffering from a bubble , whereas some commentators argue that owner - occupied housing will always be a bargain investment .

while the efficacy of using monetary policy in response to the 1990s stock market bubble may seem obvious now , it is useful to remember that opinions on the existence of an equity bubble were equally divided at the time .

the rise and fall of the stock market led to widespread debate among economists and policymakers that the end of the housing boom has only intensified .

should the federal reserve have responded to the stock market bubble ( and now the housing boom ) when it first emerged by raising interest rates to promptly extinguish it before it took off ? .

if it had done so , could a recession have been avoided ? .

is the targeting of asset bubbles consistent with the fed's dual mandate of maximum employment and low inflation ? .

how can bubbles emerge when standard economic theory strongly predicts they cannot ? .

and given theoretical predictions , how would the fed be able to accurately identify a bubble ? .

this debate is important to congress in order to effectively exercise its oversight duties for the federal reserve .

economic theory suggests that in a competitive market , price is determined by supply and demand , and equals the marginal cost of producing the good .

a market is said to be competitive when there are many buyers and sellers who are perfectly informed and rational , prices can be easily altered , and there are no barriers to entry .

a bubble is said to occur when price does not equal marginal cost .

standard economic theory ( called "efficient markets" theory ) strongly concludes that bubbles cannot occur in competitive markets because any time price exceeds marginal cost , producers will increase their supply , thereby pushing price back down to marginal cost .

at first glance , few markets seem to better fit the "perfect competition" criteria than the markets for equities and homes — there are millions of buyers and sellers , an enormous number of transactions take place , information abounds , professional analysts closely evaluate market trends , prices adjust rapidly , and so on .

few goods markets meet these criteria .

equity prices are based on the present discounted value of future dividends and price appreciation .

obviously , it is extremely difficult to accurately forecast these values into the distant future , and this would seem to suggest that bubbles could form .

still , standard theory rules out bubbles developing based solely on uncertainty for two reasons .

first , theory predicts that systematic errors will not be made by market participants overall .

in other words , optimistic and pessimistic prediction errors should on average nearly cancel out .

most participants should not systematically overestimate future prices , as a bubble implies .

second , standard theory does not necessarily require all market participants to be equally smart or sensible .

but it predicts that less skilled participants will eventually be driven out of the market because they regularly lose money in transactions with more skilled participants .

in other words , analysts who recognize the existence of a bubble should be able to profit from it by selling stocks short , and in the process of short selling , the bubble should be deflated .

this possibility seems to rule out a large and protracted bubble similar to the one that developed in the 1990s .

so why would these markets suffer from bubbles ? .

economists who accept that bubbles do occur in reality argue that people are not always as rational as theory predicts .

psychological behavior such as herd mentality , overconfidence , "animal spirits" ( as coined by john maynard keynes ) , and biased self - attribution ( taking credit for one's success and blaming others for one's failure ) may trump logic at times .

people seem to have a tendency to project past results forward ( into the future ) with little regard for whether fundamentals would justify such an assumption .

a one - time improvement in fundamentals should be matched with a one - time increase in prices ; in which case , there is no reason to think that future appreciation rates will match recent rates .

and yet , the longer that high returns persist , the more certain people become that those returns will persist in the future , and the larger the bubble becomes .

in his classic study , kindleberger argued that a bubble often emerges after a legitimate shift in fundamentals that warrants some increase in asset prices .

in the case of equity prices in the 1990s , fundamental changes such as the acceleration in productivity growth , reduction in inflation , increased appetite for risk , strength and duration of that economic expansion , and so on merited some legitimate increase in stock prices .

in hindsight , it is clear that these fundamental changes did not justify the full increase in stock prices that actually occurred .

yet , at the time , financial professionals justified the price rises by using optimistic assumptions about fundamentals within standard models .

 ( most famously , in 1999 two economists released a book entitled dow 36,000 , which argued that stock prices had not yet risen nearly high enough based on fundamentals. ) .

these explanations may have been highly unlikely , but they were not impossible ; therefore , finding the dividing line at the time between the legitimate price increase and the bubble was impossible .

similar fundamental explanations can be found for why house prices have risen in recent years — lower mortgage rates reduced borrowing costs dramatically , innovations in mortgage markets reduced liquidity constraints ( eg , down payments have fallen and access to credit has risen ) , following the stock market crash , individuals perceived homes as relatively more desirable investments , and lower inflation reduced the relative up - front costs of a mortgage .

still , there is a limit to how far price increases can be justified by these explanations .

for example , the only change to have occurred from 2003 to 2006 is a greater prevalence of non - traditional mortgages ( which some see as a symptom of a bubble ) , yet prices increased more than 50% in that time .

and builders should respond to higher demand by increasing the housing stock , which would push prices back down ( although this factor is limited in areas where land is limited ) .

just as today's stock prices should reflect future dividends and appreciation , today's home prices should reflect the future costs and benefits of ownership .

costs of ownership include maintenance and borrowing costs ; benefits include forgone rent payments and tax deductions .

any increase in prices should reflect a change in these costs and benefits or else it is caused by a bubble .

with extreme enough assumptions about , say , future rental savings or mortgage rates , nearly any increase in housing prices can be justified .

so it is impossible to currently identify a housing bubble with any certainty .

the housing market differs from an ideal competitive market in one important way: supply responds to price changes with a lag , and in some areas is constrained by a lack of open land .

this means that a rise and ( even subsequent decline ) in price in the housing market is more ambiguous than in the stock market — it could be fundamentals at work ( greater demand causes prices to rise , which increases supply with a lag ) .

the housing market may also be further from the competitive ideal than the stock market because there is no short selling , there are high transaction prices , the profit motive is not the only motivation for buying , and most buyers and sellers have little expertise .

expecting the average buyer to be able to make complex calculations about future parameters may be unrealistic .

on the other hand , it is easier to project a home's future price than a company's future earnings , because the projection is based on a tangible asset .

while people will not readily switch from ownership to rental housing , ultimately a comparison of ownership costs to rents will influence people's decisions at the margins , and should therefore not move too far apart .

discussions of a housing bubble should be cognizant of the fact that there is no national housing market .

price patterns vary widely across different regions — while prices in some regions have risen much more rapidly than the national average , other regions have seen little real appreciation in the recent boom .

thus , if there is a housing bubble , it is a series of localized bubbles , not a nationwide bubble .

the failure of economic theory to accurately predict bubbles does not mean that bubbles do not exist or theory is useless .

what it does suggest is that it would be very hard for policymakers to accurately predict a bubble until after the fact .

for example , economist randall kroszner , now a fed governor , points out that the bull equity markets of the 1950s and 1980s were about as strong as the 1920s and 1990s markets .

based on price appreciation alone , there is no way to tell until after the fact that the former two would keep rising in price while the latter two would turn out to be bubbles .

bubbles are difficult to identify with confidence until after the fact .

this limits the ability of policymakers to respond to bubbles effectively .

nevertheless , their effect on the economy has been demonstrated to be significant enough that there is risk in ignoring them .

bubbles lead to volatility in investment spending , consumption , and , in the worst case scenario , financial instability .

because the rise in house prices is not captured in the cpi and other inflation measures , true inflationary pressures in the economy may have been greater than measured in recent years , possibly suggesting that the economy is overheating .

critics have argued that the fed should act more aggressively to counteract bubbles when they form .

the fed has responded that such a policy would detract from its mandated goals to keep inflation and economic growth stable .

the greatest drawback of the critics' argument is that aggressively raising interest rates to counteract a bubble risks instigating the very recession that they ostensibly wish to avoid .

the fed claims that it will respond to bubbles insofar as they affect economic growth or inflation , but a case can be made that the fed has underestimated the effect of bubbles on the overall economy , and inflation and growth have been less stable than desired as a result .

looking at the historical record , there is strong evidence that the fed has followed its stated policy that it would not purposely eliminate bubbles .

at most , it has tightened policy slightly more than would be justified by inflation and output alone when possible bubbles have formed .

but it certainly cannot be ruled out that the interest rate path the fed has pursued would have been exactly the same in the absence of any potential bubble .

since the fed is not explicit about how different factors are weighted in its decision - making process , there is no way to settle this argument definitively .

the fed did not raise interest rates in the face of unusually rapid increases in stock prices until 1999 .

the sharp fall in stock prices in 2000 would seem to vindicate the fed's critics at first glance , but the fed could also argue the experience proved its policy to be correct .

the 2001 recession was one of the mildest and briefest declines in output since world war ii ( although it did not look nearly as mild from the perspective of the job market ) .

efforts to deflate the bubble earlier may very well have resulted in a recession of equal or greater magnitude .

besides a slow recovery in capital investment spending , the economy showed few lasting scars from the stock market crash .

by 2003 , capital investment spending had fully rebounded as well .

and although a bubble seems to have formed at some point , it does not seem to have been as large in hindsight as critics had predicted .

for example , at its trough , the s&p 500 was still 10% higher than it was when greenspan made his "irrational exuberance" speech .

thus , although policy intervention may have been justified at some point , it was probably not nearly as early as critics had demanded .

had the critics' policy been pursued , some of the rapid output gains of the last few years of the 1990s expansion could have been lost .

the burden of proof remains with critics that a policy of deflating bubbles would meet rudebusch's three tests: accurate identification , improved macroeconomic stability , and effective deflation .

part of the fed's rationale for not interfering when bubbles are forming is its belief that expansionary monetary policy can be used to avoid any serious ramifications from a bursting bubble .

although this has been true in the past — it is still too soon to tell how well this strategy worked in august 2007 — critics argue that the asymmetry in its response creates a moral hazard problem .

since investors believe that the fed will "bail out" markets when a bubble crash , they have the incentive to take larger risks , perhaps even resulting in larger bubbles than would otherwise have formed .

