starting in the 1990s with the end of the cold war and the advent of globalization , manycriminal organizations ramped up their operations and expanded them worldwide .

theseorganizations are believed to have been helped by weakening government institutions in somecountries , more open borders , and the resurgence of ethnic and regional conflicts across the formersoviet union and many other regions .

crime networks have exploited expanding trade and financialmarkets , while benefitting from rapidly advancing technology , broadened international travel , andimproved global communications .

mainly due to its clandestine nature , international crime is hardto measure .

by the most conservative estimates , criminal proceeds ( 1 ) comprise between two and fivepercent of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

 ( 2 ) transnational organized crime tends to develop in nations where law enforcement institutionsare weak and citizens have limited economic alternatives .

farmers frequently turn to drugcultivation , boosting the international narcotics trade .

unemployed citizens seek work abroad andfall victim to people - trafficking rings .

across the globe , government corruption and illicit trade fueland sustain each other .

transnational crime is believed to most frequently originate in regions suchas sub - saharan africa , the former soviet union , latin america , and the caribbean , but its effectsare global .

many experts maintain that terrorists are increasingly funding themselves through crime .

they have been linked with criminal groups in money laundering , counterfeiting , and other activities .

collaboration between the two groups could heighten threats to the united states and its interests .

an improved understanding of international organized crime's dynamics might help congressas it coordinates , funds , and oversees anti - crime policies and programs .

improved data collectionand establishing a clear picture of the relative threats posed by various criminal activities wouldclearly be helpful .

in addition , a closer scrutiny of the nexus between crime and terror could improvethe government's ability to fight both .

stronger international law enforcement cooperation and moreeffective government partnerships with the private sector both may be central to effectivelycombating transnational organized crime .

this appendix describes key u.s. programs , initiatives , and legislation to combattransnational crime .

it provides additional information on the five criminal areas discussed in "keyfederal programs and initiatives," above .

u.s. anti - nuclear smuggling efforts are coordinated by the departments of state , defense,energy , homeland security , commerce , and other agencies .

state and defense departments .

these agencieslead coordination of the proliferation security initiative .

announced by president bush in may2003 , it creates international agreements and partnerships to permit the united states and its alliesto search planes and ships suspected of carrying nuclear material or technologies .

in addition , thedod - managed cooperative threat reduction program works to destroy nuclear weapons , especiallyin the former soviet union .

the state department also funds the international science andtechnology centers in russia and ukraine to help employ scientists with nonweapons - relatedprojects .

energy department .

doe runs several programsto secure nuclear weapons and weapons - usable nuclear materials .

the international materialsprotection , control , and accounting program works in the former soviet union and other countries .

its activities include upgrading security at nuclear sites , consolidating material into more securelocations , and improving nuclear smuggling detection capabilities at borders .

the president'sfy2007 budget requests about $1.12 billion for energy , state , and defense department programsthat provide nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance to russia and other former soviet states .

this compares to about $1.02 billion appropriated in fy2006 .

the fy2007 request includes $372.1million for dod's cooperative threat reduction programs , down from $415.5 million in fy2006 .

the request includes $675 million for energy department wmd threat - reduction efforts , up from$530 in fy2006 .

it also calls for $75 million in comparable state department funding , up from $71million in fy2006 .

 ( 57 ) homeland security department .

the goal of thecontainer security initiative , launched in january 2002 by the former u.s. customs service ( nowpart of dhs ) is to increase inspection of the approximately seven million shipping containersentering the u.s. annually .

dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) is generally charged withprotecting u.s. borders from incoming nuclear material .

its efforts include border patrols , seaportsecurity , and customs inspections .

dhs also leads interagency efforts to develop technology toprotect the united states from wmd threats .

commerce department .

commerce's bureau ofindustry and security ( bis ) is responsible for safeguarding u.s. national security and for promotingits foreign policy and economic interests by implementing u.s. export - control policy on dual - usecommodities , software , and technology .

as part of the state department's export control andrelated border security assistance program ( exbs ) , bis helps other countries develop and enforceeffective export controls through workshops , training , and other activities .

recent legislative activity .

a number of nuclearblack market - related proposals are contained in the foreign relations authorization act for fy2006and fy2007 ( h.rept .

109-168 , h.r .

2601 ) .

title viii , the nuclear black marketelimination act , has four basic components .

these are: sanctions , penalties for corporate entitiesassociated with proliferation activities , incentives for proliferation - interdiction cooperation , andnonproliferation conditions required to receive u.s. assistance .

another h.r .

2601 sectioncalls for the u.s. government to ask pakistan for direct access to a.q .

khan in order to furtherinvestigate his nuclear smuggling activities .

 ( 58 ) .

a number of u.s. agencies , coordinated mainly by the state department's bureau ofinternational narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) , run anti - drug programs and initiatives .

u.s. anti - narcotics efforts center primarily on foreign crop eradication and global narcoticsinterdiction .

the state department and other agencies help eradicate crops by providing foreigncountries with equipment and supplies .

state department .

inl manages the andeancounterdrug initiative ( aci ) , the primary u.s. program supporting counternarcotics and economicdevelopment in the andean region .

 ( 59 ) aci funding from fy2000 through fy2004 totals about $3.5billion .

congress appropriated $731 million for aci in fy2005 ; $734.5 million was approved forfy2006 .

the white house is requesting $721.5 million for fy2007 .

inl also leads other agencies in training and assisting foreign law enforcement , managinginteragency coordination of programs such as the international law enforcement academies ( ileas ) .

ileas train foreign personnel and promote international legal cooperation .

 ( 60 ) they have trained over13,000 officials from 68 countries in africa , asia , europe , and latin america .

the u.s. agency for international development ( aid ) also funds a variety of anti - narcoticsprograms .

many promote education , institutional development , and alternative employment forpeople involved in drug production .

aid also provides balance of payments support to compensatecountries ( especially andean ) forgoing drug export revenue .

justice department .

drug enforcement agency ( dea ) agents cooperate with law enforcement agencies in 58 countries in activities such as bilateralinvestigations , institution building , and training .

in the justice - led southwest border initiative ( swbi ) , several federal agencies work to combat mexico - and colombia - based trafficking groupsoperating along the southwest border .

working in concert , the dea , the fbi , the u.s. customsservice , and u.s .

attorneys' offices around the country conduct wiretaps aimed at tracking drugmovements and identifying traffickers .

dea and other justice department officials play a centralrole in bringing smugglers to face justice in the united states through extradition , a significantjudicial tool in combating narcotics .

defense department .

dod responsibilitiesinclude heading federal efforts to detect aerial and maritime drug trafficking toward the unitedstates .

dod analysts also work with dea and other u.s. agents to execute anti - narcotics actionsin key drug production and transit countries .

recent legislative activity .

the fy2006 foreignoperations appropriations act ( p.l .

109-102 , h.r .

3057 ) authorizes $734.5 millionfor aci in fy2006 .

in addition , the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-163 , h.r .

1815 ) , signed by the president on january 6 , 2006 , authorizes $901.7 million fordefense department global drug interdiction .

unlike the fy2005 authorization , it did not includeprovisions relating to colombia or the andean counterdrug initiative .

 ( 61 ) .

interagency anti - trafficking efforts are led by the state department .

other agencies,including the departments of justice , health and human services , homeland security , and labor,also play key roles .

state department .

the victims of traffickingand violence protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) , signed into law october 28 , 2000 , containedseveral key anti - trafficking provisions .

one established an annual state department trafficking inpersons report .

first issued in july 2001 , it reviews anti - trafficking trends and rates countries'anti - trafficking efforts .

p.l .

106-386 also authorizes the president to impose sanctions , under the internationalemergency economic powers act ( p.l .

95-223 ) , against countries that do not meet anti - trafficking"minimum standards. .

 ( 62 ) also authorized was the interagency task force to monitor andcombat trafficking in persons .

created in 2002 , it includes the secretary of state , the attorneygeneral , the secretary of labor , and other top officials .

it receives assistance from the statedepartment office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons .

justice department .

the trafficking in personsand worker exploitation task force , established by the justice and labor departments , is chargedwith coordinating anti - trafficking investigations and prosecutions .

on january 24 , 2002 , theattorney general announced the implementation of a special "t" visa , authorized under p.l.106-386 , to assist trafficking victims cooperating with law enforcement officials .

victims facingsignificant retribution or other risks upon returning abroad may be granted permission to remain inthe united states and are eligible to apply for permanent residency after three years .

recent legislative activity .

on october 7 , 2005,the senate ratified the united nations protocol to prevent , suppress , and punish trafficking inpersons , ( 63 ) to which theunited states became a party on december 3 , 2005 .

currently 113 countries have signed theprotocol , with 94 countries party to the agreement .

on january 10 , 2006 , the president signed the trafficking victims protection reauthorizationact of 2005 ( p.l .

109-164 ) .

among other things , the bill aims to assist foreign trafficking victimsin the united states , address the needs of child victims , and develop anti - trafficking programs inpost - conflict situations and foreign humanitarian emergencies .

it authorizes $188 million in 2006and $173 million in 2007 to combat human trafficking .

 ( 64 ) .

the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) leads other agencies includingthe departments of commerce , state , justice , and homeland security in combating ip violations .

ustr .

a centerpiece of u.s. efforts tostrengthen ip enforcement is the annual ustr - led "special 301 process," ( 65 ) which seeks to identifycountries lacking adequate intellectual property protection .

if a trading partner is identified as apriority foreign country ( pfc ) , the ustr has 30 days to decide whether to investigate the countries'questionable policies .

such an investigation can lead to separate intellectual property agreementswith the pfc or to u.s. trade sanctions .

ustr also manages several tariff preference programs,such as the generalized system of preferences .

 ( 66 ) many u.s. anti - piracy initiatives involve forging international agreements , often through theworld trade organization ( wto ) .

through the wto , the ustr can initiate dispute settlementproceedings against foreign governments and institutions ; a stringent wto membership applicationprocess also promotes tougher ip laws .

free trade agreements ( fta ) help , too ; fta partner nationsmust bring their enforcement regimes up to u.s. legal standards , as mandated by the bipartisantrade promotion act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

 ( 67 ) in october 2004 the administration launched the interagency strategy targeting organizedpiracy ( stop ! .

 ) , which aims to strengthen existing anti - piracy efforts and includes new actions suchas the creation of a government ip complaint hotline .

homeland security department .

dhs's effortsinclude seizing pirated goods at u.s. borders and ports .

according to the agency , it made more than7,200 seizures valued at nearly $140 million in fy2004 .

chinese goods comprised almost 70% ofthis value .

dhs is developing a risk - assessment computer model to help target suspected shipments .

recent legislative activity .

the 109th congresshas seen a number of legislative actions related to trade and ip violations .

the united states traderights enforcement act ( h.r .

3283 ) , for example , would boost funding and increaseenforcement through several federal agencies .

among other things , it would authorize an additional$6 million for the ustr beyond the president's budget request for fy2006 and fy2007 , for a totalof $44.78 million and $47.02 million , respectively .

h.r .

3283 passed on july 27 , 2005 .

a similar bill , s. 1421 , has been introduced in the senate .

another bill , h.r .

4186 , would create a chief trade prosecutor to ensurecompliance with trade agreements .

separate legislation , s. 2317 , would require theustr to identify trade enforcement priorities , take action with respect to priority foreign countrytrade practices , and establish within the ustr's office a chief enforcement officer and a tradeenforcement working group .

 ( 68 ) .

u.s. anti - money laundering efforts are coordinated by the departments of treasury , justice,homeland security , and other agencies .

department of treasury .

the office of terrorismand financial intelligence ( tfi ) and its subsidiary bureaus safeguard domestic and foreign financialsystems through financial sanctions , financial regulation and supervision , international initiatives,private sector outreach , law enforcement support , and other methods .

tfi and treasury bureaus suchas the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) support u.s. law enforcement agencies ininternational financial crime investigations and provide u.s. policymakers with global moneylaundering analyses .

fincen and other treasury affiliates cooperate with 32 foreign government institutions toimprove international money laundering standards through the financial action task force ( fatf ) .

fincen also participates in global anti - money laundering networks .

the egmont group iscomprised of fincen and 100 similar international agencies .

egmont works to expand , systematize,and secure information sharing among its members .

department of justice .

the asset forfeiture andmoney laundering section guides law enforcement agencies on money laundering - relatedinvestigations and prosecutions .

it also coordinates multi - district investigations and prosecutions,develops regulatory and legislative initiatives , and ensures uniform application of forfeiture andmoney laundering statutes .

homeland security department .

u.s.immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) manages a handful of money laundering programs andinitiatives .

its financial investigative program investigates money laundering crimes involvingdrugs , human smuggling , telemarketing fraud , and counterfeit goods trafficking .

ice's domestic andinternational money laundering operations are coordinated through its money launderingcoordination center .

recent legislative activity .

the usa patriotimprovement and reauthorization act ( p.l .

109-177 , h.r .

3199 ) , contains significantlanguage on money laundering .

signed by president bush on march 9 , 2006 , it will , among otherthings , increase penalties for financing terrorist activities and place greater restrictions on certainmoney - transferring businesses .

 ( 69 ) .

