often it is very difficult to determine if a cyber attack or intrusion is the work of a terrorist organization with the objective of doing harm , or a cyber criminal who wishes to steal information for purposes of monetary gain .

just as terrorists and violent extremists often rely on exploiting vulnerabilities of targets seen as soft and easy to access to support possible future cyber attacks , cyber criminals exploit these same vulnerabilities to gain access to information that may lead to monetary gain .

implementation of a stronger policy for domestic physical security has reduced the risk to some targets that may have previously been vulnerable to physical attacks .

also , it is suggested by numerous experts that terrorists may be enhancing their computer skills or forming alliances with cybercriminals that possess a high - level of telecommunications expertise .

in addition , continuing publicity about internet computer security vulnerabilities may encourage terrorists' interest in attempting a possible computer network attack , or cyberattack , against u.s. critical infrastructure .

to date , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reports that cyberattacks attributed to terrorists have largely been limited to unsophisticated efforts such as email bombing of ideological foes , or defacing of websites .

however , it says their increasing technical competency is resulting in an emerging capability for network - based attacks .

the fbi has predicted that terrorists will either develop or hire hackers for the purpose of complimenting large conventional attacks with cyberattacks .

recently , during the annual threat assessment , fbi director mueller observed that "terrorists increasingly use the internet to communicate , conduct operational planning , proselytize , recruit , train and to obtain logistical and financial support .

that is a growing and increasing concern for us. .

ibm has reported that , during the first half of 2005 , criminal - driven computer security attacks increased by 50 percent , with government agencies and industries in the united states targeted most frequently .

cybercrime is now a major criminal activity , and it may become increasingly difficult to separate some forms of cybercrime from suspected terrorist activities .

for example , in a recent report from the house homeland security committee , fbi officials indicated that extremists have used identity theft and credit card fraud to support recent terrorist activities by al qaeda cells .

also , according to press reports indonesian police officials believe the 2002 terrorist bombings in bali were partially financed through online credit card fraud .

this report reviews publications and government reports to explore the following: ( 1 ) examples of vulnerabilities that may raise the level of interest that terrorists might have in attempting a coordinated cyberattack ; ( 2 ) effects of the war on terror that are driving terrorists to use the internet more ; ( 3 ) inconsistent reporting about terrorists' cyber activities ; and ( 4 ) ways that terrorists may be improving their cyber skills .

distinctions between crime , terrorism , and war tend to blur when attempting to describe a computer network attack ( cna ) in ways that parallel the physical world .

for example , if a nation state were to secretly sponsor non - state actors who initiate a cna to support terrorist activities or to create economic disruption , the distinction between cybercrime and cyberwar becomes less clear .

because it is difficult to tell from where a cyberattack originates , an attacker may direct suspicion toward an innocent third party .

likewise , the interactions between terrorists and criminals who use computer technology may sometimes blur the distinction between cybercrime and cyberterrorism .

it also may be the case that individuals providing computer expertise to a criminal or terrorist may not be aware of the intentions of the individual that requested the support .

so far , it remains difficult to determine the sources responsible for most of the annoying , yet increasingly sophisticated attacks that plague the internet .

given the difficulty in determining the originator of the cyber intrusions or attacks , some argue that unlike responding to traditional criminal acts , the focus should be on the act rather than the perpetrator and the threshold for launching defensive and offensive actions should be lowered .

the internet is now used as a prime recruiting tool for insurgents in iraq .

insurgents have created many arabic - language websites that are said to contain coded plans for new attacks .

some reportedly give advice on how to build and operate weapons , and how to pass through border checkpoints .

other news articles report that a younger generation of terrorists and extremists , such as those behind the july 2005 bombings in london , are learning new technical skills to help them avoid detection by law enforcement computer technology .

computer security experts disagree about whether a widespread coordinated cyberattack by terrorists is a near - term or long - term possibility .

however , terrorists have repeatedly demonstrated a willingness to plan and launch conventional attacks against targets that have easy accessibility and numerous vulnerabilities .

internet and computer system vulnerabilities are persistent and widely publicized .

as technology continues to advance , the capability , reliance , and interdependent nature of computer systems likely will be more vulnerable to cyberattack tools that are becoming faster and more sophisticated .

terrorists may also be developing links with cybercriminals that will give them access to high - level computer skills .

the time may be approaching when a cyberattack may offer advantages that cause terrorists to act , even if the probability of success , or level of effectiveness , is unknown .

similar to terrorists reconnaissance of physical targets to assess the level of security prior to an attack , it is suggested that the u.s. may experience a number of small cyber intrusion events prior to an attempt at a larger more devastating attack .

given the ability of a catastrophic cyber - attack to disrupt a significant portion of the nation's infrastructure , some national security observers suggest that the director of national intelligence ( dni ) should have the responsibility for monitoring the capabilities and identities of the countries and groups that may wish to cause the nation harm through cyberattack .

the dni , as the nation's chief intelligence officer , has the ability to coordinate all known cyber - threat related information and then task the intelligence community to collect information to better understand the groups that may wish to cause the u.s. harm , and to forecast their intentions and capabilities .

one issue is whether dhs has done enough to strengthen computer security for civilian federal agencies and for the private sector .

in july 2005 , dhs secretary michael chertoff announced creation of the new position of assistant secretary for cyber and telecommunications security .

in doing so he acknowledged both the efficiencies and vulnerabilities of modern technology upon which so much of society now depends .

many cybersecurity observers hope that by elevating the dhs cyber security officer from a division director to an assistant secretary level position , the new senior official will become a more effective proponent of federal government efforts to address and manage information technology vulnerabilities , incident response programs , and remediation efforts .

dhs is also supporting efforts to encourage u.s. computer systems to change to the new , reportedly more secure , ipv6 internet protocol .

despite these efforts , according to gao officials , dhs does not have an internet recovery plan , or a national cybersecurity threat assessment .

dhs officials have stated that a draft cybersecurity threat evaluation plan will be available in late 2005 , but a finalized cybersecurity plan that pinpoints the nations's weakest security links will likely not be available until 2006 .

leaders of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , subcommittee on financial management , government information and international security , reportedly have stated that dhs does not have a robust way to detect a coordinated attack against the critical infrastructure .

security vulnerabilities found in the internet and in critical infrastructure computer systems are widely publicized .

many experts are concerned that private sector cyber security firms do not notify dhs or their customers immediately upon recognition of a potentially serious internet security vulnerability .

if hackers become aware of this vulnerability , observers speculate that these individuals could disable portions of the internet , or successfully disrupt selected portions of the united states or international critical infrastructure .

this raises the following questions: should vendors of computer products be required to quickly report all serious , newly discovered product vulnerabilities to dhs ? .

should computer service providers or businesses be required to report to dhs any major security vulnerabilities that have been newly exploited by cybercriminals ? .

should there be penalties if an organization has a poor security policy that contributes to a major loss of sensitive information ? .

some actions are underway that congress may consider .

for example , on september 30 , 2005 , an interim rule was issued by the federal acquisition regulations council , outlining several new steps acquisition workers must take to ensure it security is incorporated into all federal purchases .

under this interim rule , government contracting officers must include additional cybersecurity rules in their acquisition planning , which will require vendors to improve computer security for the it products and services they supply to the federal government .

experts now believe that terrorist collaborate with organized crime networks in the middle east for international smuggling of arms and illegal drugs .

criminal drug traffickers can provide terrorists with access to computer specialists with high - level technical skills .

what are the pro's and con's of linking counterterrorism efforts more closely to the efforts of agencies that counter drug trafficking ? .

should the counterterrorism efforts be linked more closely with international efforts to prevent cybercrime ? .

what are effective ways to encourage more international cooperation for identifying which activities should be labeled as cybercrime , and for punishing those who operate as cybercriminals ? .

security experts have reportedly stated that , although u.s. military networks are relatively secure , many of those networks remain highly dependent on the civilian communications infrastructure .

should dod collaborate more closely with dhs for new technologies to strengthen the computer security of civilian agencies and infrastructure ? .

trends for cybercrime indicate that computer attacks could increase in number , speed , and sophistication .

will future unknown computer vulnerabilities and sophisticated attacks allow terrorist to launch an effective cyberattack that might overwhelm the ability of civilian agencies to respond effectively ? .

could a new approach to computer security reduce vulnerabilities ? .

an example of a new approach to improve computer security for computer systems and the internet might include development and refinement of quantum methods for unbreakable cryptography .

however , new approaches to computer security could also lead to the emergence of new threats directed against new vulnerabilities .

for example , the proliferation and use of commercial products with unbreakable cryptography could seriously undermine the ability of law enforcement to perform critical missions such as protecting against threats posed by terrorists , organized crime , and foreign intelligence agents .

the following bills are related to improving national computer security , or the prevention of cybercrime: h.r .

1 .

h.r .

1 , "implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007," was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs on january 9 , 2007 .

the dhs secretary shall evaluate and annually prioritize all pending applications for covered grants based upon the degree to which they would lessen the threat to the critical infrastructure , including , but not limited to , cyber threats .

evaluation and prioritization shall be based upon the risk assessment by the office of intelligence analysis and the office of infrastructure protection of the threats of terrorism against the united states .

