on april 27 , 2006 , the united states and canada announced a seven - year framework agreement to resolve their longstanding dispute over u.s. imports of canadian softwood lumber .

the united states - canada softwood lumber agreement ( 2006 sla ) , which entered into force with amendments on october 12 , 2006 , establishes canadian export charges , with the level generally depending on average lumber prices , except for lumber from logs harvested in the yukon , northwest territories , nunavut , and atlantic provinces .

as required under the 2006 sla , the united states has revoked its antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) orders on softwood lumber , and 80% of the estimated duties collected are being returned to importers of record .

the sla also provides for the termination of pending litigation , the most recent phase of the dispute having been notable for the volume of domestic and international legal proceedings initiated by canada and canadian producers challenging u.s. trade remedy actions .

concerns among u.s. lumber producers about softwood lumber imports from canada have been raised for decades ; the current dispute has persisted for 25 years .

u.s. producers argue that they have been harmed by unfair competition , which they assert results from subsidies to canadian producers , primarily in the form of low provincial stumpage fees ( fees for the right to harvest trees from province - owned timberlands ) and canadian restrictions on log exports .

canadians defend their system , and u.s. homebuilders and other lumber users advocate unrestricted lumber imports .

this report provides a concise historical account of the dispute , summarizes the subsidy and injury evidence , and discusses current issues and events .

the current dispute began in 1981 , when letters from members of congress and a petition from the u.s. lumber industry asked the u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) and the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) to investigate lumber imports from canada for a possible cvd .

the itc found preliminary evidence of injury to the u.s. industry , but in 1983 , the doc determined that the subsidies were de minimis ( less than 0.5% ) , ending the cvd investigation .

in 1986 , the u.s. lumber industry filed a petition for another cvd investigation .

a 1985 court ruling on a doc determination of countervailable benefits on certain imports from mexico was seen as a favorable precedent for reversing the doc finding on canadian lumber subsidies .

in addition , numerous senators made it clear to the president that action on lumber imports was necessary for legislative approval of fast - track authority for a united states - canada free trade agreement .

the itc again found preliminary evidence of injury to the u.s. industry , and the doc reversed its 1983 determination , with a preliminary finding that canadian producers received a subsidy of 15% ad valorem ( i.e. , 15% of lumber market prices ) .

on december 30 , 1986 , the day before the final doc subsidy determination was to be issued , the united states and canada signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with canada imposing a 15% tax on lumber exported to the united states , to be replaced by higher stumpage fees within five years .

the u.s. industry then withdrew its petition .

in september 1991 , the canadian government announced that it would withdraw from the mou because most of the provinces had increased their stumpage fees .

the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) responded by beginning a section 301 investigation , pending completion of a new cvd investigation by the doc and the itc .

in march 1992 , the doc issued a preliminary subsidy finding of 14.48% ad valorem , with a final determination in may establishing a 6.51% ad valorem subsidy leading to a 6.51% ad valorem duty .

in july 1992 , the itc issued a final determination that the u.s. industry had been materially injured by canadian lumber imports .

the canadian federal government appealed both the doc and the itc final determinations to binational review panels established under chapter 19 of the united states - canada free trade agreement ( fta ) , which had entered into force on january 1 , 1989 .

in may 1993 , the binational panel reviewing the subsidy determination remanded the doc finding for further analysis , and in september , the doc revised its finding to 11.54% ad valorem .

in december , the binational subsidy panel again remanded the doc finding and ordered the doc to find no subsidies .

in january 1994 , the doc complied with the order .

using a provision of the fta , the ustr requested an extraordinary challenge committee ( ecc ) to review the binational panel decisions , but the ecc was dismissed in august 1994 for failing to meet fta standards .

the doc then revoked the cvd , and in october , the ustr announced that it would terminate the section 301 action .

two events in september of 1994 induced canada to negotiate restrictions on its lumber exports to the united states .

first , the u.s. lumber industry filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the binational panel review process , now contained in the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

second , the president submitted implementing legislation for the gatt uruguay round agreements , which explicitly approved the president's statement of administrative action ( saa ) accompanying the proposed legislation , the document containing language indicating that because of canadian practices , lumber imports from canada could be subject to a cvd .

in february 1996 , the two nations announced an agreement - in - principle — a fee on canadian lumber exports to the united states in excess of a specified quota for five years — with the final u.s. - canada softwood lumber agreement ( 1996 sla ) signed in may and retroactive to april 1 , 1996 .

the 1996 sla was effective through march 31 , 2001 .

annual canadian lumber imports have risen from less than 3 billion board feet ( bbf ) , about 7% of the u.s. market , in the early 1950s to more than 18 bbf , more than a third of the u.s. market , since the late 1990s .

u.s. lumber producers argue that subsidies to canadian producers give them an unfair advantage in supplying the u.s. market and that this has injured u.s. producers .

these two issues — subsidies and injury — are the basis in u.s. trade law for determining whether a cvd is warranted .

in addition , critical circumstances , which allow for retroactive duties , are deemed to exist if imports rise significantly after ending import restrictions .

finally , dumping — selling imports at less than the cost of their production — can lead to additional duties .

immediately following the expiration of the 1996 sla on march 31 , 2001 , the u.s .

coalition for fair lumber imports filed antidumping and countervailing duty petitions with the department of commerce .

the doc announced the initiation of investigations on april 24 , 2001 , finding that petitioners had standing and had shown adequate industry support .

on may 16 , 2001 , itc issued its preliminary determination of threat of material injury , which permitted the investigations to continue .

on august 17 , the doc published its preliminary determination of canadian subsidies of 19.31% ad valorem and established a preliminary duty at that level .

the doc also preliminarily found that critical circumstances existed , potentially allowing for retroactive application of the duty .

on november 6 , 2001 , the doc published its preliminary determination that canadian firms were dumping lumber , with margins ranging from 5.94% to 19.24% ( 12.58% for most firms ) .

the doc also aligned , and postponed until march 25 , 2002 , final determinations in the cvd and ad cases .

negotiations were undertaken to forestall final determinations of injury , subsidy , and dumping .

the negotiations collapsed on march 21 , 2002 , and on march 22 , the doc issued final determinations that , as later amended , found canadian subsidies of 18.79% ad valorem and dumping margins ranging from 2.18% to 12.44% for individually investigated companies and a margin of 8.43% for all other firms .

the doc did not find critical circumstances , however , in its final subsidy determination .

on may 2 , 2002 , by a 4-0 vote of the commissioners , the itc issued a final determination of threat of material injury .

duties averaging 27% went into effect may 22 , 2002 , when the doc published the final duty notice in the federal register .

the united states immediately began collecting duty deposits at this rate .

seeking revocation of the antidumping and countervailing duty orders and return of the estimated duties deposited by importers on softwood lumber entries , canada challenged doc and itc determinations in the softwood antidumping and cvd investigations before binational panels established under chapter 19 of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and in dispute settlement proceedings initiated in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

canadian producers also filed claims against the u.s. government under the investor - state dispute settlement provisions of nafta , arguing that the imposition of the ad and cvd duties had caused the united states to breach obligations owed canadian investors in the united states under nafta chapter 11 .

in addition , canada and canadian producers filed suits in the u.s. court of international trade challenging agency actions in the softwood investigations , as well as related actions under other statutes , including the continued dumping and subsidy offset act  ( cdsoa ) , which required the distribution of collected antidumping and countervailing duties to u.s. firms .

although canada had generally prevailed in its nafta and wto cases , the united states continued to collect estimated duties on softwood entries .

in particular , the united states used a wto - related itc affirmative threat of injury determination to maintain the ad and cvd orders , even though canada had earlier obtained a negative threat determination a result of its nafta case .

although canada had obtained a court order in its favor in the suit challenging the application of the cdsoa to canadian imports , for the most part , domestic and international litigation directly affecting the ad and cv duty orders was not fully resolved at the time the april 2006 framework agreement was reached .

as evident from several of the legal proceedings discussed above , canada was concerned that in cases where canadian firms were subsequently excluded from an ad or cvd order , or were the orders to be eventually revoked , duty deposits would not be returned to importers .

moreover , were these duties not refunded , they might eventually be available for distribution to u.s. lumber firms under the continued dumping and subsidy offset act of 2000 ( cdsoa ) , also known as the "byrd amendment," 19 u.s.c .

§1765c , which mandated the annual disbursement of ad and cvd duties to petitioners and interested parties in the underlying trade remedy proceedings for a variety of qualifying expenditures .

although congress repealed the cdsoa in february 2006 , it also required the continued distribution of duties collected on entries of goods made and filed before october 1 , 2007 .

as discussed below , however , the u.s. court of international trade , in a suit filed by canada and canadian producers , ruled that the cdsoa does not apply to canadian imports .

prior to canada's federal court suit , canada and 10 other wto members had successfully challenged the cdsoa in a wto dispute proceeding .

the wto panel and appellate body ruled that the statute violated provisions in the antidumping and scm agreements prohibiting wto members from maintaining a "specific action against" dumping or subsidization except as provided in wto agreements .

canada was one of eight complainants who requested and received authorization to retaliate against the united states for its failure to repeal or modify the law by december 27 , 2003 , the end of the compliance period in the case .

an arbitral panel ruled that each could retaliate in an amount equal to 72% of the annual cdsoa disbursements relating to duties paid on imports from that country .

having identified a current annual retaliation level of $14 million , canada began to impose a 15% surcharge on imports of u.s. live swine , cigarettes , oysters , and certain specialty fish as of may 1 , 2005 .

although the united states now considers that with repeal of the cdsoa it has fulfilled its wto obligations , canada and other complainants have expressed concerns that the continued payments authorized under the legislation prevent the united states from fully complying with the wto decision in the case .

in april 2005 , canada and canadian industry groups challenged cdsoa distributions based on canadian imports in a suit in the u.s. court of international trade , arguing that , because of a provision in the nafta implementation act stating that any amendment to u.s .

ad and cvd laws enacted after the nafta entered into force "shall apply to goods from an nafta country only to the extent specified in the amendment , the cdsoa , in not expressly referring to canada , does not apply to imports of canadian products .

on april 7 , 2006 , the court held that due to the cited statutory requirement , the u.s. bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) does not have authority under the cdsoa to distribute ad or cvd duties collected on canadian or mexican imports .

on july 14 , 2006 , the court permanently enjoined cbp from making any cdsoa payments to the extent they derive from antidumping or countervailing duties imposed on softwood lumber and two other canadian products .

although other wto members have continued their retaliatory measures in the wto case , canada did not renew its tariff surcharge , which expired april 30 , 2006 .

on april 26 , 2006 , the united states and canada announced a tentative agreement to terminate the ad and cvd duties and related litigation .

an early version of the agreement was signed on july 1 , 2006 , with a finalized version signed september 12 , 2006 .

amendments to the september 12 text were subsequently agreed upon , and , on october 12 , 2006 , the softwood lumber agreement between the government of canada and the government of the united states of america ( sla 2006 ) entered into force .

under the agreement , the united states has revoked the cvd and ad orders on canadian lumber .

in exchange , and as discussed earlier , the parties have agreed to terminate , or in some cases to seek to dismiss , nafta , wto , and domestic court cases filed by canada and canadian producers , as well as the u.s. court case filed by u.s. industry challenging the constitutionality of the nafta binational panel system ( described above ) .

the canadians are imposing export charges when the random lengths' framing lumber composite price falls below us$355 per thousand board feet ( mbf ) , with the rate charged varying with how far the composite price falls .

the export charges can be significantly reduced if the canadian producing region also agrees to volume restraints , which become increasingly restrictive as the average price falls .

lumber prices have been falling in 2006 , falling below the trigger in may and to the maximum rate of 15% ( or less with restrictive volume restraints ) for july through september .

there are several additional provisions relating to export charges and volumes .

there is a third country trigger , allowing export charge refunds if , for consecutive quarters , the third country share of u.s. lumber consumption grows , the u.s. share increases , and the canadian share decreases .

a surge mechanism generally provides for substantially greater export charges if a canadian region's exports exceed 110% of its allocated share of total canadian exports .

for high - value products — those valued at more than c$500 per mbf — the export charges are calculated at c$500 per mbf .

canada and the united states have agreed to make "best efforts" to define "policy exits" from the export charges for each province within 18 months of the final agreement .

also , the export measures would not apply to lumber products from timber harvested in the atlantic provinces , the yukon , northwest territories , or nunavut , or for the companies excluded from the cvd order .

sla 2006 is for seven years and may be renewed for two additional years .

once the agreement has been in force for 18 months , however , it may be terminated by either party upon six - month notice .

in addition , the united states may immediately terminate the agreement if canada fails to apply the export measures agreed to in the sla ; likewise , canada may immediately terminate the agreement if the united states breaches its commitments not to undertake trade remedy investigations involving softwood lumber while the sla is in effect .

the sla precludes new cases , investigations and petitions , and actions to circumvent the commitments in the agreement .

in addition , u.s. producers who are participating in the sla have agreed that , in the event the sla expires under its own terms or the united states exercises its option to terminate the agreement after it is in effect for 18 months , they will not file ad or cvd petitions or request a section 301 investigation involving canadian softwood lumber , and will oppose the initiation of any such investigations , for a period of 12 months after the termination .

finally , on the issue of the roughly $5 billion deposited under the cvd and ad orders , the funds have been allocated to importers of record and other recipients .

the greater of $4 billion or 80% of the deposits , plus interest , are being returned to the importers of record .

the remaining $1 billion is being split between the members of the u.s .

coalition for fair lumber imports ( $500 million ) , a proposed bilateral industry council charged with improving north american lumber markets ( $50 million ) , and jointly agreed "meritorious initiatives," including assistance for timber - reliant communities , low - income housing and disaster relief ( such as aid to victims of hurricane katrina ) , and promotion of sustainable forest management practices ( $450 million ) .

on october 12 , 2006 , the ustr announced that the three meritorious initiatives would be the united states endowment for forestry and communities , inc. ( $200 million ) , habitat for humanity international ( $100 million ) , and the american forest foundation ( $150 million ) .

benjamin cashore , flights of the phoenix: explaining the durability of the canada - us softwood lumber dispute ( orono , me: canada - american center , december 1997 ) .

brink lindsay , mark a. groombridge , and prakash lougani , nailing the homeowner: the economic impact of trade protection of the softwood lumber industry ( washington , dc: cato institute , 2000 ) .

john a. ragosta , harry l. clark , carloandrea meacci , and gregory i. hume , canadian governments should end lumber subsidies and adopt competitive timber systems: comments submitted to the office of the united states trade representative on behalf of the coalition for fair lumber imports ( washington , dc: dewey ballantine llp , april 14 , 2000 ) .

flc les reed , two centuries of softwood lumber war between canada and the united states: a chronicle of trade barriers viewed in the context of saw timber depletion ( montreal , canada: free trade lumber council , may 2001 ) .

world resources institute , canada ' s forest at a crossroads: an assessment in the year 2000 , a global forest watch canada report ( washington , dc: 2000 ) .

crs report crs report rl30826 , softwood lumber imports from canada: history and analysis of the dispute , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

appendix a .

softwood lumber from canada: dumping margins appendix b .

softwood lumber from canada: subsidy rate .

