the issue of women's rights in afghanistan and iraq has taken on new relevance following the u.s. - led military actions in afghanistan in 2001 , the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 , and subsequent reconstruction efforts in both countries .

one of the major questions facing the united states in the post - war reconstruction process is the extent to which it can help women participate — often for the first time in their lives or the recent history of their countries — in political , educational , and economic life after years of warfare , gender - based repression , and economic exclusion .

advancing the position of women and committing adequate resources to women's and girls' education have both been linked , on a global level , to the achievement of efficient and stable development , particularly in post - conflict regions .

congressional initiatives focused on women in these countries have covered a range of political , economic , and social issues .

particular areas of emphasis include the incorporation of women in local and national governance , the inclusion of women's rights in a new constitution , participation by women in the workforce , universal access to education , provision of adequate health care , and supplying humanitarian assistance to needy families .

this report focuses primarily on foreign aid appropriated by congress to united states agency for international development ( usaid ) and the state department for humanitarian and reconstruction activities in afghanistan and iraq , but also touches upon iraq programs funded through the departments of health and human services , agriculture , labor , and defense .

overall , conditions for women in afghanistan have vastly improved since the fall of the taliban in 2001 , particularly in terms of education and job opportunities .

many refugees have returned , millions of afghan girls now attend school , and it is no longer illegal for women to work .

a great deal remains to be done , however , in improving the basic standard of living and means of livelihood for most afghan women .

although women may legally work , for example , many still face serious challenges in finding culturally appropriate jobs ( in most areas of afghanistan women still find it difficult or impossible to work in open areas where they may come into contact with men ) , within easy commuting distance of home , at tolerable hours , with reasonable pay .

furthermore , most afghan women ( and , for that matter , most men ) have had little or no education and lack employable skills .

while women have gained substantial ground in political participation , especially since passage of the recent constitution guaranteeing them a minimum number of parliamentary seats , they nevertheless continue to face conservative attitudes in many rural areas of the country , particularly in the south and east .

among the breakthroughs , in 2005 a woman was appointed governor of a province ( bamiyan ) .

in marked contrast to the taliban's repressive treatment , which was rooted in longstanding rural afghan customs , iraq's policies toward women have historically been more liberal .

even compared to other countries in the middle east , iraqi women fared reasonably well under the provisional 1970 constitution , which granted them equal rights with men , including the rights to go to school , own property , work , and hold political office .

the condition of women worsened somewhat under the regime of saddam hussein , however , particularly after the first gulf war when hussein turned more to islamic and tribal traditions that held women in inferior positions .

in addition , the economic conditions brought about by international sanctions after the gulf war are said to have affected women disproportionately .

conditions appear to be improving for some women living in iraq's cities , who are regaining greater civil rights and educational opportunities in the wake of the u.s. - led invasion of 2003 .

the political process in particular has opened up ; the new constitution requires 25% female representation , and women are serving in the government as members of the cabinet and the iraq governing council .

there are no women governors in the provinces , however .

although progress is being made on the political front , in other ways women are worse off under increasingly islamist policies , especially in southern iraq .

women in rural areas continue to face growing difficulties , particularly in places where religiously conservative local leaders have gained power .

gender discrimination , forced segregation , and austere dress requirements all bear the hallmarks of regression rather than progress in women's development and integration .

other problems women face are similar to those of the population as a whole: economic insecurity and the threat of political and sectarian violence .

while women are being forced to cover up in southern iraq , in other parts of the country it is reported that some women wear head scarves as a means of protection and anonymity .

the fragile situation on the ground in many parts of the country is limiting the provision of humanitarian assistance and makes meeting basic needs , such as adequate food , shelter , and medical care , a daily struggle .

women in the kurdish areas to the north are reported to have more opportunities and face better treatment than women in the central and southern portions of the country .

identified below are specific legislative earmarks to support programs for afghan women and children and general funds that identify women and children among the program beneficiaries .

this is not meant to be an exhaustive inventory of all u.s. - funded projects that may address women's needs .

providing such a list would be both debatable and difficult , because many projects addressing overall societal issues — such as refugee care and resettlement , health , education , and job training — do not mention women but may implicitly benefit them disproportionately .

the legislation and programs detailed below are those that expressly benefit women .

this section lists congressional funding of afghan women's programs since 2001 .

the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( h.r .

3057 , p.l .

109-102 ) , includes a $50 million earmark for programs directly addressing the needs of afghan women and girls .

of this amount , $7.5 million is to be made available to support women - led non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

in addition , the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2006 ( h.r .

3010 , p.l .

109-149 ) , includes $5,952,000 for the development of maternal child health clinics ( consistent with section 103 ( a ) ( 4 ) ( h ) of the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 ) .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 ( h.r .

4818 , p.l .

108-447 ) also included $50 million for programs for women and girls , including $7.5 million for women - led ngos .

in addition , section 305 of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( s. 2845 , p.l .

108-458 ) required the president to formulate a five - year strategy for afghanistan that included support for women's rights , including increased political participation , but no funding was appropriated .

two similar bills were introduced but not enacted in the last congress ( s. 2032 and h.r .

4117 ) , each titled the afghan women security and freedom act of 2004 , authorizing appropriations of $300 million for afghan women in fiscal years 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 .

$20 million was to be earmarked for the afghan ministry of women's affairs and $10 million for the afghan independent human rights commission for each fiscal year .

s. 2032 was referred to the committee on foreign relations in january 2004 and h.r .

4117 was referred to the house international relations committee in april 2004 .

neither bill was signed into law .

the president's fy2005 budget request did not contain specified amounts for aid to women , although the administration indicated that a significant amount of the funds for development programs would support activities benefitting women and girls .

an early version of the emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 ( h.r .

1268 ) , included $5 million for afghan women's organizations , but this provision was removed from the bill before its final passage as p.l .

109-13 .

in the fy2004 consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( h.r .

2673 , division d of p.l .

108-199 ) , $5 million was earmarked from the economic support fund to support programs to address the needs of afghan women through training and equipment for women - led afghan non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

the fy2004 supplemental appropriations included a $60 million esf earmark for women's programs , including technical and vocational education , programs for women and girls against sexual abuse and trafficking , shelters for women and girls , humanitarian assistance for widows , support of women - led ngos , and women's rights programs .

in h.j.res .

2 ( p.l .

108-7 ) , the fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution , $5 million was earmarked in the foreign operations appropriation from the esf to support activities coordinated by the afghan ministry of women's affairs , including support for the establishment of women's centers in afghanistan .

a further $60 million from the international disaster assistance account specifically for humanitarian assistance also mentions the improvement of the status of women with priority placed on girls' and women's education , health , legal and social rights , economic opportunities , and political participation .

through the fy2003 state department budget ( consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 , h.j.res .

2 , p.l .

108-7 ) , about $10.5 million was earmarked for the asia foundation and $2 million for the national endowment for democracy for women's rights in afghanistan .

the fy2003 supplemental ( p.l .

108-11 ) contained no specific earmarks for women's programs in afghanistan .

the afghan women and children relief act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-81 ) , signed into law on december 12 , 2001 , authorized the provision of educational and health care assistance to the women and children of afghanistan .

no specific amount was authorized .

the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-327 ) authorized $15 million for the afghan ministry of women's affairs .

afghanistan receives the third - highest share of u.s. foreign aid in fy2006 .

it was the leading recipient in fy2005 , and ranked fourth in fy2004 .

usaid supports afghan women through a number of grants and programs throughout the country .

specific activities have included small grants to establish the ministry of women's affairs , assistance for afghan ngos , opportunities for income generation in the private sector , and programs to support opportunities for women in agriculture and rural environments .

larger aid programs , such as humanitarian assistance , health , and education , have included support for women , and in some cases , have been integrated into other multi - year development programs .

usaid reports that significant progress has been made in a number of key areas in economic growth , democracy and governance , election participation , and education and health .

usaid partners have focused particularly on promoting women's participation in the political process at the local and national levels .

the state department's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) provides support to afghan refugees , internally displaced persons ( idps ) , returnees and other vulnerable members of the population through funds appropriated to the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account .

its implementing partners include the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) , the international federation of the red cross and red crescent societies ( ifrc ) , the international organization for migration ( iom ) , other u.n. agencies , and ngos .

supporting vulnerable women is one of prm's core goals , and prm funds several programs for afghan women refugees , idps , and returnees , including literacy training , income generation , gender - based violence prevention , and mother - child health care .

the majority of prm's assistance funding does not specifically target women , although many women are beneficiaries .

since the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 , the bush administration has stated its interest in ensuring that iraqi women are involved in rebuilding and reconstruction efforts in iraq .

for the same reasons mentioned in the preceding section on afghanistan , presenting an exhaustive list of programs and funding for iraqi women is difficult .

several programs have been launched specifically focused on women and are detailed below .

because of increasing violence in iraq , however , it is difficult to assess the extent to which these programs have been sustained .

this section lists congressional funding of iraqi women's programs since 2003 .

it should be noted that , while relatively little funding has been dedicated exclusively to iraqi women , the overall level of spending in iraq has been much higher than in afghanistan , and much of this funding implicitly includes women .

no specific earmarks for women's programs have been passed in the current congress .

the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( h.r .

3057 , p.l .

109-102 ) , provides $28 million each to the international republican institute and the national democratic institute to fund governance and rule of law programs in iraq .

the earlier version of this bill as passed in the senate had specified that the funding should be spent in the areas of "governance , elections , political parties , civil society , and women's rights," but the mention of women was not included in the final conference report .

in addition , two congressional resolutions emerged in this session encouraging the iraqi transitional national assembly to adopt a constitution granting women equal rights ( h.res .

383 and s.res .

231 , both passed unanimously ) .

a third resolution commended iraqi women candidates in the january 2005 elections ( h.res .

143 , referred to the subcommittee on middle east and central asia ) .

no specific earmarks for women's programs were passed in this session .

two similar bills were introduced authorizing unspecified funds for assistance to iraqi women in the areas of health care , education , economic empowerment , political participation , civil society , and personal security ( h.r .

4671 and s. 2519 , both entitled the iraqi women and children ' s liberation act of 2004 ) .

neither bill was reported out of committee .

in conference report language ( h.rept .

108-337 ) , accompanying the emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense and for the reconstruction of iraq and afghanistan , 2004 ( h.r .

3289 , p.l .

108-106 , enacted in november 2003 ) , which provided $18.4 billion for iraqi reconstruction , conferees included $10 million "to support women's programs" in iraq .

in february 2004 , deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz announced that "the united states is giving special emphasis to helping iraqi women achieve greater equality and has allocated $27 million for women's programs. .

he added that "education for women is one of the highest priorities , and the united states has committed more than $86.8 million to education projects , with special emphasis on ensuring that girls are registered and attending school. .

in march 2004 , secretary of state colin powell announced a $10 million iraqi women's democracy initiative ( iwdi ) , intended to "train iraqi women in the skills and practices of democratic public life. .

programs have provided voter education to women , as well as training in political leadership , communications , and coalition - building skills to women in the national assembly .

the state department reports that over 2000 iraqi women already have been trained in political , economic and media skills so far .

the secretary also announced the formation of a "u.s. - iraq women's network" ( usiwn ) .

these programs represent a fairly small amount of overall u.s. funding in iraq .

since 2003 , iraq has been the leading cumulative recipient of u.s. foreign aid , and iraqi women's issues and programs — in the sectors of education , health care , local governance , and civil society — have received an indeterminable amount of funding through other iraqi reconstruction funds .

since april 2003 , usaid has implemented a number of programs targeting women , especially in governance and the economic sphere .

usaid reports that nearly 60 percent of its small business development grants in iraq have been awarded to women .

in addition , "a grant for nearly $1.3 million is being finalized for a women - focused international micro finance institute , combining loans with one - on - one technical assistance to develop business ideas. .

usaid is also working to train women politicians and journalists , as well as ngos promoting women's interests .

some of these initiatives have been managed under the auspices of the iraq local governance program ( lgp ) , an initiative intended to provide a foundation for iraq's transition to democracy , which has attempted to deal with the obstacles presented by iraqi culture to women in government .

the lgp has recruited and trained women to serve on various sub - national governing bodies and councils , as well as worked with city councils to meet the needs of women in their communities .

usaid has held a number of workshops for women throughout iraq , where "international and local participants discuss issues such as islam , democracy , oppression of women , women's rights and participation in future elections. .

the iraqi women in local governance group ( iwlgg ) was also established in order to "enhance the political participation of women through civic education and training and monitoring the progress of female participation in each local government. .

usaid has supported accelerated learning programs that are specifically targeted toward girls' education .

these programs are intended to provide girls with life skills and the academic background necessary to return to formal schooling .

usaid is also rehabilitating the water and sanitation facilities at 800 primary schools , and providing training that it says will reach 75,000 female teachers and administrators by the end of the 2005-2006 school year .

a usaid fact sheet discussing reconstruction accomplishments indicates that usaid has rehabilitated over 2,800 schools , and constructed 45 new schools , and trained over 47,500 secondary school teachers and administrators through september 2005 .

an earlier report indicated that as a result of these efforts , "female attendance has surpassed male attendance. .

in the transition to a post - conflict environment , afghan and iraqi women face particular challenges , especially in a climate of uncertainty and insecurity .

while conditions for women in afghanistan have improved markedly since the fall of the taliban , afghan women are still among the most socioeconomically disadvantaged in the world .

female literacy is estimated at 20% .

while girls' school enrollment has skyrocketed in the last few years , there are still one - third fewer girls than boys in primary school .

turning to health , according to the world health organization ( who ) afghanistan has the world's second worst maternal mortality rate and fifth worst neonatal mortality rate .

while iraq is a good deal more industrialized than afghanistan , its health indicators prior to the 2003 invasion were very poor ; its neonatal mortality rate was in fact worse than that of afghanistan .

iraq has historically had a much better — and more gender - balanced — educational system than afghanistan , but girls' school attendance , especially in rural areas , still lags behind that of boys .

while congressional funding for democracy building , civil society development , and participation in the workforce will have an important affect on women's lives in each country , the rehabilitation of the basic education and health care infrastructure for afghan and iraqi women is equally , if not more , vital .

one of the key ways congress has had an impact on the situation for afghan women has been through a series of legislative earmarks .

to date , in iraq , although some funds have been designated to include women , such as $10 million for the iraqi women's democracy initiative , congress has not used legislative earmarks extensively for women's programs .

in consideration of the funding appropriated in recent years , there are some similarities in the approach taken by the united states to improve the lives of afghan and iraqi women .

however , not only are afghanistan and iraq starting from different economic and social points , but the timetables for reconstruction will differ as well based on events and challenges on the ground .

although it is too soon to draw specific lessons from either country , as congress examines the progress of reconstruction programs for women , it may be important to consider the effect of religious versus secular forces , the variation in local traditions and cultures , and the differences between rural and urban communities to see if the assistance provided to afghan and iraqi women is effective and can be used as a model in future post - conflict regions .

