congressional interest in the intellectual property laws , including patents , copyrights , and trademarks , has been reflected in recent free trade agreements ( ftas ) to which the united states is a signatory .

congress stated in the bipartisan trade promotion act of 2002 that an overall negotiating objective of such agreements was to encourage our treaty partners to agree to "a standard of [intellectual property] protection similar to that found in united states law. .

in keeping with this mandate , the united states has entered into numerous ftas that have required their signatories to conform to stipulated standards of intellectual property protection .

because the ftas are drafted in a manner that complies with current u.s. law , their effect is to obligate u.s. treaty partners to amend their intellectual property laws to match or resemble those of the united states .

ftas have been described as an effective mechanism for advancing u.s. interests in ensuring intellectual property protection .

nonetheless , concerns have arisen over the intellectual property provisions of the ftas .

some commentators have suggested that certain fta provisions may lock the united states into current intellectual property policies , inhibiting opportunities for future reform .

others are concerned that under existing multilateral agreements , in particular those of the world trade organization ( wto ) , the intellectual property obligations found within one fta may extend beyond that particular treaty partner .

finally , some observers perceive the ftas to be an inappropriate and unfair vehicle for international intellectual property reforms .

this report offers a broad overview of the intellectual property components of the ftas .

it begins by offering a brief introduction to the global intellectual property system .

next , this report considers the subject matter of the different free trade agreements themselves .

it then reviews perceived concerns with respect to the free trade agreements and closes with concluding observations .

the term "intellectual property" refers to the subject matter of the laws that give rise to proprietary interests in creations of the mind .

significant legal intellectual property disciplines include copyright , which concerns artistic and literary works ; patent , pertaining to pragmatic innovations ; trademark , relating to commercial symbols ; and data protection , concerning pharmaceutical and agricultural test data .

a brief review of each of these legal regimes , as they exist in the united states , will aid subsequent analysis .

copyrights provide protection for original works of authorship .

the types of creations addressed by copyright range from traditional works of art , including literature , music and visual art , to such modern forms of artistic expression as sound recordings , motion pictures and even computer software .

copyright protection arises automatically , as soon as the work has been fixed in tangible form .

authors may register their works with the u.s .

copyright office , a component of the library of congress .

if an author chooses to register his work , he obtains certain procedural and substantive advantages during copyright enforcement .

the copyright law affords authors the exclusive right to reproduce , adapt , and publicly distribute , perform , and display the protected work , subject to limitations such as the fair use privilege .

the term of copyright is ordinarily the life of the author plus 70 years .

patents provide exclusive rights to inventors of new , useful and nonobvious inventions .

the patent law concerns hard technologies , including chemical , electrical and mechanical products and processes , as well as other pragmatic innovations in fields ranging from biotechnology to business methods .

an inventor may obtain a patent by filing a patent application with the united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) .

such an application must completely describe and precisely claim the invention .

patents issued confer the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the patented invention .

the term of a patent is ordinarily 20 years from the date the application was filed .

trademarks consist of any word or symbol used by a merchant to identify its goods or services , and to distinguish them from those of others .

to be subject to protection under the trademark laws , a mark must successfully distinguish the origins of its associated goods , and not be confusingly similar to marks used by others or merely describe the characteristics of those goods .

trademark rights arise under state law as soon as the mark is used on goods in commerce .

however , trademarks may be registered with the uspto , a step that affords significant substantive and procedural advantages .

trademark law also protects the appearance of product packaging and , in some cases , the actual physical configuration of the goods , if these serve as brand identifiers .

a trademark owner may prevent others from using any mark that creates a likelihood of confusion as to the source or sponsorship of the associated goods or services .

trademark rights persist so long as the mark continues to be used and retains its distinctiveness .

another intellectual property right concerns the protection of pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical test data .

most national governments regulate the marketing of pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals in the interest of public health .

this oversight includes a required showing that these products are safe and effective before they can be distributed to the public .

such evidence is not generated by government laboratories , however .

rather , national governments require sponsors of new drugs and agricultural chemicals to submit test data that evidence their safety and efficacy .

because the required test data may be very costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals often do not disclose test data to the public .

otherwise the sponsor's competitors could avoid the expenses of developing this data for themselves .

sponsors also desire government agencies that receive the test data to maintain the data in confidence .

in addition , brand - name pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical firms often seek to limit the ability of generic competitors to rely upon the data in order to obtain marketing approval of their own products , even if they cannot actually view the data themselves .

in the united states , federal legislation limits the ability of generic competitors to reference data generated by the manufacturers of brand - name pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals .

with respect to pharmaceuticals , these "marketing exclusivities" consist of a period of time during which the food and drug administration ( fda ) protects an approved drug protection from competing applications for marketing approval .

under the hatch - waxman act , drugs that qualify as a "new chemical entity" may obtain five years of marketing exclusivity .

the hatch - waxman act also provides for a three - year marketing exclusivity awarded to a drug sponsor that conducts new clinical studies upon a drug that does not qualify as a new chemical entity .

the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act of 1978 , also provides for data protection for agricultural chemicals under somewhat different certain terms and conditions .

a number of rationales explain the intellectual property laws .

some legal experts assert that intellectual property laws are needed to encourage individuals to create new works of authorship , inventions , and other innovative subject matter .

it is believed that absent a system of proprietary rights , free riders could readily exploit these works without having to bear the costs of creating them .

individuals would in turn possess diminished incentives to devote their efforts to being authors or inventors .

in addition , intellectual property rights are said to facilitate market mechanisms by creating discrete , well - defined property interests that decrease transaction costs and encourage commercial exchanges .

on the other hand , intellectual property laws have been subject to criticism .

some assert that intellectual property rights are unnecessary due to market forces that already suffice to create an optimal level of creative activity .

the desire to become famous , or to gain a lead time advantage over competitors , may well provide sufficient inducement to write or to invent without the need for further incentives .

in an era where information can be readily transmitted around the globe , the notion that an innovation can be an object of possession has also been challenged .

each of these contentions has a varying degree of persuasiveness .

as of yet , however , no conclusive study has demonstrated that the social benefits of the intellectual property laws outweigh the costs .

as a result , the justifications and criticisms of intellectual property remain open to challenge .

at present time , no unified legal regime governing intellectual property rights exists on an international basis .

there is no global copyright , patent or trademark .

innovators must secure and enforce these rights within the particular jurisdiction where they desire protection .

in addition , the varying national laws that establish intellectual property rights often differ in important respects .

such factors as the works subject to protection , the scope of rights , and the duration of protection are among the factors that may vary widely in different jurisdictions .

absent some obligation , a particular nation is not required to provide intellectual property rights that resemble those of the united states , or even to establish such laws at all .

since the nineteenth century , however , many nations in fact have committed to provide certain standards of intellectual property protection via bilateral and multilateral international agreements .

the most significant of these is the wto agreement on trade — related aspects of intellectual property rights , commonly known as the trips agreement .

domestically , the uruguay round agreements act in 1995 made significant amendments to u.s. intellectual property laws in an effort to comply with the trips agreement .

as discussed below , the trips agreement required each wto member state to provide minimum substantive standards of intellectual property protection and enforcement .

the trips agreement obligated each wto member state to provide stated levels of intellectual property protection .

although commentators broadly agree that the trips agreement was a watershed event for international intellectual provision , many of its obligations nonetheless fell short of the level of intellectual property rights available in the united states .

for example , u.s. copyright law provides for a term of protection of the life of the author plus 70 years , while a term of life plus 50 years is acceptable under the trips agreement .

u.s. patent law allows patent term to be extended in order to account for long delays in patent office acquisition procedures , but the trips agreement does not require such a measure .

the trips agreement allows wto member states to disallow the registration of trademarks that are not visually perceivable — an option that blocks protection for such commercial symbols as sounds and scents — but no such blanket restriction exists under u.s. law .

in enacting the bipartisan trade promotion act of 2002 , congress stated that an overall negotiating objective of such agreements was to encourage our treaty partners to agree to "a standard of [intellectual property] protection similar to that found in united states law. .

in keeping with this mandate , the united states has entered into numerous ftas that have required their signatories to provide higher levels of intellectual property protection than are required under the trips agreement .

with respect to the intellectual property laws , each of the ftas stipulates standards that comply with current u.s. law .

as a result , the united states need take no action in order to comply with those provisions of the fta .

in contrast , the u.s. treaty partner must often substantially amend its intellectual property laws in order to comply with the fta .

this report next offers an overview of these fta "trips - plus" intellectual property obligations .

it should be noted that the intellectual property provisions of most of these agreements are lengthy and detailed .

further , some of the ftas impose more significant obligations than others .

as a result , if particular information about an individual fta is needed , that instrument should be consulted for a more detailed understanding of its contents .

observers have acknowledged that the ftas have been an effective mechanism for advancing u.s. interests in intellectual property on the global stage .

concerns have nonetheless arisen about the implications of the fta intellectual property provisions .

this report considers three of these concerns: potential lock - in effects , extent of fta obligations , and the fairness of using ftas as a mechanism for international intellectual property reforms .

congressional interest in the ftas as a vehicle for advancing the intellectual property interests of the united states is fueled by a number of objectives .

among them are combating high levels of intellectual property piracy overseas , supporting research and development - based domestic industries , and establishing a more favorable balance of trade .

although the ftas are believed to be an effective mechanism towards achieving these goals , concerns have arisen about both their fairness , as well as their consequences in terms of u.s. obligations towards other trading partners and their impact upon contemplated changes to domestic law .

the scope of these potential consequences counsels continued congressional attention towards the ftas that the united states has already formed , as well as those ftas that are planned for the future .

