this report provides an overview discussion on the modernization of u.s. military tactical aircraft , meaning fighter aircraft , strike fighters , and attack planes .

tactical aircraft are a major component of u.s. military capability , and account for a significant portion of u.s. defense spending .

in early 2009 , the air force , navy , and marine corps collectively had an inventory of about 3,500 tactical aircraft .

current efforts for modernizing u.s. tactical aircraft center on three aircraft acquisition programs — the f - 35 joint strike fighter ( jsf ) program , the air force f - 22 fighter program , and the navy f / a - 18e / f strike fighter program .

program - specific issues for congress in fy2010 relating to the f - 35 , f - 22 , and f / a - 18e / f include the following: whether to approve or reject the administration's proposal to terminate program for developing an alternate engine for the f - 35 .

whether to whether to approve the administration's request to end f - 22 procurement at the 187 aircraft that have been procured through fy2009 , or reject that proposal and provide funding in fy2010 for the procurement of additional f - 22s in fy2010 and / or subsequent years .

whether to approve , reject , or modify the navy's fy2010 funding request for procurement of nine f / a - 18e / fs , and whether to approve a multiyear procurement ( myp ) arrangement for fy2010-fy2014 for procuring f / a - 18e / fs ( and also ea - 18gs , which are electronic attack versions of the f / a - 18e / f ) .

these program - specific issues , as well as fy2010 legislative activity relating specifically to the f - 35 , f - 22 , and f / a - 18e / f programs , are covered in detail in the following crs reports: crs report rl30563 on the f - 35 program .

crs report rl31673 on the f - 22 program .

crs report rl30624 on the f / a - 18e / f program .

this crs report discusses and presents fy2010 legislative activity on issues relating to u.s. tactical aircraft in general .

for several years now , a central issue relating to tactical aircraft in general has been the overall affordability of the department of defense's ( dod's ) plans for modernizing the tactical aircraft force .

a second key issue concerns the future of the u.s. industrial base for designing and manufacturing tactical aircraft .

this section presents legislative activity for fy2010 relating to tactical aircraft modernization in general .

for legislative activity relating specifically to the f - 35 , f - 22 , or f / a - 18e / f programs , see crs reports rl30563 , rl31673 , or rl30624 , respectively .

section 133 of h.r .

2647 as passed by the house would require dod to submit a report to congress on the procurement of "4.5" - generation aircraft , which the provision defines as f - 15s , f - 16s , and f / a - 18s that include certain upgrades .

the text of the provision states: sec .

133 .

report on 4.5 generation fighter procurement .

 ( a ) in general - not later than 90 days after the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on 4.5 generation fighter aircraft procurement .

the report shall include the following: ( 1 ) the number of 4.5 generation fighter aircraft for procurement for fiscal years 2011 through 2025 necessary to fulfill the requirement of the air force to maintain not less than 2,200 tactical fighter aircraft .

 ( 2 ) the estimated procurement costs for those aircraft if procured through single year procurement contracts .

 ( 3 ) the estimated procurement costs for those aircraft if procured through multiyear procurement contracts .

 ( 4 ) the estimated savings that could be derived from the procurement of those aircraft through a multiyear procurement contract , and whether the secretary determines the amount of those savings to be substantial .

 ( 5 ) a discussion comparing the costs and benefits of obtaining those aircraft through annual procurement contracts with the costs and benefits of obtaining those aircraft through a multiyear procurement contract .

 ( 6 ) a discussion regarding the availability and feasibility of f - 35s in fiscal years 2015 through fiscal year 2025 to proportionally and concurrently recapitalize the air national guard .

 ( 7 ) the recommendations of the secretary regarding whether congress should authorize a multiyear procurement contract for 4.5 generation fighter aircraft .

 ( b ) certifications - if the secretary recommends under subsection ( a ) ( 7 ) that congress authorize a multiyear procurement contract for 4.5 generation fighter aircraft , the secretary shall submit to congress the certifications required by section 2306b of title 10 , united states code , at the same time that the budget is submitted under section 1105 ( a ) of title 31 , united states code , for fiscal year 2011 .

 ( c ) 4.5 generation fighter aircraft defined - in this section , the term `4.5 generation fighter aircraft' means current fighter aircraft , including the f - 15 , f - 16 , and f - 18 [sic: f / a - 18] , that — ( 1 ) have advanced capabilities , including — ( a ) aesa radar ; ( b ) high capacity data - link ; and ( c ) enhanced avionics ; and ( 2 ) have the ability to deploy current and reasonably foreseeable advanced armaments .

section 1032 would require a report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) .

regarding this section , the committee's report states: the committee expects that the analyses submitted [under section 1032] will include details on all elements of the force structure discussed in the qdr report , and particularly the following: ( 1 ) a description of the factors that informed decisions regarding the fighter force structure for the air force , navy , and marine corps , including: the assumed threat capabilities to include fighter force capabilities as well as air defense capabilities ; the modeling simulations and analysis used to determine fighter force structure for the air force , navy , and marine corps ; the extent to which unmanned aerial vehicle inventories compensate for manned fighter aircraft inventory ; and the quantifiable operational risks associated with the planned fighter fleets , based on requirements of combatant commanders , and measures planned to address those risks ; ... ( pages 387-388 ) sectio n 1047 would prohibit the air force from retiring fighter aircraft in accordance with the combat air forces restructuring plan announced by the air force on may 18 , 2009 , until 90 days after the air force submits to congress a report on various aspects of the plan .

the text of the provision states: sec .

1047 .

combat air forces restructuring .

 ( a ) limitations relating to legacy aircraft - until the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date the secretary of the air force submits a report in accordance with subsection ( b ) , the following provisions apply: ( 1 ) prohibition on retirement of aircraft - the secretary of the air force may not retire any fighter aircraft pursuant to the combat air forces restructuring plan announced by the secretary on may 18 , 2009 .

 ( 2 ) prohibition on personnel reassignments - the secretary of the air force may not reassign any air force personnel ( whether on active duty or a member of a reserve component , including the national guard ) associated with such restructuring plan .

 ( 3 ) requirements to continue funding - ( a ) of the funds authorized to be appropriated in title iii of this act for operations and maintenance for the air force , at least $344,600,000 shall be expended for continued operation and maintenance of the 249 fighter aircraft scheduled for retirement in fiscal year 2010 pursuant to such restructuring plan .

 ( b ) of the funds authorized to be appropriated in title i of this act for procurement for the air force , at least $10,500,000 shall be available for obligation to provide for any modifications necessary to sustain the 249 fighter aircraft .

 ( b ) report - the report under subsection ( a ) shall be submitted to the committees on armed services of the house of representatives and the senate and shall include the following information: ( 1 ) a detailed plan of how the force structure and capability gaps resulting from the retirement actions will be addressed .

 ( 2 ) an explanation of the assessment conducted of the current threat environment and current capabilities .

 ( 3 ) a description of the follow - on mission assignments for each affected base .

 ( 4 ) an explanation of the criteria used for selecting the affected bases and the particular fighters chosen for retirement .

 ( 5 ) a description of the environmental analyses being conducted .

 ( 6 ) an identification of the reassignment and manpower authorizations necessary for the air force personnel ( both active duty and reserve component ) affected by the retirements if such retirements are accomplished .

 ( 7 ) a description of the funding needed in fiscal years 2010 through 2015 to cover operation and maintenance costs , personnel , and aircraft procurement , if the restructuring plan is not carried out .

 ( 8 ) an estimate of the cost avoidance should the restructuring plan more forward and a description of how such funds would be invested during the future - years defense plan to ensure the remaining fighter force achieves the desired service life and is sufficiently modernized to outpace the threat .

 ( c ) exception for certain aircraft - the prohibition in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall not apply to the five fighter aircraft scheduled for retirement in fiscal year 2010 , as announced when the budget for fiscal year 2009 was submitted to congress .

section 1051 expresses the sense of congress regarding navy carrier air wing force structure .

the text of the provision states: sec .

1051 .

sense of congress regarding carrier air wing force structure .

 ( a ) findings - congress makes the following findings: ( 1 ) the requirement of section 5062 ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , for the navy to maintain not less than 11 operational aircraft carriers , means that the naval combat forces of the navy also include not less than 10 carrier air wings .

 ( 2 ) the department of the navy currently requires a carrier air wing to include not less than 44 strike fighter aircraft .

 ( 3 ) in spite of the potential warfighting benefits that may result in the deployment of fifth - generation strike fighter aircraft , for the foreseeable future the majority of the strike fighter aircraft assigned to a carrier air wing will not be fifth - generation assets .

 ( b ) sense of congress - it is the sense of congress that — ( 1 ) in addition to the forces described in section 5062 ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , the naval combat forces of the navy should include not less than 10 carrier air wings ( even if the number of aircraft carriers is temporarily reduced ) that are comprised of , in addition to any other aircraft , not less than 44 strike fighter aircraft ; and ( 2 ) the secretary of the navy should take all appropriate actions necessary to make resources available in order to include such number of strike fighter aircraft in each carrier air wing .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 , summarizes section 133 on page 125 and section 1051 on page 393 .

the report summarizes section 10 4 7 on page 392 , and states further in connection with section 1047 that: the committee is concerned about air force plans to accelerate the retirement of 249 legacy fighter aircraft in fiscal year 2010 , in addition to the five fighter aircraft previously scheduled for retirement .

the additional aircraft scheduled for retirement are 112 f - 15s , 134 f - 15s and 3 a - 10s .

the committee notes that such actions could lead to serious gaps in force structure and capability since these actions are being taken while replacement aircraft are still being tested and are not yet available for fielding .

additionally , the committee is concerned that the air force has not identified , for all of the affected bases , the follow - on missions that will serve to fill force structure and capability gaps .

the committee has identified $143.7 million in unjustified program growth in the air force operation and maintenance administrative budget , specifically service - wide technical support , service - wide administration , and service - wide other activities .

additionally , the committee has identified $200.9 million in unexecutable peacetime operations due to deployments in the air force operating forces , air operations budget activity .

the committee recommends that these funds totaling $344.6 be used for the continued operation and maintenance of the 249 legacy fighters that were slated for retirement during fiscal year 2010 until such time as the reporting requirement above is met .

in addition , the committee recommends that $10.5 million of funds for aircraft procurement be available for obligations for modifications necessary to sustain the 249 fighter aircraft .

 ( pages 392-393 ) the report states the following regarding the projected air force fighter shortfall: the committee notes that for the past year , the department of the air force has informed congress that it requires 2,200 fighter aircraft , and that the department projects a shortfall in its fighter aircraft inventory that would begin in fiscal year 2017 and grow to approximately 800 aircraft by 2024 .

the committee believes that such a shortfall will adversely affect the ability of the active duty forces and air reserve forces to meet future requirements for both air expeditionary forces and for the air sovereignty alert mission in the united states .

accordingly , the committee directs the secretary of the air force , in consultation with the chief of the air national guard and the chief of the air force reserve , to provide a report to the congressional defense committees by march 1 , 2010 .

the report should include statements from both the chief of the air national guard and the chief of the air force reserve describing their separate and independent views to congress , as applicable .

the report should address the so - called ''fighter gap'' issue in the long - and short - term with alternative solutions including but not limited to: accelerated procurement of fifth generation fighters such as the f - 22 and f - 35 ; an interim procurement of so - called ''4.5 generation'' fighters ; and fleet management options such as service life extension programs .

the report must include a detailed analysis of the effect that any shortfalls will have on the air national guard and the air sovereignty alert mission specifically , including the loss of air national guard flying missions throughout the united states and the resultant loss of air national guard pilot and maintenance capability .

 ( page 101 ) the report states the following regarding the projected navy - marine corps strike fighter shortfall: the committee is concerned regarding the current and forecasted strike - fighter aircraft inventory of the department of the navy .

the committee understands that the department of the navy has a fiscal year 2009 strike - fighter inventory shortfall of 110 aircraft and predicts a fiscal year 2010 shortfall of 152 aircraft , with a potential peak strike - fighter shortfall of 312 aircraft by fiscal year 2018 .

the committee believes such drastic shortfalls in strike fighter - inventory are unacceptable .

the committee understands that a variety of factors cause the current and projected strike - fighter shortfall .

those factors include a fiscal year 2002 decision to reduce f / a - 18a through d inventory by 88 aircraft , a reduction in the program of record quantity for f - 35b / c by 409 aircraft , delays in development of the f - 35b / c program , and f / a 18a through d aircraft reaching forecasted service life sooner than expected .

the committee remains unconvinced that naval strike - fighter shortfalls should be viewed against the totality of department of defense strike - fighter inventory .

the capabilities of the naval strike - fighter force are inherent in the capability of the aircraft carrier as a strike platform and , as such , force structure requirements for naval aviation must be viewed as those required to support sufficient carrier air wings ( cvw ) to match the number of statutorily mandated aircraft carriers .

the committee supports procurement of additional f / a - 18e / f aircraft to mitigate the naval strike - fighter inventory shortfall and believes that procurement of additional f / a - 18e / f aircraft through a multi - year procurement contract is more cost effective and prudent than procuring new aircraft through an annual contract or applying $25.6 million of additional fiscal resources per aircraft to extend the service life of the f / a - 18a through d fleet .

therefore , the committee includes a provision in title i of this act that would authorize the secretary of the navy to enter into a multi - year procurement contract for the purchase of additional f / a - 18e / f and ea - 18g aircraft and also includes a provision in title x of this act [section 1051] that expresses a sense of congress that the department of the navy should maintain no less than ten carrier air wings with no less than 44 strike - fighters each .

additionally , the committee directs the director of the congressional budget office to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by february 2 , 2010 , that evaluates the operational effectiveness and costs of extending and modernizing the service - life of f / a - 18a through d aircraft to 10,000 flight hours versus procuring , either through an annual or multi - year procurement contract , additional f / a - 18e / f aircraft beyond the current program of record .

 ( page 61 ) .

the senate armed services committee's report ( s.rept .

111-35 of july 2 , 2009 ) on the senate - reported version of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( s. 1390 ) includes a section on the f / a - 18e / f program that states the following regarding the projected navy - marine corps strike fighter shortfall: the committee has expressed concern that the navy is facing a sizeable gap in aircraft inventory as older f / a - 18a - d hornets retire before the aircraft carrier variant ( f - 35c ) of the joint strike fighter ( jsf ) is available .

the committee raised this issue in the committee reports accompanying s. 1547 ( s.rept .

110-77 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 and accompanying s. 3001 ( s.rept .

110-335 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 .

the committee is disappointed that the navy has failed to provide the report comparing single versus multiyear procurement costs mandated by the second of those committee reports .

last year , the committee received testimony from the navy of a projected shortfall in navy tactical aviation .

the navy indicated that , under assumptions current at that time , it would experience a shortfall of 69 tactical aircraft in the year 2017 , a number that swells to 125 when requirements of the united states marine corps are included .

the committee believes that the navy's projection of this shortfall was , however , based on a series of questionable assumptions .

this year , the chief of naval operations said that the projected gap may be as high as 250 aircraft total for the department of the navy .

the committee believes that the navy has failed to present a budget in fiscal year 2010 that takes effective action to deal with this substantially increased projected shortfall in the department of the navy's tactical air fleet and is concerned about the potential risk such a shortfall could pose to national security .

the committee also notes that this shortfall figure is still predicated on an initial operation capability of the f – 35c in 2015 but that achieving this is considered optimistic by many observers .

the navy's delay in taking action causes concern that it: ( 1 ) is continuing to accept the substantial security risks associated with the projected shortfall ; ( 2 ) remains overly reliant on a potentially costly service life extension program ( slep ) for legacy f / a - 18s as a means to mitigate the gap until the joint strike fighter achieves full operational capability ; and ( 3 ) is not adequately considering realistic , fiscally responsible long - range procurement plans to address the carrier strike aircraft shortfall , such as a multiyear procurement of f / a - 18e / f aircraft as opposed to a series of single year purchases .

the committee is concerned that , in response to possible further delays , expanding costs and technological immaturity with the jsf , the navy appears increasingly reliant on its proposal to extend the life of select legacy f / a - 18's from 8,600 to 10,000 flight hours through a slep currently estimated to cost on average $26.0 million per plane .

this life extension would be in addition to the 2,600-hour service life extension that the navy already plans for most legacy f / a - 18s .

by the navy's own testimony , it is unclear how many of the planes are capable of reaching 10,000 flight hours even with a slep .

the committee is concerned that the cost uncertainties of a slep achieving an additional 1,400 flight hours make such a plan risky .

in any case , the committee believes such slep may be inefficient when compared with the benefits of procuring new f / a – 18e / f's , which might cost less than $50.0 million each in 2009 constant dollars under a multiyear procurement acquisition strategy .

normalizing costs for the expected return in additional service life , a slep to achieve the additional 1,400 hours would cost approximately $18,571 per flight hour gained , versus $8,333 per flight hour provided by a new f / a – 18e / f ( at a 6,000 flight hour life , the cost per flight hour of a new f / a - 18e / f would fall even further to $5,814 if those planes are similarly extended to 8,600 flight hours as have legacy f / a - 18s ) .

in light of such costs , the committee believes the navy must more carefully evaluate costs and benefits of new f / a – 18e / f procurements , compared to investing in a slep of legacy aircraft .

the committee further notes that new f / a - 18e / f models come equipped with improved technological capabilities over the legacy f / a - 18's , including active electronically scanned array radar , modernized avionics , advanced aerial refueling system capability , and added weapon hard points , among other features that would not be part of a slep upgrade package for the older aircraft .

these factors would tend to increase the benefit of purchasing new f / a - 18e / fs compared to conducting a slep on legacy aircraft .

the navy projects that the f / a - 18e / f will remain in the fleet until at least 2040 , and should be able to use most or all of the full service life of any newly purchased aircraft .

the committee understands that the department of defense intends to review the whole issue of tactical aircraft forces in the pending quadrennial defense review .

the committee expects the department to conduct and submit the analysis of multiyear procurement for the f / a - 18 as directed in the committee report last year to include cost differentials between single year and multiyear procurement strategies and tradeoffs between a slep and new procurements of the f / a - 18e / f .

the department should include such information derived from that analysis in deciding how to implement the results on the ongoing quadrennial defense review regarding tactical aviation .

the committee expects that the department's tactical aviation procurement strategies will be informed by the quadrennial defense review .

in light of the significant increase in the strike - fighter shortfall testified to before the committee this year , additional actions to address that shortfall cannot be delayed too long .

 ( pages 20-22 ) .

the conference version ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) of h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 , contains a provision ( section 131 ) that requires the department of defense ( dod ) to submit a report to congress on the procurement of "4.5" - generation fighter aircraft .

section 1052 would require a report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) .

the house report on h.r .

2647 ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 — see discussion above ) stated that the report on 4.5-generation fighter aircraft is to include , among other things , a description of the factors that informed decisions regarding the fighter force structure for the air force , navy , and marine corps .

section 1075 of h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 prohibits the air force from retiring fighter aircraft in accordance with the combat air forces restructuring plan until 30 days after the air force submits to congress a report on various aspects of the plan .

section 1076 expresses the sense of congress regarding navy carrier air wing force structure .

section 131 states: sec .

131 .

report on the procurement of 4.5 generation fighter aircraft .

 ( a ) in general. — not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the procurement of 4.5 generation fighter aircraft .

the report shall include the following: ( 1 ) the number of 4.5 generation fighter aircraft needed to be procured during fiscal years 2011 through 2025 to fulfill the requirement of the air force to maintain not less than 2,200 tactical fighter aircraft .

 ( 2 ) the estimated procurement costs for those aircraft if procured through annual procurement contracts .

 ( 3 ) the estimated procurement costs for those aircraft if procured through multiyear procurement contracts .

 ( 4 ) the estimated savings that could be derived from the procurement of those aircraft through a multiyear procurement contract , and whether the secretary determines the amount of those savings to be substantial .

 ( 5 ) a discussion comparing the costs and benefits of obtaining those aircraft through annual procurement contracts with the costs and benefits of obtaining those aircraft through a multiyear procurement contract .

 ( 6 ) a discussion regarding the availability and feasibility of procuring f – 35 aircraft to proportionally and concurrently re capitalize the air national guard during fiscal years 2015 through fiscal year 2025 .

 ( b ) 4.5 generation fighter aircraft defined. — in this section , the term ''4.5 generation fighter aircraft'' means current fighter aircraft , including the f – 15 , f – 16 , and f – 18 , that — ( 1 ) have advanced capabilities , including — ( a ) aesa radar ; ( b ) high capacity data - link ; and ( c ) enhanced avionics ; and ( 2 ) have the ability to deploy current and reasonably foreseeable advanced armaments .

section 1052 states: sec .

1052 .

report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review .

 ( a ) report requirement. — concurrent with the delivery of the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review required by section 118 of title 10 , united states code , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report with a classified annex containing — ( 1 ) the analyses used to determine and support the findings on force structure required by such section ; and ( 2 ) a description of any changes from the previous quadrennial defense review to the minimum military requirements for major military capabilities .

 ( b ) major military capabilities defined. — in this section , the term ''major military capabilities'' includes any capability the secretary determines to be a major military capability , any capability discussed in the report of the 2006 quadrennial defense review , and any capability described in paragraph ( 9 ) or ( 10 ) of section 118 ( d ) of title 10 , united states code .

section 1075 states: sec .

1075 .

combat air forces restructuring .

 ( a ) limitations relating to legacy aircraft. — until the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date the secretary of the air force submits a report in accordance with subsection ( b ) , the following provisions apply: ( 1 ) prohibition on retirement of aircraft. — the secretary of the air force may not retire any fighter aircraft pursuant to the combat air forces restructuring plan announced by the secretary on may 18 , 2009 .

 ( 2 ) prohibition on personnel reassignments. — the secretary of the air force may not reassign any air force personnel ( whether on active duty or a member of a reserve component , including the national guard ) associated with such restructuring plan .

 ( b ) report. — the report under subsection ( a ) shall be submitted to the committees on armed services of the house of representatives and the senate and shall include the following information: ( 1 ) a detailed plan of how the force structure and capability gaps resulting from the retirement actions will be addressed .

 ( 2 ) an explanation of the assessment conducted of the current threat environment and current capabilities .

 ( 3 ) a description of the follow - on mission assignments for each affected base .

 ( 4 ) an explanation of the criteria used for selecting the affected bases and the particular fighters chosen for retirement .

 ( 5 ) a description of the environmental analyses being conducted .

 ( 6 ) an identification of the reassignment and manpower authorizations necessary for the air force personnel ( both active duty and reserve component ) affected by the retirements if such retirements are accomplished .

 ( 7 ) a description of the funding needed in fiscal years 2010 through 2015 to cover operation and maintenance costs , personnel , and aircraft procurement , if the restructuring plan is not carried out .

 ( 8 ) an estimate of the cost avoidance should the restructuring plan more forward and a description of how such funds would be invested during the future - years defense plan to ensure the remaining fighter force achieves the desired service life and is sufficiently modernized to outpace the threat .

 ( c ) exception for certain aircraft. — the prohibition in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall not apply to the five fighter aircraft scheduled for retirement in fiscal year 2010 , as announced when the budget for fiscal year 2009 was submitted to congress .

section 1076 states: sec .

1076 .

sense of congress regarding carrier air wing force structure .

 ( a ) findings. — congress makes the following findings: ( 1 ) section 5062 ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , requires the department of the navy to maintain not less than 11 operational aircraft carriers .

 ( 2 ) in repeated testimony before congress , the navy has pledged its long - term commitment to naval combat forces that include 11 operational aircraft carriers and 10 carrier air wings , composed of 44 strike - fighter aircraft per wing .

 ( b ) sense of congress. — it is the sense of congress that — ( 1 ) in addition to the forces described in section 5062 ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , the navy should meet its current requirement for 10 carrier air wings ( even if the number of aircraft carriers is temporarily reduced ) that are comprised of not less than 44 strike - fighter aircraft , in addition to any other aircraft associated with the air wing ; and ( 2 ) the congress and the secretary of the navy should take all appropriate actions necessary to achieve the current requirement for such carrier air wings until such time that modifications to the carrier air wing force structure are warranted and the secretary of the navy provides congress with a justification of any proposed modifications , supported by rigorous and sufficient warfighting analysis .

regarding section 131 , the conference report states: the conferees agree that the investment strategy that the department of the air force intends to help the department of defense transition from , the capability provided by the current tactical fighter force to a smaller but more flexible , lethal and capable strike fighter force , will be challenging .

as the air force implements that strategy but where circumstances warrant , the conferees expect the air force will analyze the viability of procuring additional 4.5 generation fighter aircraft under a multiyear contract and , where those conditions required to be present under section 2306b of title 10 , united states code , as amended , exist , submit a multiyear procurement proposal to congress , accompanied with certifications required under section 2306b of title 10 , united states code , as amended .

with this provision , the conferees merely intend for the air force to conduct , and provide the congressional defense committees with , the analysis necessary to support , where warranted , a multiyear purchase of additional 4.5 generation fighter aircraft , specifically defined under this provision to capture the f – 15 , f – 16 , and f – 18 that have advanced radar , data - link and avionics capabilities and the capability to deploy advanced armaments .

the conferees do not intend that this provision will modify in any way the requirements of section 2306b of title 10 , united states code , as amended , by section 811 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( public law 110 – 181 ) , and the statement of managers accompanying those amendments ( h. rept .

110 – 477 ) .

 ( page 682 ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-230 of july 24 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , states the following regarding the air force's proposed combat forces restructuring plan: combat air force restructure the committee is concerned with the lack of detail and analysis provided to the congress regarding the air force's combat air force restructure plan that would retire 248 legacy f – 15 , f – 16 and a – 10 aircraft .

many of these same concerns regarding the proposed restructuring plan were expressed by the house - passed version of the fiscal year 2010 national defense authorization act .

the committee directs that the reports stipulated in the house - passed version of the fiscal year 2010 defense authorization act also be transmitted to the defense appropriations committees .

particularly given these outstanding reports and the expected publication of the quadrennial defense review in the coming year , the committee is concerned that full implementation of the restructure may be premature .

additionally , the committee is concerned with the personnel costs and potential acquisition costs associated with the air force proposal to remove the training of f – 15 pilots and related personnel from tyndall air force base .

the committee directs the department to provide a cost benefit analysis of this proposal regarding tyndall air force base and kingsley field in klamath falls , oregon no later than 180 days after enactment of this act .

the report shall include an analysis of factors impacting f – 15 training quantity and quality at each location , to include training synergies , airspace access and availability .

the report shall identify and explain the justification for where f – 15 basic crew chief training , air control squadron training and intelligence formal training will be established and maintained .

the report shall include analysis on simulator and ancillary training access , expected effect on the quality and experience of the instructor base , future military construction requirements and special considerations and costs required due to the differing training environments and climatology at each base .

moreover , the committee requests that the department identify airfields that share runways for both air force and commercial operations within the continental united states .

the committee requests that the department include air force policy on and analysis of the training and operational mission impacts at bases with shared runways .

additionally , the committee directs an independent review by a federally funded research and development center ( ffrdc ) on the impact of the restructure on the nation's combat air forces .

the committee directs the secretary of the air force to provide the described reports no sooner than 180 days after enactment of this act .

the committee further directs that no funds may be obligated on executing the combat air force restructure until 180 days after submission to the congressional defense committees of all directed reports .

 ( pages 62-63 ) the report states the following regarding the project navy - marine corps strike fighter shortfall: strike fighter shortfall sustained , continued operations in overseas contingencies have resulted in the department of the navy's tactical aircraft fleet ( primarily the f – 18 variant aircraft ) being flown at an extremely high operational tempo .

this has caused the aircraft to age at a faster rate than the navy had planned when determining the introduction of the follow on aircraft , the f – 35 lightning ii joint strike fighter .

the net result of these sustained operations is that the navy is forecasting critical shortfalls in its strike fighter inventory .

delays in the introduction of the f – 35 from the original forecast have exacerbated this shortfall .

last year , the department of the navy predicted that the shortfall would peak at 125 aircraft in fiscal year 2017 .

although the department of the navy has not provided an updated shortfall prediction with the submission of this year's budget , the committee understands it is now over 200 aircraft .

this is due to the fact that a key assumption in last year's prediction , the life extension of the older variant f – 18 aircraft , is proving to be more problematic than anticipated .

additionally , the navy has reduced the number of f – 18 aircraft being purchased in fiscal year 2010 from what was predicted last year .

this reduction is confusing , since it moves the tactical aircraft inventory in the exact opposite direction one would expect when faced with a shortage of aircraft .

fortunately for the navy , the production line for the f / a – 18e / f variant aircraft is still open and producing aircraft .

for the last ten years this program has produced cost effective aircraft under the umbrella of a multi - year procurement strategy , however the fiscal year 2010 aircraft are being purchased as a standalone , annually priced procurement .

the unit price difference between an annual procurement and a multi - year procurement is substantial .

since the f – 35 will not begin to deliver in significant quantities for several years , the committee believes the navy is letting a golden opportunity slip away by not entering into another multi - year procurement for f / a – 18e / f aircraft .

in addition to mitigating the strike fighter shortfall , the navy would achieve significant savings by purchasing aircraft under a multi - year procurement .

therefore , the recommendation provides $108,000,000 above the request for the procurement of long lead equipment in an economic order quantity and cost reduction initiatives for a five year , 150 aircraft multi - year procurement for the f / a – 18e / f and ea – 18g programs .

additionally , in an attempt to further mitigate the strike fighter shortfall , the recommendation provides $495,000,000 for the procurement of an additional nine f / a – 18e / f aircraft .

 ( page 153 ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-74 of september 10 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 states the following regarding the projected navy - marine corps strike fighter shortfall: f / a – 18 super hornet . — the committee is concerned about the shortfall in the navy's strikefighter inventory created by the aging of the older f / a – 18 models and the fact that the f – 35 joint strike fighter program will not start delivering carrier aircraft in significant numbers for several years .

the shortfall is currently estimated to be at least 129 aircraft ; it could be well above that level if it extending the life of the f / a – 18 out to 10,000 hours is cost prohibitive .

to ensure that navy has sufficient aircraft for the fleet , the committee provides an increase of $512,280,000 to procure an additional nine 9 f / a – 18s in fiscal year 2010 .

the committee again encourages the navy to pursue a multi - year procurement contract for these aircraft .

 ( page 257 ) .

on october 6 , during its consideration of h.r .

3326 , the senate approved , by a vote of 91-7 ( record vote number 309 ) , an amendment ( s.amdt .

2596 ) that prohibits the air force from retiring any tactical aircraft as announced in the combat air forces restructuring plan announced on may 18 , 2009 , until the air force submits to the congressional defense committees the report that provides , among other things , a detailed plan for how the air force will fill the force structure and capability gaps resulting from the retirement of those aircraft .

the text of the amendment is as follows: amendment no .

2596 ( purpose: to limit the early retirement of tactical aircraft ) at the appropriate place , insert the following: sec .

__ .

 ( a ) limitation on early retirement of tactical aircraft. — the secretary of the air force may not retire any tactical aircraft as announced in the combat air forces structuring plan announced on may 18 , 2009 , until the secretary submits to the congressional defense committees the report described in subsection ( b ) .

 ( b ) report. — the report described in this subsection is a report that sets forth the following: ( 1 ) a detailed plan for how the secretary of the air force will fill the force structure and capability gaps resulting from the retirement of tactical aircraft under the structuring plan described in subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) a description of the follow - on missions for each base affected by the structuring plan .

 ( 3 ) an explanation of the criteria used for selecting the bases referred to in paragraph ( 2 ) and for the selection of tactical aircraft for retirement under the structuring plan .

 ( 4 ) a plan for the reassignment of the regular and reserve air force personnel affected by the retirement of tactical aircraft under the structuring plan .

 ( 5 ) an estimate of the cost avoidance to be achieved by the retirement of such tactical aircraft , and a description how such funds would be invested under the period covered by the most current future - years defense program .

this appendix presents air force briefing slides on the air force's proposed combat air forces restructuring plan .

