nato's mission in afghanistan , the international security assistance force ( isaf ) , is seen as a test of the allies' military capabilities and their political will to undertake a complex mission in a distant land and to sustain that commitment .

since the washington nato summit in 1999 , the allies have sought to create a "new" nato , capable of operating beyond the european theater to combat emerging threats such as terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

nato has sought to be "global" in its geographic reach and in the development of non - member partner states that can assist in achieving an agreed mission .

this change in overall mission initially reflected a nato consensus that the principal dangers to allied security lie distant from the treaty area and require new political tools and military capabilities to combat them .

isaf was created by united nations security council resolution 1386 on december 20 , 2001 .

led originally by the united states , the isaf mission was initially limited to kabul .

nato took over command of isaf in afghanistan in august 2003 .

the security council passed the currently governing resolution , res .

1883 , on september 23 , 2008 .

the resolution calls upon nato to provide security and law and order , promote governance and development , help reform the justice system , train a national police force and army , provide security for elections , and provide assistance to the local effort to address the narcotics industry .

by the end of october 2009 , isaf had an estimated 71,000 troops from 42 countries , with the 28 nato members providing the core of the force .

the largest troop deployments come from the united states which has approximately 34,800 troops , the united kingdom ( 9,000 ) , germany ( 4,300 ) , canada ( 2,800 ) , italy ( 2,700 ) , france ( 3,100 ) , the netherlands ( 2,100 ) , and poland ( 2,000 ) .

the nato / isaf mission in afghanistan is led by u.s. general stanley mcchrystal , who assumed command in june 2009 .

nato's effort in afghanistan is the alliance's first "out - of - area" mission beyond europe .

the purpose of the mission is the stabilization and reconstruction of afghanistan .

although nato has undertaken stabilization and reconstruction missions before , for example in kosovo , the scope of the undertaking in afghanistan is considerably more difficult .

taliban and al qaeda insurgents are providing stiff resistance to the operation , afghanistan has never had a well - functioning central government , the distance from europe , and the country's terrain present daunting obstacles to both nato manpower and equipment .

stabilization and reconstruction must take place while combat operations , continue .

and , although the allies agree upon the general political objective of the isaf mission , some have had differing interpretations of how to achieve it .

politically , the mission in afghanistan is likely to remain important for nato's future .

several key nato members , above all the united states , view the afghanistan mission as a test case for the allies' ability to generate the political will to counter significant threats to their security .

these countries believe afghanistan provides a test of will against the concrete danger of international terrorism although some allies may disagree with such this assessment .

however , as the war enters it ninth year , there appears to be growing opposition to the war among the public throughout europe who question the threat to europe from afghanistan , and many experts suggest that significant progress in stabilizing afghanistan must be made in 2010 or allied solidarity in support of the isaf mission , including within the united states , could begin to unravel .

over the past several years , nato governments have also repeatedly pledged to develop capabilities making their forces more expeditionary , flexible , and "deployable. .

the mission in afghanistan provides a hard test of these capabilities and commitments .

the impact of afghanistan could also be felt as nato begins its effort to write a new strategic concept that will define the alliance and its role in the future .

differences of opinion on future commitments such as afghanistan could provide serious disagreement within the alliance for achieving consensus on nato's future as a "global" or expeditionary alliance and thus on the ability and willingness of the member states to provide funding in order to procure the capabilities necessary for an alliance of that sort in the future .

the conflict in afghanistan continues to present a significant challenge to nato's military commanders as well .

over the past three years , taliban attacks have increased in scope and number , and taliban fighters have adopted some of the tactics , such as roadside bombs and suicide attacks , used by insurgents in iraq .

in january 2008 , a report issued by the afghanistan study group claimed that the year 2007 was the deadliest for american and international troops in afghanistan since the 2001 invasion of afghanistan .

however , in 2008 the violence continued to escalate with a reported 30% increase nationwide and an estimated 40% rise in attacks over 2007 in the u.s. - led eastern sector .

the continuation of violence throughout 2009 including allied operations in helmand province has increased the number of casualties resulting from these and other attacks by taliban forces and has now made 2009 the deadliest year for the allied effort .

suicide attacks and insurgent violence have continued and have escalated thus far in 2009 .

as the 2009 winter season came to an end , many military experts were expecting the spring and early summer to become a difficult and violent period that could have become a decisive time for the isaf mission as the nation prepared for national elections scheduled for august .

although by june 2009 some 400 insurgent attacks had been recorded , a higher than normal number , the anticipated large - scale spring / early summer offensive did not materialize as expected .

according to some experts , three explanations have been offered for this .

the first was that the beginning of the deployment of the 21,000 additional u.s. troops pledged by president obama created uncertainty within the taliban leadership with respect to where those troops would actually be deployed .

a second explanation was related to the significant offensive against the taliban inside pakistan by the pakistan military in the swat valley region that apparently seriously disrupted taliban planning and supply for the spring offensive in afghanistan .

a third reason was that the taliban were simply delaying their major offensive until august when they would try to disrupt the national elections .

by july , the violence had escalated but a concerted push by the taliban did not materialize .

by july , the allies , particularly the british and the united states , launched major operations in helmand province , where large numbers of taliban insurgents are deployed .

these operations were intended to root out taliban strongholds in advance of the august elections and to inflict major casualties on the taliban on their home turf .

forces from the united states , britain , canada , and the netherlands , which are deployed in this southern region have borne the brunt of the fighting .

the inequity of burden - sharing in combat operations remains an important point of contention within the alliance , and is a factor in domestic opposition to the conflict in states that carry the greatest combat burden .

turmoil in neighboring pakistan has also complicated isaf's mission .

the assassination of presidential candidate benazir bhutto in december 2007 , possibly by islamic extremists , led to increasing internal restiveness against president pervez musharraf , criticized by some nato experts as unable or unwilling to stem taliban movement across the pakistan border into afghanistan .

some experts believe that over the past several years , pakistani and afghan taliban militants have increasingly merged and pooled their efforts against governments in both countries and al qaeda has reportedly been facilitating the afghanistan insurgency and the unrest against the pakistan government .

with the inability of the pakistani government to control the number of taliban insurgents who used pakistan as a sanctuary , the united states stepped up its use of missile attacks against suspected insurgent hideouts inside pakistan .

although apparently unofficially tolerated by the pakistani government , this has caused a deterioration in u.s. - pakistan relations that continues today and which has led to anti - u.s. views in pakistan .

u.s. officials , in july 2008 , apparently confronted pakistani officials with evidence that pakistan's inter - services intelligence agency ( isi ) was actively helping afghanistan militants , particularly the haqqani faction .

since the resignation of musharraf , the new government in pakistan has dispatched military units to the border region and has authorized the army to conduct offensive operations against taliban forces in the northern tribal areas .

in october 2008 , the pakistan government began to arm anti - taliban tribal militias in the northern region in an attempt to control taliban activity .

in early 2009 , the pakistan government attempted to curtail taliban military activity in the swat valley region by agreeing to allow the taliban to enforce strict sharia law in exchange for ending support for military operations against pakistani government forces and taliban operations into afghanistan .

this initiative ended rather abruptly when the taliban continued its anti - government activity and the pakistan military launched a major military operation in the region .

pakistan has reported that since the beginning of the offensive , it has inflicted serious casualties on the taliban and has secured large areas of territory once controlled by the taliban .

the karzai government in afghanistan has also come under both domestic and international criticism due to rampant corruption and an inability to improve security and overall living conditions for its citizens .

some warlords continue to exert strong anti - government influence , and the narcotics industry remains an entrenched threat to the country's political health .

the allies have not always been in full agreement on how to counter these problems , but allied officials said that they needed a strong , competent , and reliable afghan government to provide reasonable services to the population if nato were to succeed .

the national elections held on august 20 in which president karzai was reelected for another term were considered seriously flawed in many areas of the country and a run - off election had been initially scheduled .

however , the opposition candidates decided against another campaign and vote .

european union involvement in afghanistan has focused primarily on providing humanitarian and reconstruction assistance .

the european commission estimates that it has contributed a total of approximately €1.65 billion in aid to afghanistan since 2002 .

since 2007 , the eu has broadened its engagement through increased levels of development aid and the launch of a police training mission .

since 2007 , the basis for eu assistance to afghanistan has shifted from individual project proposals to strategic annual action programs ( aap ) prepared in consultation with the afghan government and stakeholders .

european aid seeks primarily to fill needs identified in afghanistan's national development strategy ( ands ) .

the eu has programmed €700 million in assistance to afghanistan for the years 2007-2010 .

an additional €420 million is expected to be allocated in 2011-2013 .

for the 2007-2010 period , the eu expects 90% of its funding to go to projects in three areas: governance ( 40% ) ; rural development ( 30% ) ; and health ( 20% ) .

in the spring of 2009 , the eu announced that it would establish an election observation mission ( eom ) to help monitor the presidential and regional elections held august 20 , 2009 .

the eom was established on july 13 , 2009 .

by election day , the eu had close to 200 observers participating in the eom in various regions of afghanistan .

the eu also contributed €35m to the united nations fund for electoral support to be used for the afghan elections .

in may 2007 , the eu accepted a request by nato to take the lead in training afghanistan's police .

the european police ( eupol ) training mission began in june 2007 with an initial mandate of three years .

the effort has faltered thus far for several reasons , including delays in recruiting qualified personnel and strained relations with nato .

the mission , headquartered in kabul , consists of 177 international and 91 local staff .

however , as recently as the fall 2008 , observers complained that up to half the personnel allocated to the mission had yet to be deployed , and no afghan police personnel had been trained .

eu officials have expressed their intention to continue to grow the mission , suggesting that the eupol training team could be doubled .

in terms of coordination with nato , turkey had reportedly blocked any provision by nato of intelligence to the eu and the afghan police because ( greek ) cyprus and malta , both in the eu , are not nato members and do not have security agreements with nato .

turkey had also blocked any agreement for nato to provide protection to police who come under attack by the taliban .

turkey's actions seemed to be a side effect of its dispute with the eu over a range of issues .

a bipartisan consensus continues to support the afghanistan mission in the 111 th congress , although there are signs of growing discontent among a growing number of members who are concerned over the growing number of u.s. troops being committed to afghanistan and the rising costs associated with the new military build - up .

the afghan freedom support act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 327 ) , as amended , authorizes u.s. aid for reconstruction , military operations , counter - narcotics efforts , election reform , and human rights assistance .

a succession of appropriations bills has met or exceeded authorization targets .

since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , congress has appropriated over $200 billion for afghanistan .

in hearings during the 110 th congress , administration officials told members that the united states spends approximately $2 billion a month in afghanistan on troops and reconstruction .

that figure continued to rise as the president's initial commitment of 17,000 troops began arriving in afghanistan in 2009 and will continue to rise in 2010 as the first contingent of the 30,000 new troops begins to arrive in country .

on july 15 , 2008 , then - senator biden the former chairman of the senate foreign relations committee along with senator lugar , the committee's ranking member , introduced s. 3263 , a bill that would have significantly increased non - military aid to pakistan .

the assistance would have , among other things , been used to improve pakistani counter - terrorism capabilities and ensure more effective efforts were made against taliban and al qaeda forces using pakistan as a springboard for launching military and terrorist attacks into afghanistan .

while that legislation was not adopted , the new strategy for afghanistan and pakistan introduced by president obama seemed to contain elements of the biden / lugar approach .

several hearings have been held during the 111 th congress that addressed a range of afghanistan - related issues , including troop levels , command and control arrangements , counter - narcotics efforts , prts , and others .

both the house and senate armed services committees have held two hearings on afghanistan .

the middle east subcommittee of the house foreign affairs committee also held a hearing on april 2 , 2009 .

at these hearings , congressional committees continued to press secretary gates and other officials to provide congress with a more detailed accounting of isaf's operations , and urged the administration to persuade the allies to provide a greater proportion of isaf's forces .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110 - 181 ) established three reporting requirement: a twice yearly report from the president on progress toward security and stability in afghanistan ; an annual report from the secretary of defense on a long - term , detailed plan for sustaining the afghan national security forces ; and a one - time requirement for a report from the secretary of defense on enhancing security and stability along the afghanistan - pakistan border .

hearings on the overall status of the conflict , the nato commitment , the ability of the kabul government to establish nation - wide authority , the problems associated with the unsettled pakistan - afghanistan border , and president obama's new strategy will be topics of several hearings during the remainder of 2009 and well into 2010 .

in june 2009 , congress approved the fy2009 supplemental appropriations ( p.l .

111-32 , h.r .

2346 ) providing some $4.5 billion for afghanistan .

on june 11 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

1886 , the pakistan enduring assistance and cooperation enhancement act which included several initiatives for both afghanistan and pakistan including the afghanistan - pakistan reconstruction opportunity zones act ( roz ) .

the roz act would establish u.s. trade preferences for products from afghanistan and parts of pakistan .

afghanistan's long history without an accountable central government able to extend its reach over the country's difficult geographic and political terrain continues to present the allies with problems rivaling the specific threat of the taliban .

for some , afghanistan's political transition was completed with the convening of a parliament in december 2005 .

however , after seven years neither the government in kabul nor the international community has made much more than incremental progress towards its goals of peace , security , and development .

according to a march 2008 report issued by the atlantic council of the united states , the situation on the ground has settled into a strategic stalemate .

nato and afghan forces cannot eliminate the taliban threat by military means as long as they have sanctuary in pakistan , and the civil development efforts are not bringing sufficient results .

these sentiments were also reiterated by secretary of defense gates when he testified before the senate armed services committee in january , 2009 .

with this reality , there have been increasing calls for the karzai government and the us / nato leadership to consider reaching out to moderate taliban forces and sympathizers inside afghanistan to explore the idea of a cease fire and coalition government .

meetings between the kabul government and some elements of the taliban were held during the summer of 2008 but it would appear at this point that the taliban is too disjointed of a movement to provide any realistic political settlement .

the idea of approaching moderate elements of the taliban has also been adopted as part of president obama's strategy for afghanistan and pakistan .

the declining fortunes of the karzai government has presented a difficult obstacle .

nato is attempting both to respect the policies of a nascent representative government and to urge it forward to better governance .

the karzai government's own problems have been apparent: discontented warlords , endemic corruption , a vigorous drug trade , the taliban , and a rudimentary economy and infrastructure .

in the view of former nato general and now ambassador to afghanistan , carl eikenberry , "the enemy we face is not particularly strong , but the institutions of the afghan state remain relatively weak. .

in 2008 , there was a widespread view that president karzai was losing the confidence of the afghan people ; he blamed the slow pace of reconstruction and insufficient financial support from the international community .

however , as early as 2006 , general ed butler , the former commander of british forces in afghanistan stated that , "this year we need to be seen to be making a difference .

it is a real danger that if people do not feel safer , we may lose their consent. .

in his view , poor governance and not the taliban insurgency was the country's central problem , a view widely reflected by other officials from nato governments .

for some , general butler's warnings have not been addressed and still prevail .

the national elections held in august 2009 featured several candidates who originally worked in the karzai government but who opposed president karzai's reelection .

u.s. and nato political and military leaders had to walk a fine line during the election campaign as they continued to prosecute the war effort and work with the existing government .

now they have to work with a newly reelected karzai government and must encourage him to initiate significant political , social , and economic reforms as well as tackle the endemic corruption that has characterized his government thus far .

nato's effort to assist the karzai government in curtailing the narcotics trade demonstrated a central dilemma of isaf's mission .

the allies must fight an insurgency tied to the opium industry with forceful means while at the same time attempt to win the confidence of the afghan people through reconstruction of the country and by providing poppy farmers alternative ways to make a living .

in this view , "breaking down suspected insurgents" doors in the morning [makes] it difficult to build bridges in the afternoon. .

while nato officials state publicly that allied forces have not been burning poppy fields , relying instead on the afghan army and police to do the job , farmers are well aware that it is isaf that supplies the intelligence , training , and logistics enabling government security forces to attack the industry , the lifeline of many poor afghans .

nato's training of afghan officials has made measured progress in some areas , and very little in others .

although the karzai government has complained that nato is not building a sufficiently large army fast enough , most allies believe that substantial progress has been made in developing a professional and reliable force that will eventually equal approximately 134,000 troops by 2011 .

as of october 2009 , the ana had 93,000 troops and nato troops are apparently giving more and more responsibility to the ana in joint operations .

nato and the broader international community are now making a more substantial effort to reform the judicial system and build an effective police force .

italy has successfully urged donor nations to provide more funding to build a judicial system and to begin implementation of specific programs using the funds .

the eu has assumed responsibility for training the police , and began putting professional trainers on the ground in june 2007 , but this effort has yet to bear significant fruit .

nato faces complex issues both in its own ranks and on the ground in afghanistan that are likely to concern isaf over the next several years .

although the allies agree on their overall mission to stabilize the country , even with their endorsement of the u.s. strategy , some allies have differed on the means to reach that objective and on the amount of resources to be made available .

as a result , nato commanders have had difficulty persuading allies to contribute forces to isaf or to provide nato forces the appropriate equipment for their tasks .

despite past pleas for more troops , and the effort by the u.s. administration to secure commitments for additional troops beyond those committed to the august election , only modest troop increases from nato member countries are expected .

the issue of military equipment continues to remain an unresolved problem that even the british recently debated .

many allied forces lack sufficient helicopter support , night - vision equipment , or the technology necessary to detect roadside bombs .

the current global economic crisis has made it difficult for some militaries to even consider buying or supplying the requisite equipment .

some nato governments continue to send forces inappropriate for the task or forces that are heavy on support functions but light on combat capability .

this attitude was again seen in the types of additional forces that were pledged at the april nato summit .

these governments continue to be reluctant to send their forces into the field to confront the taliban and to control warlords and their militias .

for some allies , it is clear that conducting combat operations and seriously dealing with the drug trade can prevent the return of the taliban , al qaeda , other or radical islamic groups inimical to western interests .

for others , the sooner the afghan government and the civil sector can win the hearts and minds of the general population through economic development and the efficient provision of services , the faster stability will take hold .

the allies had long reached a consensus that developing good governance and reconstruction is the key to building a viable , functioning afghan state .

officials in allied governments repeatedly point to the need for more road building to extend the reach of kabul and to provide the infrastructure to diversify and strengthen the economy of a country lacking the capacity to develop enduring market practices .

former deputy commander in afghanistan , a now u.s .

ambassador to kabul , general karl eikenberry , when asked by a congressional committee what he needed to build a stable society , responded , "would i prefer to have another infantry battalion on the ground of 600 u.s. soldiers or would i prefer to have $50 million for roads , i'd say ... $50 million for roads. .

his view has been echoed by calls from the nato secretary general for allies and international institutions to provide more funds for reconstruction .

political differences within the alliance over how to manage afghanistan's future apparently have subsided as the obama administration's strategy has taken hold .

the allies' description of prts as the "leading edge" of their stabilization effort in some cases continues to masks a divergent reality .

some prts are clearly effective , building needed infrastructure and by most accounts gaining the confidence of local populations .

others , in the view of some u.s. and european officials , are no more than showcases , aimed more at demonstrating an ally's desire to participate in an important nato mission than at producing concrete results for the stabilization plan .

many nato member country officials believe that five years or more will be necessary to build a market economy and proficient governance and that substantial economic assistance will be needed for some time .

however , some observers have indicated that while governments have pledged money to support the afghanistan national development strategy the current global economic and financial crisis has slowed the actual payment of those contributions .

while key allied governments say that they are committed to staying for a period of years to stabilize the country , a problem for many of the allies is a growing feeling of an "out - of - area" fatigue in afghanistan and a lack of public support for continued involvement in the isaf mission .

most observers had predicted that isaf's efforts to stabilize afghanistan would require a minimum of five more years , and probably longer .

this prospect has exacerbated an existing problem that several allied governments already face with respect to declining support for the mission among their general populations .

many europeans question whether the taliban in afghanistan pose a threat to europe at all , and in the wake of the russian conflict with georgia in the summer of 2008 , believed nato needed to refocus its priorities .

president obama attempted to address this issue during his april trip to europe when he suggested that europe does remain a potential target for attacks carried out by al qaeda and again during his speech on december 1 , 2009 .

however , many observers do not believe that message will have any traction among the european public , who are turning against the war .

although president obama's spring trip to europe succeeded in renewing , at least temporarily , support for the afghanistan mission among the alliance's leadership , the lack of public support for continued involvement in isaf in some allied countries will continue to complicate attempts by the u.s. administration to successfully implement the new strategy for afghanistan and pakistan in the long run .

the netherlands and canada have already announced the dates 2010 and 2011 , respectively , for the withdrawal of their forces from afghanistan .

some observers believe that unless the situation on the ground in afghanistan begins to show improvement by mid - 2010 , additional nato allies might begin to set withdrawal timetables .

in fact , during the summer of 2009 , several nato allies called for the convening of a united nations conference on the future of afghanistan in order to discuss what was needed to help restore stability to that country and who could provide that assistance .

however , these countries also want to take the opportunity during this conference to discuss a potential exit strategy for the military component of the engagement .

that conference has been scheduled to take place in january 2010 and now that president obama has raised the idea of an exit strategy , this issue will likely generate a very animated debate .

the afghanistan mission is an important test of nato's out - of - area capability and political will to sustain such a commitment .

in a view of growing prevalence , afghanistan exemplifies conditions in which "extreme belief systems ... unstable and intolerant societies , strategic crime and the globalization of commodities and communications combine to create a multi - dimensional threat transcending geography , function , and capability. .

as previously suggested , the nato allies have maintained a basic unity of purpose in afghanistan .

their desire to stabilize the country and to prevent the return of a terrorist state has led to an ongoing general consensus that isaf can help to build a state that is relatively stable and no longer a source of international terrorism .

on the other hand , the growing level of violence carried out by what some perceive to be a resurgent taliban , reinforced by the a growing number of al qaeda and other foreign fighters , and the perception that the afghan government has not made tangible progress in extending its authority , has lead to some wavering among the allies with respect to a long term commitment to remain in afghanistan .

many observers have predicted that isaf's efforts to stabilize afghanistan will require a minimum of five more years , and probably longer .

this prospect has exacerbated an existing problem that several allied governments already face with respect to declining support among their general populations .

as the years wear on and the situation on the ground shows little progress and more violence , some policy - makers believe that the five - plus years time - frame could ultimately lead to new public pressure on nato member parliaments to consider downgrading support , or at least reducing the military commitments to the afghan mission .

in a public opinion survey released by the german marshall fund in september 2008 , only 43% of those europeans polled supported combat operations against the taliban .

recent polls in the united states also indicate that americans are growing weary of the war as well .

as was pointed out by the atlantic council in its march 2008 issue brief , " the stalemate in afghanistan poses a great dilemma for nato: how can the 28 nato governments convince their public to support a long - term effort in afghanistan without clear indications of real progress either in the security or reconstruction sectors .

those allies with substantial forces fighting in afghanistan are already fatigued by the political battles at home , as adverse domestic opin ion challenges the governments. .

some observers believe a good portion of the negative public opinion within some allied nations was initially directly attributable to the overall negative opinion of the foreign policy of the previous bush administration , especially its iraq policy .

these observers believe that the new u.s. administration has had a more positive effect on the international stage that has served to help reverse some of the prevailing skepticism .

for some observers , however , the renewed emphasis on afghanistan by the obama administration has resulted in mixed pressure on the nato allies .

on the one hand , while there had been a decline in the debate over sending more troops to afghanistan in early 2009 that debate has resumed as a result of president obama's decision to send additional military forces to afghanistan .

the united states would still like the allies to lift their restrictive national caveats in order to allow more flexibility in the use of existing troops in the country .

they argue that a more secure environment will allow a more rapid development of the afghan infrastructure , the economy and government institutions such as the military , police and judiciary .

on the other hand , many point out that increased military engagement has lead to more combat operations , more violence and more casualties , a situation many nato allies have to explain to their public on a more regular basis .

nato's exit strategy for afghanistan requires supporting the development of the economic foundations of the country and providing the security for a fledgling government to find a stable political footing that excludes violence , reduces corruption , and creates a climate conducive to representative institutions .

external factors will affect realization of this exit strategy .

stabilization of afghanistan is closely linked to developments in and the intentions of neighboring iran and pakistan , a situation that many in the alliance believe demands a continuing u.s. presence .

u.s. leadership of the alliance appears to be at a key moment .

the allies believe that the success of the mission will also be a test of the united states' ability and commitment to lead nato , even if some allies do not always agree with every element of u.s. policy in the country .

the united states and its nato allies have greater unity of purpose in afghanistan for now .

the ultimate outcome of nato's effort to stabilize afghanistan and u.s. leadership of that effort may well affect the cohesiveness of the alliance and washington's ability to shape nato's future .

