along with the united states , germany is widely considered one of israel's closest allies .

germany's commitment to israel's sovereignty and security has historically been the strongest influence on its policy in the middle east and a key factor in its cooperation with the united states in the region .

however , debate surrounding israel's august 2006 request for german ground troop participation in a united nations ( u.n. ) mission on the israeli - lebanese border , increasing german advocacy for a more proactive european union ( eu ) role in the middle east , and shifting perceptions of israel in the german public have brought attention to what many consider a changing role for germany .

indeed , the october 2006 deployment of a german naval contingent off the lebanese coast marks the first time german troops have been stationed so close to israeli soil , and german leaders have announced their intention to work toward reviving european and international engagement in the israeli - palestinian peace process during germany's eu presidency in the first half of 2007 .

given germany's long - standing support of israel and close ties to the united states , israeli and bush administration officials have generally welcomed the idea of increased german engagement in the middle east .

for some analysts , germany's leading role in the eu and consistent commitment both to israel and u.s. involvement in the peace process suggest that germany will become an ever - more important partner for israel and the united states .

on the other hand , the presence of german troops in lebanon , growing public opposition to israeli policies and germany's commitment to a common european approach prompt others to emphasize an increasing potential for divergence between german policy on the one hand and israeli and u.s. policies on the other .

the federal republic of germany ( west germany ) and israel established formal diplomatic relations in may 1965 .

however , german policy towards israel during the preceding 13 years , beginning with the luxembourg reparations agreement of 1952 , set the tone for what continues to be widely considered a special relationship .

after taking office in 1949 , west germany's first chancellor , konrad adenauer , pursued a foreign policy rooted in the belief that the legitimacy of the young german state depended largely on its willingness to atone for atrocities perpetrated by the national socialist ( nazi ) regime of adolf hitler .

accordingly , his policies were motivated by a perceived moral obligation to support the jewish state .

the cornerstone , enshrined in the luxembourg agreement , was a long - term commitment to provide unprecedented financial reparations to the state of israel and restitution and compensation to individual victims of nazi persecution .

in the luxembourg agreement , west germany agreed to pay 3 billion deutschmark ( $715 million ) to the state of israel and 4.5 million dm ( $110 million ) to jewish organizations represented by the conference on jewish material claims against germany ( claims conference ) , which were helping resettle jews outside of israel .

germany subsequently enacted legislation mandating direct compensation to individual victims of nazi crimes .

the german government continues to make payments to individuals , mostly by way of pension contributions , and estimates that some 40% , or over 25 billion euros ( approximately $32.5 billion ) , of german reparations and compensation have gone to the state of israel or individuals living in israel .

in 1992 , two years after german unification , the government expanded its compensation laws to include individuals previously denied compensation by the former german democratic republic ( east germany ) .

according to historians , while the united states supported the idea of german reparations , american officials were unwilling to impose additional financial burdens on the young german state so soon after world war ii and urged israel to negotiate directly with germany .

indeed , reparations to israel were neither required by the international community nor wholeheartedly endorsed by the german and israeli people .

most agree that german support for israel arose largely due to the individual efforts of adenauer and israeli prime minister david ben - gurion .

beginning in 1957 , the two leaders enhanced relations by establishing military ties , avoiding considerable domestic and international opposition by keeping arms shipments secret .

in 1964 , german newspaper reports exposed arms shipments to israel , setting off crises both within and between germany , israel and the arab world .

ultimately , west germany suspended the shipments .

however , both to make up for this loss and to address increasing public and political pressure , adenauer offered to establish formal diplomatic relations with israel in march 1965 .

until this point , he had resisted renewing an initial 1952 offer of diplomatic ties , fearing retaliation from the arab world .

german reparations and compensation for crimes committed during the holocaust and long - standing defense and scientific cooperation continue to represent the cornerstone of a robust german - israeli bilateral relationship .

however , as memory of the holocaust fades and public criticism of israeli policies increases , the countries have focused on expanding cultural and broader societal exchanges .

successive german governments have prioritized support for israel as a cornerstone of german policy in the middle east .

during the cold war , germany tended to express this support quietly , favoring covert financial and military support over vocal political backing .

however , since unification and during a period of european integration and unprecedented eu expansion , germany has emerged as an increasingly proactive advocate for greater eu engagement in the middle east .

german leaders have become vocal supporters of a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict .

former foreign minister joschka fischer's 2002 push to revitalize the peace process is considered by many to have been both a significant first step towards the 2003 "performance - based roadmap to a permanent two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict" ( road map ) and a turning point in germany's role in the region .

while some israelis are skeptical of increased eu influence , most appear to continue to view germany as a strong and reliable partner within a union of countries generally considered less sympathetic to israel , and have welcomed a more proactive german role in driving eu policy .

for its part , germany seeks to carry out its support of israel within the overarching framework of the eu's common foreign and security policy ( cfsp ) .

despite periods of increased tension between germany and israel , leaders on both sides continue to characterize the relationship as an essential component of their foreign policy .

in the past decade , germany has extended political support to israel largely through its advocacy within the eu .

in 2002 , despite having temporarily suspended arms shipments to israel in response to israeli actions during the al - aqsa intifadah , germany is reported to have successfully blocked proposals for eu sanctions against israel .

in 2004 , although germany ultimately endorsed the eu's official opposition to israel's security fence in the west bank , german interior minister otto schily and other prominent officials openly supported israel's decision .

during israel's july 2006 conflict with hezbollah in lebanon , germany and the united kingdom were the only two eu member states officially opposed to an immediate cease - fire .

and , in november 2006 , germany is reported to have joined the czech republic and the united kingdom in blocking public eu condemnation of israel's military operation in the gaza strip .

while distinguishing itself as a strong supporter of israel within the eu , germany appears to have maintained the trust of palestinians and other groups in the region traditionally opposed to israeli objectives .

after a tel aviv nightclub bombing in 2001 , foreign minister fischer is reported to have shuttled between plo leader yasser arafat and israeli prime minister ariel sharon , successfully eliciting restraint from sharon and condemnation of the bombing from arafat .

analysts also cite the success of german negotiators in facilitating highly delicate prisoner exchanges between the israeli government and hezbollah in 1996 and 2004 as evidence of the trust germany enjoys from both hezbollah and the israelis .

more recently , a german negotiator is reportedly mediating between israel and hezbollah for the release of two israeli soldiers kidnaped in july 2006 .

the united states and germany share several national security interests and policy priorities in the middle east .

germany's commitment to israel's sovereignty and security remains the strongest influence on its policy and a key factor in its cooperation with the united states .

as noted above , the two countries are widely considered israel's closest allies and both share a commitment to a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict and to preventing iran from developing nuclear weapons .

moreover , both the u.s. and germany consider terrorism , radical islamic fundamentalism , and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , particularly to iran , the primary threats to national security .

at times , however , germany tends to favor different policy approaches to realizing these objectives .

in the middle east , germany's emphasis on diplomatic engagement and dialogue over military measures and isolation suggests a greater willingness to engage traditional adversaries of the united states and israel such as syria and iran in search of diplomatic solutions .

merkel's call for a comprehensive diplomatic initiative indicates a desire to link discussion of the israeli - palestinian and israel - lebanon conflicts to discussion of security in iraq , to which both israel and key figures in the bush administration have reacted skeptically .

the presence of german troops off the lebanese coast and increasing criticism regarding the strength of their mandate are fueling german calls to offer syria concessions within the framework of a broader dialogue .

proponents of such an approach argue that cooperation with syria is essential to achieving stability in lebanon and cooperation from hamas , and can only be achieved through constructive dialogue .

although merkel has joined european leaders in advocating dialogue with syria and iran and increased eu engagement in the israeli - palestinian conflict , germany and most eu member states remain dedicated to securing robust u.s. engagement in any peace proposal .

numerous analysts assert that germany is unlikely to assume a leadership role in the peace process without strong u.s. backing .

however , calls for eu - led initiatives from spain , france and italy indicate ongoing european frustration with perceived u.s. inattention to the peace process .

this leads many analysts to predict that germany will be hard - pressed to forge european and transatlantic consensus during its eu - presidency , let alone lead a revived quartet initiative .

accordingly , german diplomats are careful to dampen expectations of germany's ability to drive the peace process .

merkel has shown no signs of deviating from germany's traditional support for israel and , if anything , has displayed a tendency to be less critical of israeli policies than her predecessor gerhard schröder .

nonetheless , growing criticism within the german media and germany's political classes , and high public disapproval of israeli action during its july 2006 incursion into lebanon , suggest a growing willingness to challenge israeli policies .

furthermore , the presence of german troops in the region has significantly raised germany's interest in seeing a peaceful resolution to israeli - arab conflicts .

these factors and germany's commitment to a stronger eu foreign policy are taken by some as indications of increasing potential for divergence between german policy on the one hand and u.s. and israeli policies on the other .

on the other hand , german officials and politicians consistently assert that germany's commitment to israel and a common transatlantic approach to the arab - israeli peace process will continue to remain the paramount drivers of german policy in the region .

indeed , a historical perspective on germany's relationship with israel indicates that german leaders have consistently chosen to support israel — whether militarily , financially or politically — despite periods of public , political or even international opposition .

this support , however , has often been carried out secretively .

in fact , historical accounts suggest that german success in maintaining relatively positive relations on both sides of the arab - israeli conflict has depended largely on its ability to avoid a high - profile leadership role in the region .

aspects of germany's relations with israel intersect with congressional concerns , especially with respect to policy issues in the middle east .

recent relevant examples include congressional perspectives on hezbollah and international assistance to the palestinians .

members of congress have repeatedly called on the european union to classify hezbollah as a terrorist organization .

in march 2005 , both the house and senate passed resolutions ( h.res .

101 and s.res .

82 ) urging the eu to add hezbollah to its list of terrorist organizations .

in july 2006 , as fighting between hezbollah and israel escalated , 200 members of the house signed a letter to eu high representative for common foreign and security policy javier solana reiterating their request .

the eu has not designated hezbollah as a terrorist organization because some member states view it as playing an important social and economic role in lebanon or as a legitimate political entity represented in the lebanese parliament and cabinet .

eu and german officials indicate that such a designation is unlikely as long as eu member states are negotiating with the lebanese government as part of the unifil force currently maintaining a cease - fire in southern lebanon .

unlike some eu member states , such as the united kingdom , which has placed hezbollah on its terrorist list , germany does not maintain an independent national list of terrorist organizations , choosing instead to adopt the common eu list .

composition of the eu list is agreed on unanimously and deliberations remain secret .

although most observers assert that the french government has been the strongest european opponent to classifying hezbollah as a terrorist organization , german officials indicate that they would likely support such a designation .

members of congress also remain concerned about eu aid to the palestinians .

congress has enacted a series of measures to restrict u.s. funding for the palestinian authority .

as noted previously , germany has been one of the largest donors to the pa , and has provided direct assistance to the palestinian people through the eu's temporary international mechanism ( tim ) since july 2006 .

after hamas's victory in parliamentary elections in january 2006 , chancellor merkel was one of the first european leaders to back quartet conditions for the provision of eu aid and negotiations with hamas .

nonetheless , some observers have voiced concern that germany and other european states may be more willing than the united states to show flexibility in their commitment to these requirements , particularly in exchange for hamas cooperation in a potential national unity government or in peace talks .

in response to such allegations , german officials consistently cite a steadfast german commitment to the quartet principles .

