technological development has increasingly resulted from cooperative ventures formedbetween and among the private sector , universities , and government entities .

 ( 12 ) several developments inthe modern research environment have contributed to this trend towards collaboration .

one factoris the growth of the communications networks , including the internet , which collectively have madecollaboration over long distances much easier .

 ( 13 ) the growing complexity of modern technology has ramifications upon the cost of conductingresearch , the specialization of researchers , and the ability to innovate .

cooperation may benefit firmsby allowing them to share risks and costs .

high technology research is often expensive , and manyfirms have found limited associations with other entities more cost effective than hiring neededexpertise on a permanent basis .

coupled with reported declines in public financing , cost increaseshave also encouraged academic researchers to find new sources of financial support .

 ( 14 ) the extreme complexity of many modern technologies has also led to the growingspecialization of individual researchers .

because few persons are able to master numeroussophisticated and ever - advancing scientific fields , breakthroughs at the frontiers of scientificknowledge increasingly depend upon interdisciplinary research .

 ( 15 ) trends for individualresearchers are also reflected within the institutions in which they operate .

even elite , multinationalenterprises may lack the expertise to perform cutting - edge research on their own .

they may insteadturn to government laboratories , universities , or other entities in order to gain access to expertise andequipment not readily available elsewhere .

 ( 16 ) congress has also endeavored to create an environment conducive to research associationsbetween and among public , private , and non - profit entities .

among the legislative initiatives in thisarea is the national cooperative research act , ( 17 ) which aimed to encourage companies to undertake joint researchthrough clarifications of the antitrust laws .

the bayh - dole act allowed universities , nonprofitinstitutions , and small businesses to obtain title to patents on inventions resulting fromgovernment - funded research .

 ( 18 ) the stevenson - wydler act contained provisions concerningassignment of title to inventions arising from collaborative work between federal laboratories andoutside cooperating parties where no direct federal funding is involved .

 ( 19 ) in addition , congress hasprovided tax and other incentives to stimulate joint research projects .

 ( 20 ) although supporters of collaborative research cite its numerous potential advantages , someobservers have voiced concerns over this trend .

first , collaboration may effectively reduce thenumber of researchers working on a particular problem .

in the manner of an anticompetitivecorporate merger , a joint venture may potentially slow the pace of industrial research .

 ( 21 ) second , experience demonstrates that joint ventures may be employed to facilitate cartels andother collusive behavior .

in particular , as a collaborative research and development project may callfor close , continuing cooperation between two firms , such an arrangement may ultimately decreasethe participants' willingness to act as vigorous rivals in the marketplace .

 ( 22 ) third , joint ventures mayreduce competition by excluding or hampering outsiders from access to technology or otherresources that are essential to participate in a particular market .

 ( 23 ) finally , some commentators have viewed government support for particular joint venturesas particularly problematic .

such support has been characterized as "picking winners and losers" inthe marketplace .

 ( 24 ) others believe that the government has consistently been a poor judge of selecting projects to awardwith federal funding .

 ( 25 ) despite these concerns , there can be little doubt that collaborative efforts form a significantcomponent of research and development projects in the united states .

 ( 26 ) .

joint research sometimes leads to technological breakthroughs that in turn may be subjectto patent protection .

this report next reviews both the innovation policies that shape patent lawdoctrines , as well as the practical workings of the patent system as applied to collaborative research .

congressional amendments to the patent act of 1952 in 1984 , 1999 , and 2004 have clarifiedand refined the legal standards governing collaborative research .

in the view of some observers,however , additional concerns exist with respect to the governing patent law standards .

this reportconsiders two of these issues: the standard of inventorship itself , as well as the property rulesregulating joint ownership of patents .

although amendments to the patent statute have clarified rules pertaining tocooperative research and development endeavors , concerns about the standards of jointinventorship and joint ownership persist .

these topics represent relatively technical aspectsof the patent law .

they are nonetheless subjects that have been the subject of legislativereform over the past two decades , and that are of undoubted importance to collaborativeresearch .

although legislation currently before the 109th congress proposes many reforms tothe patent statute , ( 116 ) this proposal would retain rather than refine existingrules with respect to joint inventorship and joint ownership .

as technologies and marketscontinue to advance , striking a balance between encouraging cooperation among researchers,while maintaining sufficient patent - based exclusivities to encourage innovation in the firstinstance , will continue to be in the public interest .

