homelessness in america has always existed , but it did not come to the public's attention as a national issue until the 1970s and 1980s , when the characteristics of the homeless population and their living arrangements began to change .

throughout the early and middle part of the 20 th century , homelessness was typified by "skid rows" — areas with hotels and single - room occupancy dwellings where transient single men lived .

skid rows were usually removed from the more populated areas of cities , and it was uncommon for individuals to actually live on the streets .

beginning in the 1970s , however , the homeless population began to grow and become more visible to the general public .

according to studies from the time , homeless persons were no longer almost exclusively single men , but included women with children ; their median age was younger ; they were more racially diverse ( in previous decades the observed homeless population was largely white ) ; they were less likely to be employed ( and therefore had lower incomes ) ; they were mentally ill in higher proportions than previously ; and individuals who were abusing or had abused drugs began to become more prevalent in the population .

a number of reasons have been offered for the growth in the number of homeless persons and their increasing visibility .

many cities demolished skid rows to make way for urban development , leaving some residents without affordable housing options .

other possible factors contributing to homelessness include the decreased availability of affordable housing generally , the reduced need for seasonal unskilled labor , the reduced likelihood that relatives will accommodate homeless family members , the decreased value of public benefits , and changed admissions standards at mental hospitals .

the increased visibility of homeless people was due , in part , to the decriminalization of actions such as public drunkenness , loitering , and vagrancy .

in the 1980s , congress first responded to the growing prevalence of homelessness with several separate grant programs designed to address the food and shelter needs of homeless individuals .

then , in 1987 , congress enacted the stewart b. mckinney homeless assistance act ( mckinney act ) , which created a number of new programs to comprehensively address the needs of homeless people , including food , shelter , health care , and education ( p.l .

100-77 ) .

the act was later renamed the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act ( mckinney - vento ) in p.l .

106-400 after its other prominent sponsor , bruce f. vento .

among the programs authorized in the mckinney - vento act were four grants to provide housing and related assistance to homeless persons: the emergency shelter grants ( esg ) program , the supportive housing demonstration program , the supplemental assistance for facilities to assist the homeless ( safah ) program , and the section 8 moderate rehabilitation assistance for single room occupancy dwellings ( sro ) program .

these four programs , administered by the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , were created to provide temporary and permanent housing to homeless persons , along with supportive services .

over the years , congress changed the makeup of the homeless assistance grants , but for 20 years , from 1992 to 2012 , the same four grant programs composed the homeless assistance grants .

these were the esg program , the supportive housing program ( shp ) , the shelter plus care ( s+c ) program , and the sro program .

on may 20 , 2009 , for the first time since 1992 , the homeless assistance grants were reauthorized as part of the helping families save their homes act ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

the law is often referred to as the "hearth act" after its title in p.l .

111-22 ( the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing act ) .

the hearth act changed the makeup of the four existing grants — the shp , s+c , and sro programs were combined into one grant called the "continuum of care" ( coc ) program ; the esg program was renamed the "emergency solutions grants" ; and rural communities were to have the option of competing for funds under a new rural housing stability assistance program ( rhs ) .

the way in which the funds are distributed , the purposes for which grantees may use funds , and the people who may be served have also changed .

the hearth act authorized the continuum of care program , together with the emergency solutions grants program , at $2.2 billion in fy2010 and such sums as necessary for fy2011 .

the way in which homelessness is defined is an important part of how the homeless assistance grants operate , as it determines who communities may assist with the grants they receive .

the definition had been the subject of debate for a number of years , with some finding that the definition governing the hud homeless programs was too restrictive when compared to definitions used in other federal programs that assist those experiencing homelessness .

until enactment of the hearth act , "homeless individual" was defined in section 103 ( a ) of the mckinney - vento act as ( 1 ) an individual who lacks a fixed , regular , and adequate nighttime residence ; and ( 2 ) an individual who has a primary nighttime residence that is — ( a ) a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations ( including welfare hotels , congregate shelters , and transitional housing for the mentally ill ) ; ( b ) an institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized ; or ( c ) a public or private place not designed for , or ordinarily used as , a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings .

this definition was sometimes described as requiring one to be literally homeless in order to meet its requirements — either living in emergency accommodations or having no place to stay .

the hearth act expanded the definition of "homeless individual," and on december 5 , 2011 , hud issued final regulations clarifying aspects of the hearth act definition of homelessness .

the regulation took effect on january 4 , 2012 .

the hearth act retained the original language of the definition with some minor changes , but also added provisions that move away from the requirement for literal homelessness and toward housing instability as a form of homelessness .

each subsection below explains separate ways in which the hearth act changed the definition of homelessness .

the emergency solutions grants , until enactment of the hearth act known as the emergency shelter grants , was the first of the homeless assistance grants to be authorized .

it was established one year prior to enactment of mckinney - vento as part of the continuing appropriations act for fy1987 ( p.l .

99-591 ) .

funds are distributed to grantee states and local communities to assist those experiencing homelessness ( see the next section for information on how funds are distributed ) .

from its creation through fy2010 , the funds distributed through the esg program were provided primarily for the emergency shelter and service needs of homeless persons .

however , when the esg program was reauthorized as part of the hearth act ( p.l .

111-22 ) , it not only changed its name , but the focus of the program was broadened to include an expanded role for homelessness prevention and rapid rehousing ( assistance to quickly find permanent housing for individuals or families who find themselves homeless ) .

on december 5 , 2011 , hud issued interim regulations for the esg program , and they became effective on january 4 , 2012 .

funding for the program's new purposes was made available as part of a second round of funding in fy2011 .

in fy2012 and thereafter , all funds awarded could be used for the esg program activities as authorized by the hearth act .

the bulk of the funding for the homeless assistance grants is awarded as competitive grants through what is now the coc program .

the coc program differs from esg in that it focuses on the longer - term housing and services needs of homeless individuals and families .

for the 20 years prior to creation of the coc program , there were three separate competitive grants , each of which provided different services to different populations .

enactment of the hearth act brought each of the three programs' functions under the umbrella of the coc program .

the programs were the supportive housing program ( shp ) : the shp provided funds for transitional housing for homeless individuals and families for up to 24 months , permanent housing for homeless individuals with disabilities , and supportive services .

eligible recipients were states , local government entities , public housing authorities ( phas ) , private nonprofit organizations , and community mental health centers .

grantees were required to meet different match requirements: acquisition , rehabilitation , or new construction with an equal amount of the grant recipient's own funds , supportive services with a 20% match , and operating expenses with a 25% match .

the single room occupancy program ( sro ) : the single room occupancy ( sro ) program provided permanent housing to homeless individuals in efficiency units similar to dormitories , with single bedrooms , community bathrooms , and kitchen facilities .

the sro program did not require residents to have a disability and did not fund supportive services .

eligible recipients were phas and private nonprofit organizations .

the program did not have a match requirement .

the shelter plus care ( s+c ) program: the s+c program provided permanent supportive housing through rent subsidies for homeless individuals with disabilities and their families .

the s+c rent subsidies could be tenant - based vouchers , project - based rental assistance , sponsor - based rental assistance , or single room occupancy housing .

eligible recipients were states , local government entities , and phas .

the s+c program required grant recipients to match the amount of grant funds they received for rental assistance with an equal amount of funds for supportive services .

 ( for a more detailed description of the three programs , see the appendix . ) .

applicants no longer apply for one of the three existing grants — s+c , shp , or sro — based on the type of housing and services they want to provide .

instead , the new consolidated grant provides funds for all permanent housing , transitional housing , supportive services , and rehousing activities .

the way in which hud awards coc program grants did not change significantly with enactment of the hearth act , and , in fact , the hearth act served , in part , to codify the way in which the funds are distributed .

the coc program funds , like those for the three competitive grants before it , are distributed to eligible applicant organizations through a process that involves both formula and competitive elements .

hud first uses the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program formula to determine the need levels of continuums of care ; the need level sets a baseline for the amount of funding that a community can receive .

hud then determines through a competition whether applicant organizations that provide services to homeless persons qualify for funds .

in the area of rural homelessness , the hearth act retained portions of mckinney - vento's rural homelessness grant program ( title iv , subtitle g of mckinney - vento , a program that was never implemented or funded after it was authorized as part of p.l .

102-550 ) as the rural housing stability assistance program .

the grants themselves are referred to as the rural housing stability ( rhs ) grants .

as of the date of this report , hud had released proposed regulations , but had not yet made funds available through the rhs grants .

the program allows rural communities to apply separately for funds that otherwise would be awarded as part of the continuum of care program .

the hearth act provides that not less than 5% of continuum of care program funds be set aside for rural communities .

if the funds are not used , then they are to be returned for use by the coc program .

after creating the four homeless assistance grants in 1987 , congress played a decreasing role in how funds are allocated among them .

initially , from fy1987 to fy1994 , congress appropriated funds separately for each of the four programs .

however , beginning in fy1995 and continuing through fy2010 , congress appropriated one lump sum for all four programs , and hud then determined how the funds were distributed among the esg , shp , s+c , and sro programs .

the way funding allocations operate changed again in fy2011 , with congress specifying in the appropriations laws a minimum amount of funds to be set aside for the esg program in that year , and minimum amounts for the esg , coc , and rhs programs in fy2012 through fy2017 .

table 3 shows a distribution of the grants from fy1987 through fy2017 .

despite the enactment of mckinney - vento reauthorization legislation , there are other factors involved in the distribution of the homeless assistance grants that may continue to be issues of concern to those interested in how funds are allocated .

an ongoing concern has been the amount of funds required to renew existing housing and services contracts , leaving a relatively small share of funding to support new projects .

 ( this is also an issue for the hud budget in general. ) .

another issue is the way in which the cdbg formula affects the distribution of the homeless assistance grants .

the cost to renew existing grants takes up a large share of continuum of care program funds ( see table 2 ) .

in fy2016 , 90% of the coc funds allocated went to renew existing grants .

hud has made it possible for continuums of care to free up funds for new permanent housing projects .

beginning with the fy2005 competition for available funds , continuums of care can reallocate funds from an existing shp project ( now coc project ) to a new project , while still qualifying for the annual renewal demand ( ard ) level that would have been required to renew the shp / coc projects .

although this allows cocs to defund projects that they do not think should receive grants , it does not address what cocs can do about renewing projects they think are worth funding while also funding projects that would create new housing .

hud has allowed the reallocation of funds in all competitions since fy2005 , with the exception of fy2009 .

the hearth act also introduced a way in which homeless assistance grant funds could be freed up for new projects .

under the new law , renewals of permanent housing rental assistance and operating cost contracts could be funded from the project - based section 8 rental assistance account .

this assumes that appropriations for the homeless assistance grants would not be reduced to account for transfer of the renewals to another account .

in addition , such a move would put pressure on the project - based section 8 account , perhaps resulting in less funding for all hud programs .

to date , congress has not renewed contracts through the project - based section 8 account .

the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program formula has determined how esg funds are distributed since the inception of the program in 1986 , and has been used in the distribution of the competitive grants since at least fy1995 .

the effectiveness of using the cdbg formula to target funds to services for homeless persons has been questioned at various times .

two general accounting office ( now government accountability office ) reports from the late 1980s noted that the cdbg formula might not be the best way to target funds to areas that most need homeless assistance funds .

congress , too , has questioned the relationship between the formula and homelessness .

in fy2001 , the senate appropriations committee noted that "the cdbg formula has no real nexus to homeless needs," and urged hud to hasten its development of a method for counting homeless individuals .

hud responded with a report that proposed alternative methods for determining community need for homeless assistance .

the hearth act ( p.l .

111-22 ) responded to these concerns , in part by directing hud to develop a formula for determining need for the competitive continuum of care program within two years of the law's enactment .

in its interim regulations , hud maintained the use of the cdbg formula for determining preliminary pro rata need ( pprn ) for participating communities ( see " the grant application process " ) .

the cdbg formula uses a combination of five factors to award funds to recipient communities .

 ( the cdbg formula uses four separate methods to award funds ; this report does not discuss the details of these methods. ) .

the five factors are population , the number of persons in poverty , housing overcrowding ( homes in which there are more than 1.01 persons per room ) , the age of housing ( the number of housing structures built prior to 1940 ) , and the extent of growth lag in a given community ( the lack of population growth in a community compared to the growth rate it would have had if it had grown at the rate of other communities ) .

the factors are measured as ratios between the recipient community and all grant recipients .

the cdbg formula was last changed in 1977 ( p.l .

95-128 ) .

there have been other proposals for how to determine need for the homeless assistance grants .

for example , legislation to reauthorize the mckinney - vento act that was introduced prior to enactment of the hearth act gave more specific guidance as to how the hud secretary might determine need .

the community partnership to end homelessness act of 2007 ( s. 1518 ) , as passed by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would have directed the secretary to consider factors such as the number of homeless individuals , shortages of affordable housing , and severe housing problems among extremely low - income households .

the report released by hud in 2001 proposed a number of potential formula factors , with an emphasis on a measure of housing affordability .

in general , factors used to distribute formula funds for programs such as cdbg are based on data collected by government entities , like the census bureau , that do not have an interest in the way in which funds are distributed .

while the best measure of community need for homeless assistance may be the number of people who are homeless in a given community , current measures of homelessness are uncertain ( it is difficult to accurately collect data on people experiencing homelessness ) , and the entities that collect the data―the communities themselves―have an interest in the distribution of funds .

another possible issue that could affect the distribution of the homeless assistance grants is the cdbg formula itself .

in past years , hud and the administration have proposed changes to the formula , but , to date , no legislation has been introduced that would affect the distribution .

for example , in the president's fy2010 budget , the obama administration proposed using the number of people in poverty , excluding college students ; housing that is 50 years old or older and occupied by a household in poverty ; female - headed households with children under the age of 18 ; and overcrowding .

on july 25 , 2016 , hud reopened the interim coc rule to propose changes to the formula used to determine preliminary pro rata need and solicited comments .

hud proposed four alternative formulas with varying formula factors for each .

hud considered formula factors derived from data sources that have four characteristics: ( 1 ) they are relevant to measuring homelessness , ( 2 ) they are accurate , ( 3 ) they are timely , and ( 4 ) they are readily available for each jurisdiction .

hud correlated potential formula factors with the two - year average of local point - in - time counts of people experiencing homelessness in each community to determine the extent to which they might be an effective measure of homelessness .

the formula factors that hud ultimately proposed using in the four alternate formulas are population , poverty , affordability gap ( gap between demand for and supply of rental housing that is affordable and available to extremely low - income renter households ) , rent - burdened extremely low - income households , renter - occupied units , and a hybrid factor using rent - burdened households and renter - occupied units .

hud also published a table comparing allocations to continuums of care based on each alternate formula , as well as a tool that can be used to change the relative weights of each factor .

the comment period was open until september 23 , 2016 .

the supportive housing program ( shp ) the shp provided funds for transitional housing for homeless individuals and families for up to 24 months , permanent housing for homeless individuals with disabilities , and supportive services .

in fy2011 , nearly 69% of total hud competitive grant funds went to recipients as shp grants .

eligible applicants for shp grants included states , local government entities , public housing authorities ( phas ) , private nonprofit organizations , and community mental health centers .

grant recipients could provide housing together with services , or could choose to provide services only ( without a housing program component ) .

specifically , grantees could use funds to acquire and / or rehabilitate buildings that were used either to provide supportive housing or buildings that were used to provide supportive services only .

funds were able to be used to construct buildings that were used for supportive housing ( but not supportive services only ) .

at least 10% of total shp funds had to be used for supportive services , at least 25% were to be used for projects that served families with children , and at least 25% had to be used for projects that serve homeless persons with disabilities .

in addition to financing physical structures , grantees could use funds to provide services like case management , health care , child care , housing assistance , nutritional counseling , and employment assistance .

grant recipients could provide these services themselves , or through contracts with outside providers .

in addition , grant recipients could use funds to pay for up to 75% of their annual operating expenses and to help implement a homeless management information system ( hmis ) to keep records regarding the homeless individuals served within their community .

recipients of shp grants were required to meet match requirements .

all of the matching funds had to be provided by cash sources , but the level of nonfederal funds required varied with the type of activity undertaken .

funds that were used for acquisition , rehabilitation , or new construction had to be matched with an equal amount of the grant recipient's own funds .

shp grantees that received funds for supportive services had to provide at least a 20% match with funds from other sources , while grantees that received funds for operating expenses had to provide at least a 25% match of these funds on their own .

the single room occupancy program ( sro ) the single room occupancy ( sro ) program provided permanent housing to homeless individuals in efficiency units similar to dormitories , with single bedrooms , community bathrooms , and kitchen facilities .

in fy2011 , three new competitive grants were awarded to sro projects for a total of approximately $3.2 million .

the sro program did not require homeless residents to have a disability and did not fund supportive services .

eligible applicants for sro grants were phas and private nonprofit organizations .

sro units were funded as part of hud's section 8 moderate rehabilitation program , which required grant recipients to spend at least $3,000 per unit to rehabilitate property to be used for sro housing in order to bring the property into compliance with hud's housing quality standards .

grant recipients were reimbursed for the costs of rehabilitating sro units through section 8 rental assistance payments that they received over a 10-year contract period .

the costs of rehabilitation were amortized and added to a base rental amount .

the maximum amount that a building owner could spend per unit and still be reimbursed was $23,000 as of fy2011 ( this amount was updated annually ) .

after the 10-year rental contracts expired , they were renewed through the section 8 project - based rental assistance account on an annual basis rather than through the homeless assistance grants .

the shelter plus care program ( s+c ) the s+c program provided permanent supportive housing through rent subsidies for homeless individuals with disabilities and their families .

in fy2011 , approximately 40% of total competitive grant funds went to s+c grantees .

eligible applicants for the s+c grants were states , local government entities , and phas .

the s+c rent subsidies could be tenant - based vouchers , project - based rental assistance , sponsor - based rental assistance , or single room occupancy housing .

with tenant - based vouchers , residents found private market housing much as they would with a section 8 voucher ; project - based assistance was provided to building owners and attached to specific units of housing ( unlike a portable voucher ) ; with sponsor - based assistance , grant recipients contracted with private nonprofit housing providers or community mental health centers to provide housing ; and rental assistance for sros was targeted to a particular development .

the s+c program required grant recipients to match the amount of grant funds they receive for rental assistance with an equal amount of funds that they used to provide supportive services .

the services under s+c were similar to those provided in the shp , and included activities like physical and mental health care , substance abuse counseling , child care services , case management , and educational and job training .

grant recipients could fulfill their match requirement with cash , the value of a lease , salary expenses for employees , or the time of volunteers .

