the diversity rationale for affirmative action in public education has long been a topic of political and legal controversy .

many colleges and universities have established affirmative action policies not only to remedy past discrimination , but also to achieve a racially and ethnically diverse student body or faculty .

although the supreme court has recognized that the use of race - based policies to promote diversity in higher education may be constitutional in two cases involving the university of michigan's admissions policies — namely grutter v. bollinger and gratz v. bollinger — the court had never , until recently , considered whether diversity is a constitutionally permissible goal in the elementary and secondary education setting .

to resolve this question , the supreme court agreed to review two cases that involved the use of race to maintain racially diverse public schools .

the cases were meredith v. jefferson county board of education — formerly macfarland v. jefferson county public schools — and parents involved in community schools v. seattle school district no .

1 .

in parents involved in community schools v. seattle school district no .

1 , a consolidated ruling that resolved both cases , the court ultimately struck down the school plans at issue , holding that they violated the equal protection guarantee of the fourteenth amendment .

this report provides an overview of the court's decision , as well as a discussion of its implications for future educational efforts to promote racial diversity .

as noted above , the supreme court had never , until recently , considered the constitutionality of the voluntary use of race as a factor in achieving diversity in elementary and secondary education .

all three of the federal appeals courts to consider the issue since grutter and gratz were decided upheld racial diversity measures in public schools , but these opinions conflicted with pre - grutter / gratz appellate rulings that rejected such racially based plans .

possibly as a result of this conflict , the supreme court agreed to review whether the school diversity plans at issue in meredith and parents involved in community schools violate the equal protection clause of the constitution .

although the court's decision to strike down the seattle and louisville school assignment and transfer plans will have a profound impact on similar plans at many of the nation's elementary and secondary schools , the parents involved in community schools case did not completely foreclose the possibility that school districts may constitutionally pursue certain measures to avoid racial isolation and promote racial diversity in their schools .

however , it is not entirely clear what these measures might entail .

while the methods identified in justice kennedy's concurring opinion — such as engaging in strategic site selection of new schools , altering attendance zones , providing resources for special programs , and recruiting students and faculty — seem more likely to survive judicial scrutiny , the fate of other kinds of race - conscious school plans may become apparent only as a result of legal developments that emerge over time .

