child nutrition programs and the special supplemental nutrition program forwomen , infants , and children ( the wic program ) provide cash , commodity , and otherassistance ( including nutrition services and food packages in the wic program ) under threemajor federal laws: the national school lunch act ( originally enacted in 1946 and renamedthe richard b. russell national school lunch in 1999 ) , the child nutrition act ( originallyenacted in 1966 ) , and section 32 of the act of august 24 , 1935 ( 7 u.s.c .

612c ) .

 ( 1 ) the agriculturedepartment's food and nutrition service ( fns ) administers the programs at the federal level ; most funding is included in the annual agriculture department appropriations laws ; andcongressional jurisdiction is exercised by the senate agriculture , nutrition , and forestrycommittee , the house education and the workforce committee , and , to a limited extent ( relating to commodity assistance and section 32 ) , the house agriculture committee .

the most recent major amendments to the laws affecting child nutrition and wicprograms were made in the 2004 child nutrition and wic reauthorization act ( p.l.108-265 ; enacted june 30 , 2004 ) and a number of laws enacted in the 106th and 107thcongresses - - most notably as part of larger measures not specifically targeted at childnutrition or wic programs ( eg , p.l .

106-224 and p.l .

107-171 ) .

the next generalreauthorization of child nutrition and wic authorities is scheduled for 2009 .

child nutrition and wic programs are operated by a variety of local public andprivate nonprofit providers , and the degree of direct state involvement varies by program andstate - - eg , in the wic program , state health agencies exercise substantial control ; in theschool meal programs , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and local "school food authorities"most often have the major role ; in a very few instances , the federal government ( fns ) takesthe place of state agencies ( for example , where a state has chosen not to operate a specificprogram or where there is a state prohibition on aiding private schools ) .

at the state level,education , health , social services , and agriculture departments all have roles ; at a minimum,they are responsible for approving and overseeing local providers such as schools , summerprogram sponsors , and child care centers , as well as making sure they receive the federalsupport they are due .

at the local level , program benefits are provided to more than 39million children and infants , and some 2 million lower - income pregnant and postpartumwomen , through just over 100,000 public and private schools and residential child careinstitutions , about 200,000 child care centers and family day care homes , approximately30,000 summer program sites , and , in the case of the wic program , some 10,000 local healthcare clinics / sites operated by nearly 2,000 health agencies .

all programs are available in the 50 states and the district of columbia .

virtually alloperate in puerto rico , guam , and the virgin islands , and there are no restrictions oneligibility related to citizenship or legal residence status .

american samoa gets assistancefor school lunch and wic operations , and the northern marianas receive school lunchsupport .

in addition , wic - like benefits are available for overseas military personnel , anddefense department overseas dependents' schools participate in the school lunch andbreakfast programs .

in the meal service programs like the school lunch and school breakfast programs,summer programs , and assistance for child care centers and day care homes , federal aid is inthe form of legislatively set subsidies paid for each meal / snack served that meets federalnutrition guidelines .

most subsidies are cash payments to schools and other providers , butabout 10% of the total value of assistance is in the form of federally donated foodcommodities .

while all meals / snacks served are subsidized , those served free or at a reducedprice to lower - income children are supported at higher rates .

all federal meal / snack subsidyrates are indexed annually for inflation , ( 2 ) as are the income standards of eligibility for free andreduced - price meals / snacks .

 ( 3 ) however , federal subsidies do not necessarily cover the fullcost of the meals and snacks offered by participating providers , and states and localitiescontribute significantly to cover program costs - - as do children's families ( by paying chargesfor nonfree or reduced - price meals and snacks ) .

required nonfederal cost - sharing ( matching ) is relatively minimal - - states must expend at least an amount totaling just over $200 milliona year nationally in order to receive federal school lunch funds .

federal per - meal / snack childnutrition subsidies may cover local providers' administrative costs , but separate federalpayments for administrative expenses are limited to administrative expense grants to stateoversight agencies , a small set - aside of funds for state audits of child care sponsors , andspecial administrative payments to sponsors of summer programs and family day care homes .

under the wic program , federal appropriations pay the cost of specifically tailored foodpackages and include specific amounts for related nutrition services and administration .

the basic goals of the federal child nutrition programs are to improve children'snutrition , increase lower - income children's access to nutritious meals and snacks , and helpsupport the agricultural economy .

child nutrition programs are treated as entitlements: federal funding and commodity support is "guaranteed" to schools and other providers basedon the number of meals / snacks / half - pints of milk served , who is served ( eg , freemeals / snacks to poor children get higher subsidies ) , and legislatively set andinflation - indexed per - meal / snack subsidy rates .

on the other hand , the wic program is a discretionary grant program .

wic agencies serve as many applicants as possible with themoney available from federal grants ( and , in some cases , voluntary state subsidies ) , but notnecessarily all eligible applicants .

extensive information about child nutrition programs and the wic program may befound at the agriculture department's food and nutrition service website: http: / / www.fns.usda.gov .

this website provides information on all of the followingprograms - - for applicants / recipients , governments , researchers , program operators , and thoseinterested in child nutrition legislation , regulations , and guidelines - - as well as recent newsreleases , announcements , and regulatory action .

federal support for child nutrition and wic programs is derived from fundingprovided out of ( 1 ) annual agriculture department appropriations , ( 2 ) permanentappropriations not included in the annual appropriations laws ( eg , money directlyappropriated for the food service management institute under its authorizing law andother spending mandated by law ) , ( 3 ) unused money available ( carried over ) fromprior years' appropriations , transferred from other agriculture departmentappropriations accounts , or recovered from states and operators , and ( 4 ) funds paidfor child nutrition initiatives from budget accounts separate from appropriations to thechild nutrition and wic accounts ( eg , a large share of commodity assistance ) .

actual spending for most child nutrition programs - - but not wic programs - - normally is dictated by the demand for federal dollars called for by the number and type of subsidized meals , snacks , or half - pints of milk served , not the fundingmade available ( annually appropriated or otherwise ) ; these programs are mandatory"entitlements. .

wic ( and wic farmers' market ) spending , on the other hand , is"discretionary" and dictated by the dollar amounts available from current andprior - year ( carried - over or recovered unused ) appropriations .

state wic agenciesserve as many persons as they can within their respective allocations of appropriatedfunds ( supplemented by carryovers and recoveries ) , and not all eligibles may beserved if funds run short .

individual programs within the child nutrition budgetaccount ( eg , the school lunch and breakfast programs ) do not receive specific ( "line - item" ) appropriations , and thus funding may be shifted among the various childnutrition programs as needed - - so long as total spending stays within the overallamount available from new appropriations and other sources .

as a result , readily identifiable annual congressional appropriations - - typically divided into two major accounts , a child nutrition account and a wicprogram account - - do not provide a clear or complete picture of total federal supportfor child nutrition and wic programs in a given year .

 ( 32 ) rather , spending figures - - normally higher than appropriations , shown in this report's secondtable ( typically , obligations ) , give a much better overview than appropriationsamounts .

table 1 presents recent appropriations for the child nutrition and wicprogram accounts ( fy2004-fy2006 ) , the appropriations request for fy2007 , thehouse - approved fy2007 appropriations bill ( h.r .

5384 ; h.rept.109-463 ) , and the senate - reported fy2007 appropriations measure ( h.r.5384 ; s.rept .

109-266 ) .

table 2 , on the other hand , shows , for the sameyears , spending figures ( estimates for fy2006 and fy2007 ) for the various childnutrition programs and activities , the wic program , and the wic farmers' marketprogram .

for additional detailed information about the fy2007 budget andappropriations , see crs report rl33412 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2007appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

table 1 .

child nutrition & wic appropriations: fy2004-fy2007 ( in millions ) sources: agriculture department appropriations laws for fy2004-fy2006 , annual agriculture department budgetdocuments , h.rept .

109-463 , and s.rept .

106-266 .

notes: wic appropriations have been reduced to reflect directed rescissions in discretionary programs - - $27.3 million ( fy2004 ) , $42.2 million ( fy2005 ) , and $52.3 million ( fy2006 ) - - and a $100 million transfer in fy2004 .

not includedare mandatory appropriations made by laws outside the appropriations acts , funding available from other agriculturedepartment accounts ( eg , some commodity support , a $120 million transfer from the food stamp budget account infy2005 ) , unused carryover or recovered funding from previous years , and money for the wic farmers' market program infy2005 and later years ( about $20 million a year appropriated through another budget account ) .

the house bill's childnutrition appropriation does not include a $300 million contingency fund proposed by the administration and included inthe senate bill ; however , it ( like the senate bill and the administration's request ) does allow for $125 million in contingencyfunds for the wic program .

added funds for a free fresh fruit and vegetable program in selected schools are not includedin the house bill amounts shown here ( they are appropriated separately ) , but are included in the senate child nutritionappropriation .

table 2 .

child nutrition & wic spending: fy2004-fy2007 ( in millions ) sources: agriculture department budget documents , h.rept .

109-463 , s.rept.109-266 , and estimates from the agriculture department's food and nutrition servicefor wic spending under the house bill .

notes: includes spending from all funding sources: regular appropriations , moneyfrom other budget accounts ( eg , section 32 commodity support , a $120 millionfy2005 transfer from the food stamp account ) , permanent appropriations , andcarryovers of unused funding from previous fiscal years .

does not include spendingon child nutrition - and wic - related research .

a .

figures include cash assistance only , not the value of commodities or cash - in - lieuof commodities .

b .

figures include ( 1 ) some $400 million in commodities purchased for and donatedto child nutrition programs ( at no charge to the child nutrition account ) tomeet commodity entitlements , ( 2 ) cash subsidies and commodity letters ofcredit provided in lieu of commodity entitlements ( eg , $94 million infy2005 ) , and ( 3 ) certain federal commodity donationadministrative / distribution / computer support spending ( eg , $9 million infy2005 ) .

not shown is the value of "bonus" commodities donated by thedepartment from excess federal commodity holdings ( eg , $120 million infy2005 ) .

c. unlike other numbers in this table , figures for the free fresh fruit and vegetableprogram in schools represent funding made available for each year , not actualspending , because of uncertainty about spending amounts .

actual spendingfigures are likely to be substantially lower than the amounts shown .

the tableallocates to fy2004 $3 million of the $6 million provided by the 2002 farmbill ( p.l .

107-171 ) for fy2003 and fy2004 .

the $9 million shown forfy2005 is the amount mandated by the 2004 child nutrition reauthorizationlaw ( p.l .

108-265 ) for each year beginning with fy2005 .

the $15 millionshown for fy2006 includes the $9 million mandate from the child nutritionreauthorization law , plus $6 million appropriated by the fy2006appropriations measure .

the administration's request for fy2007 includesonly the $9 million mandated amount .

the house $25 million figure is adiscretionary appropriation that assumes suspension of the $9-million - a - yearmandate .

the senate figure includes the $9 million mandatory fundingamount , plus a $9 million discretionary appropriation .

d. special projects and other activities include nutrition education efforts through"team nutrition," food safety education , several program integrity / technicalassistance initiatives undertaken by the administration or directed by the 2004child nutrition reauthorization law , an information clearinghouse , programevaluations , a summer program pilot project , and funding for the fns to helpschools establish "wellness policies. .

a large portion of the fy2006 amountreflects one - time spending directives in the 2004 child nutritionreauthorization law ( p.l .

108-265 ) .

e. the fy2007 administration request for the wic program is predicated onenactment of a recommendation to limit wic nutrition services andadministration ( nsa ) support to 25% of state grants ( an estimated savingsof $152 million in fy2007 ) .

the house and senate figures reject theproposed nsa limits .

they also reflect major changes in assumptions as tofood costs , participation , and the availability of prior - year funds ( as estimatedby the food and nutrition service after passage of the house bill and beforereporting of the senate bill ) .

e. wic farmers' market figures represent spending from amounts available from newannual appropriations , plus money recovered or carried over from prior years .

they reflect a substantial amount of unused funding in fy2004 ( later madeavailable and obligated in fy2005 ) , and they assume significant , althoughshrinking , recoveries / carryovers ( a decrease in unused money ) in fy2005,fy2006 , and fy2007 .

annual appropriations were $22.9 million in fy2004,$19.8 million in fy2005 , and $19.8 million in fy2006 .

a $19.8 millionappropriation is requested for fy2007 .

in effect , the drop in appropriationsbeginning with fy2005 does not show in spending totals until fy2006because unspent funds from earlier years were available .

however , thefy2005 spending figure may be revised downward by as much as $2 millionwhen all unused money is recovered , and the fy2006 and fy2007 amountsmay be revised upward to the extent recoveries from fy2005 are madeavailable as grants .

the fy2007 figure for the house and senate bills reflects$200,000 added by these bills .

