" habeas corpus is a legal procedure that allows prisoners to assert constitutional rights , the procedure itself is not required or controlled by the constitution. .

 — u.s .

supreme court justice lewis f. powell , jr. ( 1972-1987 ) federal habeas corpus is the statutory procedure under which state and federal prisoners may petition federal courts to review their convictions and sentences to determine whether they are being held contrary to the laws or the constitution of the united states .

the authority of a federal court to issue a writ of habeas corpus has been a part of legal procedure since 1789 .

in 1867 , the writ was extended by congress to prisoners in state custody .

however , although the federal writ of habeas corpus was extended to prisoners in state custody in 1867 , it did not become fully available as a means to challenge an unlawful conviction or sentence until the 1940s .

in 1996 , congress passed legislation that restricted a prisoner's ability to seek relief through the writ of habeas corpus .

since its passage , the courts have been interpreting the meaning of the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act ( aedpa ) .

at issue for congress is whether it should further restrict state prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus relief by limiting the federal role in policing constitutional violations in the states' criminal justice systems .

two issues have emerged as the congress considers legislation that would further alter the writ of habeas corpus — trial finality and adequate representation .

proponents of habeas corpus reform contend that restricting state prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus relief is necessary due to many prisoners filing excessive and frivolous claims that result in a backlog in the system and substantial delays in the processing of cases .

critics contend , however , that many states' criminal justice systems are flawed , with many indigent defendants lacking proper representation throughout all stages of the criminal justice system .

they contend that for many defendants , the writ of habeas corpus plays a key role in restoring justice when the system fails .

this report examines the issues surrounding the debate on whether to further restrict state prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus filings .

this report does not discuss issues related to federalism and the proper role of the federal court system in overseeing the actions of state courts pertaining to prisoners' constitutional rights .

the report opens with a discussion of a commission that was established in 1988 to study and make recommendations of the then - current federal habeas corpus system and the 1996 law that restricted prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus relief .

it then provides an analysis of federal habeas corpus petition data since 1990 .

the report examines whether the number of federal habeas corpus petitions and the time it takes for the federal court system to process these claims have increased since the enactment of the aedpa .

it then discusses legislation introduced in the 109 th congress that would further restrict state prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus relief .

the report concludes with an analysis of two dominant issues that are at the center of this debate: delays caused by habeas corpus petitions and post - conviction representation .

beginning in the 1970s , the u.s. supreme court issued a set of rulings that gradually restricted prisoners' access to federal habeas corpus relief ; and in the late 1980s a commission was formed that would set the stage for congressional action .

following is a discussion of early efforts to reform the writ of habeas corpus .

as discussed below , one of the issues that is at the center of reforming the writ of habeas corpus is the perceived delay in processing these petitions .

many proponents of amending the current federal habeas corpus law point to the amount of time it takes from the initial filing of a habeas corpus petition to disposition .

they assert that the current system is abused by inmates who use the writ to delay the final outcome of their sentences .

they further contend that such delay only benefits one category of habeas corpus petitioners .

according to congressional testimony , "unlike the non - capital defendant who is serving his sentence during the habeas corpus process and has every incentive to proceed as quickly as possible to have a federal court vindicate a constitutional claim that the state courts wrongly decided , the capital defendant is not serving his sentence — he is avoiding it. .

although it may be true that some death row prisoners use the writ to avoid death , it is also important to note that the overall number of habeas corpus petitions filed by death row inmates pales in comparison to the number of petitions filed by non - death row inmates , at less than 1% in one study done in 1995 .

the current debate over whether to reform the federal habeas corpus law is centered around state capital cases .

as of december 31 , 2004 , there were 3,282 prisoners on death row in state prisons .

these cases experience some of the lengthier delays that have been highlighted in congressional testimony , and for many this is where the concern rests .

the issue of trial finality becomes apparent in these cases due to the mandated outcome — execution — being suspended pending the outcome of the habeas corpus proceeding .

two pieces of legislation were introduced in the 109 th congress that would have reformed the current federal habeas corpus system for state inmates — the streamlined procedures act of 2005 ( spa ; s. 1088 and h.r .

3035 ) .

the senate judiciary committee attempted to mark up s. 1088 on several occasions .

in addition to the spa , the house passed the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 ( h.r .

4437 ) on december 16 , 2005 .

section 302 of h.r .

4472 would have barred federal judicial review of a state prisoner's habeas corpus application in cases where the state court has found harmless errors in sentencing , see discussion below .

three additional bills ( h.r .

3132 / s. 956 and s. 1605 ) were also introduced in the 109 th congress .

the bills would have provided for an expeditious habeas review of convictions that involved a killing of a child ( §303 of h.r .

3132 , §303 of h.r .

3860 , and §4 of s. 956 ) and a public safety officer or state judge ( §6 of s. 1605 ) .

the house passed h.r .

3132 on september 14 , 2005 .

the spa would have amended aedpa and further restricted state inmates' access to federal habeas corpus relief .

generally , spa would have imposed additional requirements on habeas corpus applicants in state custody .

spa would have also imposed time limits on federal courts of appeal review of habeas corpus decisions .

in addition , it would have barred federal courts from tolling the current one - year deadline for filing habeas corpus claims for reasons other than those authorized by the state , as well as clarify when a state appeal is pending for purposes of tolling the deadline .

following is a discussion of the spa's major provisions .

as the debate over whether to reform federal habeas corpus law escalates , two major themes have emerged: trial finality and adequate representation .

both of these issues are relevant when discussing state capital and non - capital post - conviction proceedings .

following is a discussion of these two issues .

the issue of what is the proper scope of federal habeas corpus relief resurfaced in the 109 th congress .

although trial finality is often cited by proponents who favor further restricting federal habeas corpus relief to state prisoners as a desirable goal when discussing the scope of such relief , the question of a prisoner's constitutional rights is often cited by those holding an opposing viewpoint as equally paramount to the discussion of the proper scope of habeas corpus relief .

the question of what is the purpose of constitutional rights in the criminal justice system , however , can be supported by both views .

for example , do such rights exist primarily to protect the innocent and ensure that only those who actually committed a crime will be convicted or does the litigation of rights serve other purposes such as controlling police and prosecutorial behavior and protecting individual privacy and dignity ? .

regardless of the question , there appears to be a consensus among legislatures that adequate representation , arguably at all stages of the criminal justice system , is critical to ensure that an individual's constitutional rights are not violated .

as early as 1989 , the powell committee studied the federal habeas corpus system .

although the committee found that prisoners' abuses of the system were rampant , it also found that many states lacked representation for indigent prisoners in post - conviction proceedings .

as a result of the committee's study , as well as several u.s. supreme court rulings that addressed some of the issues with the system , congress passed aedpa .

among other provisions , aedpa created a two - tier system for states with respect to federal habeas corpus proceedings .

although there was already an existing system for the processing of federal habeas corpus cases , aedpa created a second , expedited system for capital cases for states that met certain requirements .

as was the case with the committee , congress , in passing aedpa , recognized the need to provide an incentive to states to have a system in place that would call for the appointment of adequate counsel as well as provide compensation for the litigation of post - conviction cases .

the need for such a system was more apparent in capital cases where prisoners were facing a death sentence .

although arizona is the only state that has successfully opted - in to the expedited system , 12 additional states have attempted to do the same to no avail .

once again congress recognized the need for effective representation in post - conviction proceedings , especially in capital cases , when it passed the justice for all act ( p.l .

108-405 ) .

title iv of the act ( the innocence protection act of 2004 ) permits the attorney general to make grants to states so they can improve the quality of legal representation provided to indigent defendants in state capital cases .

the research of liebman , fagan , west and lloyd discussed previously raised the question of whether the delays commonly associated with federal habeas corpus review are necessary to make sure that justice is administered fairly .

moreover , the research raised the possibility that the errors found in capital cases may be the result of poor representation .

until the issue of adequate representation is fully addressed in the nation's criminal justice system , reform efforts will continue to be debated .

