this report provides background information on options for technologies that could reduce the navy's dependence on oil for its ships .

it is based on testimony prepared for a hearing on alternative navy ship propulsion technologies held on april 6 , 2006 , before the projection forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee , which granted permission for the testimony to be converted into this report .

the report discusses four general strategies for reducing the navy's dependence on oil for its ships: reducing energy use on navy ships ; alternative hydrocarbon fuels ; nuclear propulsion ; and sail and solar power .

following this discussion is a section on legislative activity .

a july 2006 government accountability office ( gao ) report discusses the status of navy studies on alternative ship propulsion methods and certain navy efforts for developing new ship - propulsion technologies .

one strategy for reducing the navy's dependence on oil would be to reduce energy use on navy ships .

a second strategy for reducing the navy's dependence on oil would be to shift to alternative hydrocarbon fuels .

a third strategy for reducing the navy's dependence on oil would be to shift to a greater reliance on nuclear propulsion .

a fourth strategy for reducing the navy's dependence on oil would be to make use of sail and solar power , perhaps particularly on navy auxiliaries and dod sealift ships .

section 128 of h.r .

5122 of the house version of h.r .

5122 stated: sec .

128 .

sense of congress that the navy make greater use of nuclear - powered propulsion systems in its future fleet of surface combatants .

 ( a ) findings - congress makes the following findings: ( 1 ) securing and maintaining access to affordable and plentiful sources of energy is a vital national security interest for the united states .

 ( 2 ) the nation's dependence upon foreign oil is a threat to national security due to the inherently volatile nature of the global oil market and the political instability of some of the world's largest oil producing states .

 ( 3 ) given the recent increase in the cost of crude oil , which cannot realistically be expected to improve over the long term , other energy sources must be seriously considered .

 ( b ) sense of congress - in light of the findings in subsection ( a ) , it is the sense of congress that the navy should make greater use of alternative technologies , including nuclear power , as a means of vessel propulsion for its future fleet of surface combatants .

section 354 of the senate - passed version of the fy2007 defense authorization bill ( s. 2766 ) stated: sec .

354 .

report on actions to reduce department of defense consumption of petroleum - based fuel .

 ( a ) report required - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives a report on the actions taken , and to be taken , by the department of defense to reduce the consumption by the department of petroleum - based fuel .

 ( b ) elements - the report shall include the status of implementation by the department of the requirements of the following: ( 1 ) the energy policy act of 2005 ( public law 109-58 ) .

 ( 2 ) the energy policy act of 1992 .

 ( public law 102-486 ) ( 3 ) executive order 13123 .

 ( 4 ) executive order 13149 .

 ( 5 ) any other law , regulation , or directive relating to the consumption by the department of petroleum - based fuel .

section 375 of the senate - passed version of s. 2766 stated: sec .

375 .

energy efficiency in weapons platforms .

 ( a ) policy - it shall be the policy of the department of defense to improve the fuel efficiency of weapons platforms , consistent with mission requirements , in order to — ( 1 ) enhance platform performance ; ( 2 ) reduce the size of the fuel logistics systems ; ( 3 ) reduce the burden high fuel consumption places on agility ; ( 4 ) reduce operating costs ; and ( 5 ) dampen the financial impact of volatile oil prices .

 ( b ) report required - ( 1 ) in general - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the department of defense in implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) elements - the report shall include the following: ( a ) an assessment of the feasibility of designating a senior department of defense official to be responsible for implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( b ) a summary of the recommendations made as of the time of the report by — ( i ) the energy security integrated product team established by the secretary of defense in april 2006 ; ( ii ) the defense science board task force on department of defense energy strategy established by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics on may 2 , 2006 ; and ( iii ) the january 2001 defense science board task force report on improving fuel efficiency of weapons platforms .

 ( c ) for each recommendation summarized under subparagraph ( b ) — ( i ) the steps that the department has taken to implement such recommendation ; ( ii ) any additional steps the department plans to take to implement such recommendation ; and ( iii ) for any recommendation that the department does not plan to implement , the reasons for the decision not to implement such recommendation .

 ( d ) an assessment of the extent to which the research , development , acquisition , and logistics guidance and directives of the department for weapons platforms are appropriately designed to address the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( e ) an assessment of the extent to which such guidance and directives are being carried out in the research , development , acquisition , and logistics programs of the department .

 ( f ) a description of any additional actions that , in the view of the secretary , may be needed to implement the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

section 128 of h.r .

5122 / p.l .

109-364 ( conference report h.rept .

109-702 of september 29 , 2006 ) states: sec .

128 .

alternative technologies for future surface combatants .

 ( a ) findings. — congress makes the following findings: ( 1 ) securing and maintaining access to affordable and plentiful sources of energy is a vital national security interest for the united states .

 ( 2 ) the nation's dependence upon foreign oil is a threat to national security due to the inherently volatile nature of the global oil market and the political instability of some of the world's largest oil producing states .

 ( 3 ) given the recent increase in the cost of crude oil , which cannot realistically be expected to improve over the long term , other energy sources must be seriously considered .

 ( 4 ) alternate propulsion sources such as nuclear power offer many advantages over conventional power for major surface combatant ships of the navy , including — ( a ) virtually unlimited high - speed endurance ; ( b ) elimination of vulnerable refueling ; and ( c ) reduction in the requirement for replenishment vessels and the need to protect those vessels .

 ( b ) sense of congress. — in light of the findings in subsection ( a ) , it is the sense of congress that the navy should make greater use of alternative technologies , including expanded application of integrated power systems , fuel cells , and nuclear power , for propulsion of future major surface combatant ships .

 ( c ) requirement. — the secretary of the navy shall include integrated power systems , fuel cells , and nuclear power as propulsion alternatives to be evaluated within the analysis of alternatives for future major surface combatant ships .

section 360 states: sec .

360 .

energy efficiency in weapons platforms .

 ( a ) policy - it shall be the policy of the department of defense to improve the fuel efficiency of weapons platforms , consistent with mission requirements , in order to — ( 1 ) enhance platform performance ; ( 2 ) reduce the size of the fuel logistics systems ; ( 3 ) reduce the burden high fuel consumption places on agility ; ( 4 ) reduce operating costs ; and ( 5 ) dampen the financial impact of volatile oil prices .

 ( b ) report required - ( 1 ) in general - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the department of defense in implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) elements - the report shall include the following: ( a ) an assessment of the feasibility of designating a senior department of defense official to be responsible for implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( b ) a summary of the recommendations made as of the time of the report by — ( i ) the energy security integrated product team established by the secretary of defense in april 2006 ; ( ii ) the defense science board task force on department of defense energy strategy established by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics on may 2 , 2006 ; and ( iii ) the january 2001 defense science board task force report on improving fuel efficiency of weapons platforms .

 ( c ) for each recommendation summarized under subparagraph ( b ) — ( i ) the steps that the department has taken to implement such recommendation ; ( ii ) any additional steps the department plans to take to implement such recommendation ; and ( iii ) for any recommendation that the department does not plan to implement , the reasons for the decision not to implement such recommendation .

 ( d ) an assessment of the extent to which the research , development , acquisition , and logistics guidance and directives of the department for weapons platforms are appropriately designed to address the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( e ) an assessment of the extent to which such guidance and directives are being carried out in the research , development , acquisition , and logistics programs of the department .

 ( f ) a description of any additional actions that , in the view of the secretary , may be needed to implement the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

the conference report stated: the senate amendment contained a provision ( sec .

354 ) that would require the secretary of defense to report on the actions taken , and to be taken , by the department of defense to reduce the consumption of petroleum - based fuels .

the house bill contained no similar provision .

the senate recedes .

the conferees note that the implementation of current legislation and regulatory guidance should facilitate reduction of petroleum - based fuels by the department .

therefore , the conferees direct the secretary to submit a report , not later than september 1 , 2007 , to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives on the status of implementation by the department of the requirements contained in the following: ( 1 ) energy policy act of 2005 ( public law 109 – 58 ) ; ( 2 ) energy policy act of 1992 ( public law 102 – 486 ) ; ( 3 ) executive order 13123 ; ( 4 ) executive order 13149 ; and ( 5 ) other regulations or directions relating to the department's consumption of petroleum - based fuels .

furthermore , the conferees are concerned that although flexible fuel vehicles ( ffvs ) are being introduced into the department's vehicle inventory , little reduction in petroleum - based fuel is being realized because operators continue to fuel the ffvs with gasoline rather than e85 ( 85 percent ethanol with 15 percent gasoline ) or m85 ( 85 percent methanol and 15 percent gasoline ) .

therefore , the conferees direct the secretary to include in the report an analysis of the reduction of petroleum - based fuels since introduction of ffvs into the inventory and an assessment of how the department might increase the consumption of e85 or m85 in ffvs .

 ( page 700 ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

109-292 of july 25 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5631 , states: the committee notes the recent developments relating to the conversion of coal to liquid fuels .

demonstration projects in the united states have produced high - quality , ultra clean synthetic diesel fuels that provide improved efficiency and improved emissions compared to traditionally produced diesel fuel .

the committee encourages the department of defense to continue to explore the use of fischer - tropsch fuels as alternative sources for dod's fuel requirements .

further , the committee requests that the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics prepare a report for the congressional defense committees on the defense department's assessment , use , and plans to continue to explore the potential of synthetic fuels , to include fuels produced through the fischer - tropsch process .

 ( page 157 ) .

section 214 of h.r .

889 / p.l .

109-241 of july 12 , 2006 ( conference report h.rept .

109-413 of april 6 , 2006 ) states: sec .

214 .

biodiesel feasibility study .

 ( a ) study - the secretary of the department in which the coast guard is operating shall conduct a study that examines the technical feasibility , costs , and potential cost savings of using biodiesel fuel in new and existing coast guard vehicles and vessels and that focuses on the use of biodiesel fuel in ports which have a high density of vessel traffic , including ports for which vessel traffic systems have been established .

 ( b ) report - not later than one year after the date of enactment of this act , the secretary shall submit a report containing the findings , conclusions , and recommendations ( if any ) from the study to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation of the senate and the committee on transportation and infrastructure of the house of representatives .

section 130 of the conference report ( h.rept .

109-360 of december 18 , 2005 ) on the fy2006 defense authorization act ( h.r .

1815 , p.l .

109-163 of january 6 , 2006 ) requires the navy to submit a report by november 1 , 2006 on alternative propulsion methods for surface combatants and amphibious warfare ships .

the section states: sec .

130 .

report on alternative propulsion methods for surface combatants and amphibious warfare ships .

 ( a ) analysis of alternatives. — the secretary of the navy shall conduct an analysis of alternative propulsion methods for surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships of the navy .

 ( b ) report. — the secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the analysis of alternative propulsion systems carried out under subsection ( a ) .

the report shall be submitted not later than november 1 , 2006 .

 ( c ) matters to be included. — the report under subsection ( b ) shall include the following: ( 1 ) the key assumptions used in carrying out the analysis under subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) the methodology and techniques used in conducting the analysis .

 ( 3 ) a description of current and future technology relating to propulsion that has been incorporated in recently - designed surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships or that is expected to be available for those types of vessels within the next 10-to - 20 years .

 ( 4 ) a description of each propulsion alternative for surface combatant vessels and amphibious warfare ships that was considered under the study and an analysis and evaluation of each such alternative from an operational and cost - effectiveness standpoint .

 ( 5 ) a comparison of the life - cycle costs of each propulsion alternative .

 ( 6 ) for each nuclear propulsion alternative , an analysis of when that nuclear propulsion alternative becomes cost effective as the price of a barrel of crude oil increases for each type of ship .

 ( 7 ) the conclusions and recommendations of the study , including those conclusions and recommendations that could impact the design of future ships or lead to modifications of existing ships .

 ( 8 ) the secretary's intended actions , if any , for implementation of the conclusions and recommendations of the study .

 ( d ) life - cycle costs. — for purposes of this section , the term "life - cycle costs" includes those elements of cost that would be considered for a life - cycle cost analysis for a major defense acquisition program .

