figure 1 .

ukrainesources: map created by crs .

map information generated by hannah fischer using data from the national geospatial intelligence agency ( 2016 ) , department of state ( 2015 ) , esri ( 2014 ) , and delorme ( 2014 ) .

ukraine was the center of the first eastern slavic state , kyivan rus , which during the 10 th and 11 th centuries was one of the largest and most powerful states in europe .

eventually , kyivan rus was incorporated into the grand duchy of lithuania and into the polish - lithuanian commonwealth .

during the latter part of the 18 th century , most ukrainian territory was absorbed by the russian empire .

following the collapse of czarist russia in 1917 , ukraine achieved a short - lived period of independence ( 1917-1920 ) but was reconquered and incorporated into the former soviet union .

today , ukraine — comparable in size and population to france — is a large , important , european state .

occupying the sensitive position between russia and north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) member states poland , slovakia , hungary , and romania , ukraine has played a prominent role in the geopolitical competition between the west and russia .

ethnic russians make up approximately 17% of ukraine's population and are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country .

they form a majority in the crimea , where they make up close to 60% of the population .

in the crimean city of sevastopol , the home base of russia's black sea fleet , approximately 72% of the population is russian .

in addition , ethnic ukrainians in the east and south also tend to be russian - speaking , have generally been suspicious of ukrainian nationalism , and have supported close ties with russia .

many russian politicians , as well as ordinary citizens , have never been fully reconciled to ukraine's independence from the soviet union in 1991 and feel that the country belongs in russia's political and economic orbit .

this historical sense of "ownership" was witnessed in the strong russian support for the 2014 annexation of crimea .

it has been reported that in 2008 , russian president putin told u.s. president george w. bush that ukraine was not a state and that while the western part of the country may belong to eastern europe , eastern ukraine was russia's .

on the other hand , the u.s. and european view ( particularly in central and eastern europe ) is that a strong , independent ukraine is an important part of building a europe that is whole , free , and at peace .

since achieving its independence in 1991 , ukraine's political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well - connected businessmen , or "oligarchs," who regularly manipulated the government for their own security and profit .

ukraine's recent political unrest involved , for the most part , former president viktor yanukovych .

in the early 2000s , yanukovych served as prime minister .

he was elected president in 2004 through questionable elections and was ousted from power that year by the "orange revolution. .

he was reelected president in february 2010 .

yanukovych drew his main political support from oligarchs from the donets ( donbas ) region of eastern ukraine , which was also fairly pro - russian .

yanukovych's government was criticized for high levels of corruption , in part among yanukovych's own family and close associates .

u.s. and european union ( eu ) officials expressed strong concern over the government's human rights record , especially the targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution and yanukovych's flirtations with moscow .

many observers had believed that , despite growing dissatisfaction with the yanukovych government beginning in 2013 , there was little likelihood of public unrest in ukraine , given the failure of the government that emerged after the 2004 / 2005 pro - democracy "orange" revolution as well as widespread disillusionment with the political class as a whole .

however , in november 2013 , the yanukovych government , under pressure from moscow , made a last - minute decision to reject an association agreement ( aa ) , including a free trade pact , with the eu that would have aligned ukraine more toward europe , at least in the areas of economics and trade .

yanukovych appeared to bend to pressure from the kremlin , which opposed the aa , and instead opted for closer economic links to moscow .

the decision sparked antigovernment demonstrations in kyiv's central maidan nezalezhnosti , or independence square .

smaller protests occurred in other ukrainian cities , mainly in opposition strongholds in western and central ukraine .

observers noted that when government security forces took forceful actions against the demonstrators , public reaction shifted from just protesting against yanukovych's failure to sign the association agreement , to the government's lack of respect for the basic human dignity of ukraine's citizens .

in february 2014 , when the yanukovych government embarked on its most violent crackdown against the maidan protestors , resulting in more than 100 persons being killed , the regime sealed its own demise .

the death toll likely caused the support for the crackdown in the government - controlled ukrainian rada ( parliament ) to evaporate and , ultimately , the regime to collapse .

on february 20 , 2014 , the rada approved a resolution calling for the withdrawal of the interior ministry and military forces from the streets of kyiv to their bases .

as protestors began occupying government buildings , and as the situation in the streets became more chaotic , yanukovych and many of his supporters in the government and parliament fled , including to russia .

after yanukovych and his supporters abandoned ukraine , the rada , now composed mainly of former opposition deputies , rapidly passed sweeping measures to address the unrest and reform the government .

the parliament formally deposed yanukovych as president on february 22 for abandoning his duties .

the rada restored many democratic provisions of the 2004 ukrainian constitution , eliminating changes made by yanukovych to strengthen the presidency , and ordered new presidential elections to be held on may 25 , 2014 .

on february 27 , 2014 , the ukrainian parliament approved a new , interim government , headed by arseniy yatsenyuk , a former prime minister .

despite the rapid changes and formation of a new government , many maidan protestors viewed the new government skeptically , suspecting that it was nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the yanukovych regime .

the collapse of the yanukovych government did not sit well in moscow .

the kremlin reacted with great hostility toward the events in kyiv , referring to them as an illegal coup .

the emergence of the new , pro - western leadership in ukraine also unsettled moscow because of the presence of the large russian black sea fleet stationed in crimea .

in february 2014 , heavily armed russian - speaking forces , aided by russian troops , began seizing airports and other key installations throughout the crimean peninsula .

at the time , russian president vladimir putin claimed that many of the troops that poured into crimea were not russian federation military forces but only local crimean self - defense forces or volunteers from russia .

following the military operation , moscow announced it was annexing crimea and making it a permanent part of russia .

on march 16 , 2014 , crimean authorities held a referendum in support of the annexation by russia .

the referendum was allegedly approved by 96% of those voting , with a turnout of 83% .

ukraine , the united states , the eu , and others denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner .

russian president vladimir putin signed a "treaty" with crimean leaders on march 18 , 2014 , formally incorporating crimea into russia .

at the same time , pro - russia , armed rebels , aided by moscow , began to seize government facilities and territory in the eastern regions of the country referred to as the donbas .

these actions quickly evolved into a full - scale conflict requiring ukraine to commit its military forces against the separatists .

on may 25 , 2014 , ukraine elected petro poroshenko , a wealthy businessman , as its new president .

poroshenko pledged to move ukraine closer to the west , to clean up rampant corruption , and to deal with the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country .

in october 2014 , ukraine held national elections for the 450-seat rada ( ukraine's parliament ) .

the main victors were the petro poroshenko bloc and the people's front , led by arseniy yatsenyuk , who proposed a pro - western , reform coalition of several parties that included the samopomich ( self - reliance ) party , the populist radical party , and the fatherland party of former prime minister yulia tymoshenko .

this coalition gave the incoming government a majority of 288 seats in the rada .

the opposition bloc , composed of supporters of the former yanukovych regime , won 29 seats .

far - right groups , often held up by russian propaganda as neo - nazi gangs dominant in ukraine , won only a few seats .

one group , svoboda , won only six seats ; another group , right sector , won only one seat .

due to the inability to hold elections in districts in eastern ukraine , threatened by russian - backed sympathizers , several of the 450 seats in the parliament remain unfilled .

the overall election result was seen as a victory for forces in favor of closer ties with the eu and the united states .

on december 2 , 2014 , the incoming parliament approved the new coalition government , again led by yatsenyuk as prime minister .

representatives of the leading political groups were all included in the government .

with the poroshenko / yatsenyuk coalition commanding the majority of seats , many believed the government not only would be able to adopt much - needed reform legislation but also would be in a strong position to garner the 300 votes needed to pass amendments to the ukrainian constitution to strengthen democracy and rule of law .

prime minister yatsenyuk maintained that his government's primary goal was to adopt european standards , with the ultimate objective of eu membership for ukraine .

he consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption , including by reducing government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy and by minimizing the influence of certain oligarchs in ukraine's society .

he stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collected and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities .

in important symbolic moves , yatsenyuk appointed a u.s. citizen and former state department official , natalie jaresko , as ukraine's finance minister ; aivaras abromavicius , a lithuanian citizen , as economy minister ; and a health minister from georgia .

the former president of georgia , mikhel saakashvili , was appointed mayor of odessa .

these moves were likely intended to signal that the new government was dedicated to initiating reforms and moving the country toward the west and that these key figures were not from what many ukrainians believed was the country's morally compromised political elite .

after russia proper , the ukrainian republic was the most important economic component of the former soviet union , producing about four times the output of the next - ranking republic .

its fertile soil generated more than one - fourth of soviet agricultural output .

 ( according to the u.s. department of state , this remains the case as ukraine exported a record 33.5 million tons of grain in 2014. ) .

in addition , ukraine's diversified heavy industry , concentrated in the eastern portion of the country , supplied equipment and raw materials to industrial facilities and mining sites within ukraine and russia .

although its economy was in decline in 2013 , some believe ukraine's primary economic challenges were not all self - inflicted .

many were the result of russia's aggressive actions against ukraine .

russia's annexation of crimea in march 2014 seized 4% of ukraine's gdp .

subsequently , russia's support for separatists in eastern ukraine , a region that accounted for 10% of the country's gdp in 2013 , resulted in the region's production plummeting by 70% , costing ukraine some 7% of its 2013 gdp .

russian trade sanctions imposed in 2013 , even before the maidan , slashed ukraine's exports to russia by 70% — accounting for a drop of 18% in ukraine's total exports .

in 2014 , ukraine's exports to russia — which included machinery , steel , agricultural goods , and chemicals — fell by half .

logistical issues , the lack of commercial links , and the specialization of some products meant that ukrainian goods could not be redirected in the short term away from the russian market to other markets , particularly in europe .

it was estimated by some that the loss of the russian market likely resulted in an overall 6% decline in ukraine's gdp .

in addition , with russia's aggression in ukraine still unsettled , few had wanted to invest in what some felt could become an extended war zone .

as a consequence , ukraine's net foreign direct investment , which was slightly over 3% of gdp before the start of hostilities , evaporated .

an example of this lingering concern was seen when , according to the state property fund , the tender for a 99.6% stake in the odessa port plant , a large chemicals - production complex , that was supposed to lay the groundwork for the wider relaunch of the government's privatization plan failed to attract any bidders , particularly any international companies .

beginning in 2015 , some good news was noted .

according to some , signs of financial and economic stabilization began to appear as a result of a series of measures , including the first payments of the $17.5-billion program loan approved by the imf in march 2015 .

a rise in interest rates helped to support the hryvnya ( ukraine's currency ) .

in august 2015 , the government announced that a deal on the restructuring of up to $18 billion of ukraine's public debt had been reached with private creditors .

in december 2015 , the imf tweaked its rules regarding lending to countries in arrears to other states , allowing ukraine to continue to receive imf funding even though the government has thus far refused to repay a $3 billion bond , issued by the previous government and held by russia .

in december 2015 , the rada adopted a 2016 budget that included some changes to the tax code but did not go as far as the finance minister had wanted .

the approved budget was an attempt to reduce the budget deficit target to 3.7% of gdp , down slightly from the 2015 target of 4.3% of gdp .

according to the eiu , this target is in line with the government's commitments made as part of its april 2014 request for an imf loan of $17 billion .

passage of the budget would have allowed the imf to continue to lend money to ukraine as long as other reforms continued .

other commitments made to the imf included maintaining a flexible currency exchange rate and increasing household gas prices to 56% of the import price and heating prices to about 40% of the import price in 2014 .

the imf also wanted a commitment to make rapid progress on reforms , including energy price increases , bank restructuring , governance reforms of state - owned enterprises , and legal changes to implement anticorruption and judicial reforms .

in february 2016 , with progress on the imf's demands moving too slowly , imf director lagarde warned then - prime minister yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long and that continued imf support for ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased .

after yatsenyuk was replaced by groysman as prime minister — ushering in a new emphasis on reform , the hiring of a new prosecutor general , and the passage of legislative fixes to the energy subsidy program — the imf sent a new assessment team to ukraine .

the imf agreed that progress was being made and that the next tranche of imf funding , around $1.6 billion , would be forthcoming .

in september , the imf voted to release $1 billion of ukraine's $17.5 billion bailout package , not as much as ukraine had hoped for , but nevertheless a welcome infusion of assistance .

the new funding brought total funding from the imf so far to $7.7 billion .

the 2016 budget debate in the rada was difficult , as many parliamentarians noted that the fiscal austerity focus of the budget , the ongoing conflict in the east , and recession all contributed to a downturn in living standards , which in turn contributed to a rapid decline in public support for the government .

reductions in the energy subsidies have resulted in a rise in electricity prices , which , has spurred some public outrage and protests .

in late 2016 , however , it was reported that electricity prices had declined somewhat .

as noted above , when the free - trade agreement with the eu went into effect in january 2016 , russia suspended its own free - trade deal with ukraine and banned all imports of ukrainian food — to which ukraine has responded in kind .

russia's tightening of trade restrictions resulted in ukrainian exports to russia being cut by 50% , although russia is still an important market for ukrainian metals and machine - building .

ukraine has been successful in reorienting its trade to other markets , particularly to the eu .

however , ukraine's economic outlook for the longer time could be inhibited by a continued stagnation in the economic outlook for the eu and by a rise in uncertainty as the uk and the eu begin brexit negotiations in 2017 .

the eiu forecasted growth in real gdp of around 1.1% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017 .

natalie jaresko , in her comments at the atlantic council , suggested that ukraine could see 1.5% gdp growth this year .

the eiu also forecasts unemployment will remain at about 9% and inflation holding at around 12% .

an increase of almost 50% in domestic gas tariffs , a reform measure enacted by the rada — also needed to pave the way for the release of a delayed imf loan tranche — could spur a new round of inflation .

one area where ukraine is making a great deal of progress is in agriculture , although more reforms are needed , according to some .

ukraine possesses some of the richest agricultural soil in all of europe .

ukraine sold $7.6 billion of bulk farm commodities worldwide in 2015 , quintupling its revenue from a decade earlier and topping russia , its closest rival on world markets .

in 2016 , the government estimated that grain sales will top 60 million tons , up 7% over 2015 .

by the mid - 2020s , "ukraine will be no .

3 , after the u.s. and brazil" in food production worldwide , says the top representative in ukraine for cargill .

with respect to its need for direct foreign investment , at the end of 2015 the value of ukraine's foreign investments was over $60 billion .

partly to blame for the low investment figures appears to be international concern over the pace of reforms to improve governance , support investment , and raise standards .

cutting red tape and other reforms raised ukraine to the 83 rd position in the world bank's 2016 doing business ranking , from 152 nd position in 2012 .

ukraine fell six spots to 85 th place in the world economic forum's global competitiveness index .

according to an investors' survey , obstacles include corruption ; lack of trust in the judiciary ; the conflict with russia ; an unstable financial system ; restrictive capital and foreign exchange controls ; complicated tax administration ; and cumbersome legislation .

on the other hand , in a recent article for the atlantic council , james brooke , a foreign correspondent , made several observations regarding the business climate in ukraine in 2016 .

he quoted an official from briggs capital llc , a fund based in dedham , massachusetts , saying , "a new culture of determined entrepreneurs is finally emerging... .

the old guard , with their misconceptions of a free economy , is slowly being sidelined .

new , trusted ukraine business owners of small to medium - sized firms are operating in a westernized fashion. .

in addition to pointing out statements made by several u.s. and european business representatives in ukraine to size up the market and workforce , brooke noted the recent signing of a canada - ukraine free trade pact , which followed the first canada - ukraine business forum , an event held on june 20 in toronto and attended by representatives of 250 canadian companies and 150 ukrainian companies .

similarly , in lviv , japan's fujikura has recently opened a car parts factory .

given the significant domestic problems facing the poroshenko government , the scope of ukraine's foreign policy is focused on a few main foreign policy priorities .

these include securing continued international support for ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity , including nonrecognition of russia's annexation of crimea ; reorienting its economy as quickly as possible toward europe ; and seeking continued international assistance to ameliorate the country's economic situation .

in december 2014 , the ukrainian parliament overwhelmingly renounced ukraine's former neutral , "non - bloc" status and indicated a preference for closer relations with nato .

after taking office , president poroshenko requested assistance from nato for its military .

at the september 2014 nato summit in wales , the alliance agreed to set up four trust funds to help ukraine's military in such areas as logistics , command and control , military personnel issues ( including wounded soldiers ) , and cyber defense .

ukraine achieved independence in 1991 , following the dissolution of the soviet union .

although independent , russian political and economic influence over ukraine remained strong , with moscow determined to ensure that despite any changes in the government in kyiv , ukraine would remain on good terms with russia .

in some ways , recent russian perspectives on ukraine are seen as the culmination of long - standing russian resentment of the outcome of the cold war .

in 2005 , russian president vladimir putin called the collapse of the soviet union "a major geopolitical disaster. .

russian leaders have also asserted that nations in the post - soviet region should remain of privileged interest to russia .

part of the justification for that assertion is an alleged right to protect russian citizens and "compatriots" ( persons deemed to be linked to russia by language , culture , or ethnicity ) .

moreover , ukraine has a particularly important place in russian psychology , according to many experts .

putin has referred to ukrainians as "brothers" of the russian people .

russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incorporate crimea and most of the rest of ukraine into the russian empire , and a great deal more to keep it within the empire ( and its successor , the soviet union ) through several wars .

finally , russia has consistently reminded everyone of the strong religious connections between russia and ukraine through the eastern orthodox church .

russia has also made demands on the subject of ukraine's political future .

russian foreign minister lavrov has called for making russian the second official language in ukraine , and for constitutional reforms that would confirm ukraine's neutral status .

russia has taken other steps against ukraine , including imposing trade sanctions against ukrainian imports and cutting all gas and coal deliveries to ukraine .

as noted earlier , ethnic russians are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country where ties to russia remain strong .

soviet leaders concentrated important heavy industries ( including defense industries ) in eastern ukraine , which tied the region to russia economically and fostered what many analysts have viewed as a lingering soviet - style mindset there .

this is particularly true of the donbas region , on the border with russia .

until the collapse of the yanukovych regime in february 2014 , the kremlin preferred using indirect methods of influence in ukraine .

these included "carrots," such as favorable loan terms or lucrative business deals with ukrainian politicians and oligarchs , but also "sticks," such as de facto economic sanctions and using russian media ( which was and is still popular in ukraine ) to attack uncooperative leaders .

since the change in government , ukrainian officials have reported increased russian interference , particularly in ukraine's domestic political affairs and economy .

one example has been the hosting in moscow of representatives from the two largest opposition political parties , the party of the regions , once led by former president yanukovych , and the fatherland party , currently led by yulia tymoshenko .

russian disinformation and propaganda activities also have been on the rise .

for instance , the eu's east stratcom task force , which documents cases of fake news and other disinformation in europe , recently showed a parallel between the rise of disinformation targeting ukraine in the information space and military activity on the ground .

as the fighting in donetsk and luhansk escalated in december 2016 , so did the discrediting of ukraine in pro - kremlin media .

ukrainian forces were accused of hitting a civilian car with a tank .

ukraine also was accused of violating russian airspace over crimea , though the airspace over crimea is not russian but ukrainian .

further claims were made that the ukrainian deputy foreign minister accused the eu of betrayal ; that ukrainian soldiers sell fuel to buy clothes ; and that there are only three ways forward for ukraine — to be returned to russia , to be divided , or to be subjected to a coup .

ukraine has also been the target of numerous cyberattacks , all pointing to russia .

ukrainian government officials have reported that government computer servers have been hit by numerous and sophisticated cyberattacks , which some experts suggest may have come from russia .

speculation indicates the attacks seem to come from both russian government sources and sources supported by the kremlin , although the exact sources are rarely named , if known .

one example of a group identified as launching attacks is black energy , a known cybercrime toolkit that has been around since 2007 and was active in georgia during its conflict with russia .

as tensions rose between russia and ukraine , a new version of malware reportedly was detected being used by a mysterious group of hackers targeting ukrainian government officials , specifically their office and cellular phones , to harvest information .

it was suspected that black energy was active again .

in 2015 , black energy hackers apparently targeted government infrastructure in dnipropetrovsk , a city in the southeast of ukraine , as well as the ukrainian railway , creating proxy servers at those locations to divert traffic .

an international business times article in 2015 suggested that intelligence services ( using black energy ) would be able to hide , for "plausible deniability," behind groups such as black energy because the group is a widespread cybercrime tool used by hackers around the globe .

another reported attack came in december 2015 , when ukrainian power companies experienced unscheduled power outages impacting a large number of customers in ukraine .

in addition , there were reports of malware found in ukrainian companies in a variety of other critical infrastructure sectors .

in january 2016 , the kyiv airport computer systems were apparently hacked , an attack blamed on russian sources .

sentiments toward russia among a majority of ukrainians have clearly declined since the events of 2014 .

in june 2014 , president poroshenko announced that ukraine would ban military cooperation with russia despite the economic impact such a move would have on close to 80 ukrainian defense firms that had been closely linked to russian firms as a result of their former soviet heritage .

it was estimated at the time that a ban , with a few exceptions such as for dual technologies , including helicopter engines that were under contract , could cut close to 70% of ukrainian - made military goods exported to russia and force the closing or downsizing of the ukraine military industrial base .

on october 20 , 2016 , ukraine's rada , with 243 deputies voting in favor , approved a document holding the former soviet union responsible for the outbreak of world war ii because of its signing of molotov - ribbentrop pact with germany .

ukraine has been a priority country within the eu's neighborhood policy and the eastern partnership for several years .

the eu policy is intended to forge a close relationship that encompasses political association and economic integration , which could prepare ukraine for eventual membership in the union .

the desire among a least some segments of the ukrainian public for stronger relations with the eu and the west fueled the initial protests in late 2013 that culminated in the collapse of the yanukovych regime .

in response to the crisis in ukraine , in march 2014 , the european commission unveiled an initial support package of €11 billion ( about $15.5 billion ) focusing on the comprehensive reform process initiated by the new government in ukraine .

the package included €1.6 billion ( about $2.2 billion ) in macro - financial assistance loans to support ukraine's government finances .

the eu also agreed to provide some €1.5 billion ( about $2.17 billion ) in grant aid between 2014 and 2020 to assist ukraine's reform efforts .

the commission's package includes up to €9 billion ( about $11.16 billion ) in financing from the european investment bank ( eib ) and the european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) .

the eib has already obligated approximately €3 billion , including infrastructure projects involving energy efficiency , modernization of water systems , and transport improvement projects .

the package also included close to €110 million ( approximately $112.5 million ) aimed at developing the private sector , including small and medium enterprises .

the eu's main instrument to promote european values ( such as human rights , fundamental freedoms , rule of law , political dialogue , and reform ) and deepen economic ties with ukraine is the association agreement ( aa ) .

the aa includes a free - trade agreement with the eu , formally known as a deep and comprehensive free trade agreement ( dcfta ) .

although the dcfta further opens potentially lucrative eu markets to ukraine , it also requires ukraine to adopt eu legislation and standards and to gradually expose ukrainian firms to tough competition from eu imports .

approximation to eu norms could also lead to increased foreign investment in ukraine .

the eu and ukraine signed the parts of ukraine's aa dealing with political issues in march 2014 and the parts dealing with economic issues ( including the dcfta ) on june 27 .

ratification of the pact was initially delayed due to russian threats to block ukrainian imports from russian markets unless the pact was modified to protect russia's interests .

the eu and ukraine refused to do so , and the european parliament and the ukrainian parliament ratified the accord on september 16 , 2014 .

moscow responded by closing off the import of selected ukrainian products .

however , the eu and ukraine did appear to bow to russian threats by agreeing to postpone implementation of the dcfta until 2016 .

in the interim , ukraine was granted unilateral trade preferences from the eu .

the aa with the eu partially came into effect on january 1 , 2016 .

provisional application rather than complete application occurred because the agreement must be ratified by all 28 eu member states .

in april 2016 , voters in the netherlands rejected the agreement , forcing the government to withhold ratification .

the dutch government and the eu then began negotiations to reach a compromise that would allow the dutch to ratify the aa .

in december , the dutch presented a document stating that the netherlands wanted to make it clear that the aa was not a "stepping stone" for ukraine to become a member of the eu , nor did it contain an obligation for the eu or its member states to provide collective security guarantees or other military aid or assistance to ukraine .

the eu council , at its december summit , accepted the dutch proposals , although not without some dissention among a few member states , and are now awaiting a ratification vote by the dutch parliament .

the aa does provide ukraine with the possibility of a gradual improvement in the ukrainian economy as the trade relationship begins to take hold and matures .

as expected , as soon as the agreement went into force , russia suspended its own long - standing free - trade deal with ukraine and banned imports of ukrainian food .

in addition to the aid package and the aa , the eu established a high level investment forum / task force and created a dedicated ukraine support group , composed of experts from eu institutions and member states in different sectors , to provide advice and support to the ukrainian authorities in the mentioned reform sectors .

the eu also helped modernize ukraine's natural gas transit system and worked on reversing the flow of pipelines through slovakia so that ukraine can receive gas from the west .

finally , the eu agreed to accelerate its visa liberalization action plan to allow ukrainians to travel throughout the eu , although that agreement had not been implemented by the end of 2016 .

despite hopes for a closer association with europe promoted by veterans of the maidan protests , some in ukraine and europe believe that post - maidan disenchantment with europe may be growing .

these observers claim that oligarch - run media outlets , which oppose reform and populist leaders who want a change in government , are increasingly promoting anti - eu messages .

pointing to the difficulty in the eu's ratification of the aa with kyiv and the delays associated with implementation of the visa liberalization agreement , some in ukraine are beginning to conclude that key eu member states are dragging their feet and have failed to honor their promises to ukraine .

although the 2008 nato summit in bucharest declared that ukraine would eventually become a nato member , no date was ever set for that goal to be accomplished .

due to the current military instability in ukraine's east , the annexation of crimea by russia , and concerns among several nato allies over russia's actions to keep ukraine from becoming too close to europe and the united states , it is unlikely that ukraine would receive a membership action plan ( map ) from nato in the near future .

nevertheless , nato is assisting ukraine .

at the july 8-9 , 2016 , nato summit in warsaw , the nato - ukraine commission met .

nato pledged additional training and technical support for the ukrainian military and endorsed a previously proposed comprehensive assistance package ( cap ) .

the cap is intended to streamline and enhance nato's ongoing support for ukraine in the following areas: advisory support: resident and nonresident nato and allied advisers are assisting ukraine in a broad range of defense issues , including logistics and strategic - level reform .

defense reform: key assistance includes capacity and institution building , professional development of civilian employees , and strategic communications .

defense education: allied experts are cooperating with eight defense education institutions , three training centers , and the diplomatic academy in ukraine to improve staff skills and develop curricula that meet western standards .

countering improvised explosive devices ( ied ) and demining: nato is conducting humanitarian demining operations and will implement a project to increase ukraine's capabilities to counter ieds .

explosive ordnance disposal: allies are supporting ukraine in disposing of obsolete small arms / light weapons , ammunition , and anti - personnel mines .

in addition , the alliance restated its commitment , made at the 2014 wales summit , to established five trust funds to support ukraine .

these trust funds include command , control , communications and computers ( c4 ) ; logistics and standardization ; cyber defense ; military career transition ; and medical rehabilitation .

the united states established diplomatic relations with ukraine in 1991 , following ukraine's independence from the soviet union .

the u.s. - ukraine charter on strategic partnership highlights the importance of the bilateral relationship and outlines enhanced cooperation in the areas of defense , security , economics and trade , energy security , democracy , and cultural exchanges .

it also emphasizes the continued commitment of the united states to support enhanced engagement between ukraine and the eu and nato .

the united states is strongly committed to ukraine's turn to the west and to the ukrainian government's commitment to reform and anticorruption initiatives .

the united states has committed significant financial and technical assistance to ukraine to achieve those goals .

visits by vice president biden , secretary of state kerry , usaid assistant administrator tom melia , and , on several occasions , assistant secretary of state victoria nuland have reaffirmed this support , most recently during assistant secretary nuland's june 22 , 2016 , visit and secretary kerry's july 6 , 2016 , travels to kyiv .

on may 13 , vice president biden spoke with president poroshenko and prime minister groysman and informed president poroshenko that the united states had approved a third $1 billion loan guarantee agreement , which will support continued progress on ukrainian reforms‎ .

the united states has granted ukraine market economy status , giving ukraine permanent normal trade relations status .

ukraine is currently the united states' 80 th - largest goods trading partner , with $2.2 billion in total ( two - way ) goods trade during 2014 .

goods exports totaled $1.2 billion ; goods imports totaled $0.9 billion .

u.s. exports to ukraine include coal , machinery , vehicles , agricultural products , fish and seafood , and aircraft .

u.s. imports from ukraine include iron and steel , inorganic chemicals , oil , iron and steel products , aircraft , and agricultural products .

the u.s. congress has been an active participant in the effort to address the ukraine crisis .

congress has focused on providing assistance to the ukrainian government and supporting sanctions against russia for its occupation of crimea and its efforts to destabilize ukraine .

as early as january 2014 , the senate passed s.res .

319 .

among other provisions , the resolution urged the united states and the eu to work together to promote a peace ful resolution of the crisis that moves ukraine toward a future in the eur o - atlantic community ; encouraged all parties to avoid violence an d engage in dialogue ; and stated that , in the event of further government violence against peaceful protestors , the president and congress should consider whether to apply targeted sanctions , including visa bans and asset freezes , against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence .

on february 10 , 2014 , the house passed h.res .

447 by a vote of 381 to 2 .

the resolution contained provisions broadly similar to those of s.res .

319 , including raising the possibility of sanctions against ukrainian leaders if they use violence against protestors .

in april 2014 , president obama signed into law h.r .

4152 , which authorized aid to help ukraine carry out reforms ; provided security assistance to ukraine and other central and eastern european countries ; and required the president to impose visa bans and asset seizures against persons in ukraine and russia who were responsible for violence or for undermining the peace , security , stability , sovereignty , or territorial integrity of ukraine .

the president also signed s. 2183 , a related bill requiring radio free europe - radio liberty and voice of america to increase broadcasting in eastern ukraine , crimea , and moldova .

several other pieces of legislation were adopted by the house and senate over the period of the crisis , including urging nato allies and european union member states to immediately suspend military cooperation with russia ; to adopt visa , financial , trade , and other sanctions on senior russian and ukrainian officials and oligarchs complicit in russia's intervention and interference in ukraine ; requiring the u.s. government to assist ukraine to recover assets stolen by the previous regime through corruption ; to provide accurate information to eastern ukraine , crimea , and moldova in order to counteract inflammatory russian propaganda ; authorizing increased military and economic assistance for ukraine ; and authorizing support for russian civil society and democracy organizations .

perhaps the most important piece of legislation passed near the end of the 113 th congress was the ukrainian freedom support act ( p.l .

113-272 ) .

in it congress called on the president to increase the pressure on russia by targeting rosoboronexport and gazprom , and prohibiting export - import bank programs , government procurement contracts , exports of arms and dual - use goods and services , access to property , the u.s. banking system , or entry into the united states .

the act also authorized the president to target russian financial institutions and foreign financial institutions that engaged in russia's defense and energy sectors .

at its signing , the president stated that while he did not intend to make use of the additional authorities , he would continue to work with international allies to respond to developments in ukraine .

one issue that sparked significant congressional debate was whether the united states should supply defensive weapons to ukraine .

some members of congress have expressed support for going beyond the nonlethal support given by the united states so far to provide "defensive weapons" such as man - portable anti - tank weapons .

other suggested assistance includes additional nonlethal items , such as secure communications equipment , reconnaissance drones , and radars capable of tracking longer - range heavy artillery , not just mortars .

in february 2015 , a bipartisan group of 15 senators sent a letter to president obama urging him to act on the authorization provided by the ukrainian freedom support act to supply an "immediate infusion of effective defensive military equipment and financial aid to thwart putin's naked aggression .

defensive military assistance — such as anti - tank weapons , counter - battery radars , armored humvees , and increased training — are all critical to ensuring ukraine has the capabilities to defend its territory and its citizens. .

advocates of arming ukraine stated that sanctions alone were unlikely to stop russian aggression and that boosting ukraine's defense capabilities was essential to stop further russian conquest of ukrainian territory and to pressure putin to agree to a genuine peace agreement .

those opposed to arming ukraine argued that putin could use the move as an excuse to escalate the conflict beyond the desire to respond , thereby increasing the level of violence .

some experts concluded that escalation could have resulted in a new cold war , eliminating the possibility for u.s. - russian cooperation on key issues elsewhere .

others felt it would also split western unity on russia policy , as france and germany were strongly opposed to arming the ukrainians .

in the 2015 defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , congress supported an enhanced security assistance package for ukraine , and expanded that initiative in the 2016 ndaa .

in the fy2017 ndaa , congress extended the authority to provide additional security assistance to ukraine through december 31 , 2018 , and authorized the use of up to $350 million in fy2017 .

the ndaa , however , would limit the obligation or expenditure of funds to $175 million of the funds authorized to be appropriated in fy2017 until a certification is made that ukraine has taken substantial action on defense institutional reforms .

on september 21 , 2016 , the u.s. house adopted the stand for ukraine act ( h.r .

5094 , engel ) .

the legislation addresses the ongoing crisis in ukraine by clarifying the position of the united states on russia's illegal occupation of crimea , tightening sanctions on russia , and addressing new options to provide support for ukraine .

h.r .

5094 would link any sanctions relief to russia fulfilling its obligations under the minsk agreement , and it would make crimea - related sanctions permanent so long as the russian occupation there continues .

the legislation would also have tightened sanctions enforcement with a new anti - evasion framework and require regular reports on banks illegally controlling ukrainian assets — particularly russian banks in crimea .

additionally , the bill would try to drive new private - sector investment to ukraine , clamp down on russia buying defense equipment or services from nato allies , target human rights abuses in russian - occupied areas , and call for a strategy to push back against russian propaganda .

in the waning hours of the 114 th congress , a senate version of the act was introduced by senator menendez of new jersey .

however , that legislation was not considered by the senate .

ukraine continues to face two serious political challenges .

first , the prolonged discord at the beginning of 2016 over how to replace yatsenyuk , create a new government , and avoid national elections stymied the political process and fueled doubts among the public regarding the reform agenda .

for some , reforming ukraine is not rocket science , but it is also not easy and has had to be forced all along the way .

prime minister groysman , who came into office with little public confidence in his willingness to seriously tackle the root causes of much of the country's corruption , has since shown a relatively strong commitment to enact reforms and has appeared to be less intimidated than feared by those who oppose those reforms .

the potential for a significant period of instability and the possible necessity of a new national election in 2016 , especially in mid - summer , when the government was hit with several political developments and challenges , was avoided .

nevertheless , after 10 months of the groysman government , those doubts still persist .

instability has recently increased , in part due to the reemergence of powerful oligarchs and others with entrenched interests in not seeing too much change and attempting in subtle ways to derail the reformist agenda .

these attempts by some to stall the reforms have presented additional challenges to the reform agenda which groysman must quickly overcome in 2017 or , as some have suggested , his government could be confronted with a no - confidence measure , which could result in a new national election .

the united states and europe , while urging a faster pace for reforms and more confidence - building among the public , would like to avoid a new national election in 2017 , as signs indicate that opposition forces could present a strong challenge — aided , for many , by moscow .

the other major challenge for kyiv is of course eastern ukraine but also , fundamentally , vladimir putin .

to putin , according to many , ukraine is not a legitimate state and ukrainians are not an independent people .

ukraine is merely a territory that russia has a right to or a state that moscow should have influence over , regardless of who lives there .

as long as these attitudes persist in moscow , there can be no real solution to the conflict , regardless of how hard the west tries .

the fighting between russian - supported separatists and the ukrainian military along the demarcation line continues to flare up at times , resulting in continued fatalities and casualties .

these flare - ups in fighting , despite the attempts to carry out long - term cease - fires and troop withdrawals , have been seen as another indication that the kremlin - supported separatists have no intention of honoring the cease - fire provisions of the minsk - 2 agreement .

in addition , according to the osce monitoring mission , there have been periodic reports that weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern ukraine from russia .

nevertheless , many analysts believe that the resumption of large - scale fighting in eastern ukraine is not likely in the short term , although with kyiv showing no sign of bending , heavy fighting could resume .

at the very least , the region continues to evolve into a frozen conflict .

beyond the need for a cease - fire , the separatist rebels in the donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing other parts of the minsk - 2 agreement .

although elections are supposed to take place in the disputed territory , it appears unlikely at this time that the separatists would allow a totally free or fair election .

and , although president putin apparently told the normandy group that the osce would have total access to the area to monitor the elections , many seem doubtful that the rebels would allow such access to all voting places or guarantee the election observers' safety .

the facts on the ground in the donbas have also created an internal challenge to the government in that the stalemate in the donbas continues to fuel the growing gap between those individuals , particularly inside ukraine , who do not want to implement parts of the minsk - 2 agreement — particularly by amending the ukrainian constitution — or to accommodate the separatists at all until the separatists fulfill their responsibilities to minsk - 2 and those , under pressure from the outside , who want to keep the process moving forward as long as the other side appears willing to do so .

this , of course , could change as putin and his supporters try to stir up political chaos in kyiv or conclude that the mood of european countries and united states to support kyiv is diminishing .

putin could offer to hold elections anyway , though such elections likely would be flawed .

because some european leaders have suggested that sanctions could be incrementally reduced as individual elements of the minsk - 2 agreement , rather than the agreement in its entirety , are achieved , putin could conclude that for the west , progress — however imperfect — would nevertheless be progress , and that would be good enough for putin's overall plans for ukraine .

the dilemma for poroshenko and groysman would be whether to accept the kremlin's conditions .

kyiv's response could serve to weaken european resolve to continue to impose sanctions on russia , even though the sanctions were initially imposed in reaction to russia's annexation of crimea and its activities in eastern ukraine , and not because of the minsk - 2 agreement .

the new unknown factor for ukraine's future also will be the position of the new u.s. administration .

if washington signals a willingness to step back from its support for ukraine and the sanctions on russia , many believe eu solidarity will crack and ukraine could find itself quickly searching for a way to accommodate moscow .

at the same time , although a period of political stability and progress in the economic and reform efforts of the groysman government would be good for kyiv and the west , despite the continued conflict in the east , such progress could also cause problems for kyiv .

continued success in reform , coupled with the eu's decision to renew sanctions on russia until july 2017 and continued nato military deployments in eastern europe , could force putin to react .

putin and his allies have not reacted well to europe's continued sanctions or to recent nato actions , and faced with actual reform successes in kyiv , could be forced to react in some way to protect his position at home .

some also feel that with putin's objectives in syria well on their way to being realized , putin could turn his attention back to ukraine .

for instance , the kremlin could support an increase in fighting in eastern ukraine to slow the reforms and to generate opposition to the government for its inability to control the conflict .

the kremlin's disinformation and cyberattack efforts could increase in anticipation of national elections in the spring .

increased support channeled to opposition political groups intended to stir the skeptical public could place additional pressure on the groysman government .

or putin could offer some kind of deal to the incoming u.s. administration to try to draw a wedge between washington and brussels .

all of these options would pose substantial risks for the interests of the united states and the eu to promote stability , security , and economic development in ukraine .

after an initial round of sanctions imposed on russia for its annexation of crimea and military activity in eastern ukraine , the united states and the eu continued to add additional travel freezes , visa restrictions , and economic sanctions on russia for its failure to cease its support for the pro - separatists' actions in the donbas regions of eastern ukraine .

on march 20 , 2014 , the administration announced asset freezes on 16 high - ranking russian government officials and members of parliament .

four additional persons , all wealthy businessmen , were sanctioned as members of putin's "inner circle. .

one bank , bank rossiya , was also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior russian officials .

on april 28 , the administration imposed asset freezes on an additional seven senior russian officials .

they include igor sechin , the president of rosneft , russia's leading oil company , and former chief of staff to putin .

the administration also sanctioned 17 entities , including banks and other businesses .

the companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in putin's inner circle , such as energy trader genneddy timchenko and bankers arkady and boris rotenberg , or to bank rossiya .

due to privacy laws , the names of those receiving visa bans have not been made public , but it is likely that they include those persons under asset freezes .

on july 16 , 2014 , the united states imposed sanctions unilaterally on key firms in russia's financial , energy , and military technology sectors — including gazprombank , vnesheconombank ( veb ) , novatek , and rosneft .

u.s. firms and persons are barred from dealing in new equity or loans of greater than 90 days maturity for these companies .

on july 27 , the administration responded by adding bank of moscow , vtb bank , and russian agricultural bank to the list of companies with restricted access to u.s. capital markets .

in addition , the u.s. assets of united shipbuilding company were frozen .

in september 2014 , in response to a separatist offensive in ukraine supported by russian combat troops , the united states imposed sanctions against additional key russian companies , including transneft , lukoil , gazprom neft , rostec , surgutneftegaz , and sberbank .

on december 19 , 2014 , the president issued an executive order to bar any u.s. person from participating in new investment in crimea ; imports from and exports to the crimea region ; and any financing , facilitation , or guarantee of any related transaction by a u.s. person .

after the malaysian airlines tragedy on july 17 , 2014 , the eu largely matched and even in some cases went beyond u.s. sanctions .

on july 22 , eu foreign ministers agreed to expand ukraine - related sanctions against russia by adding individuals and companies to the existing travel ban and asset freeze list , including some persons in putin's inner circle .

on july 29 , the eu agreed to impose sanctions on russia's financial , defense , and energy sectors .

these sanctions were strengthened in september , in response to a massive russian - supported offensive in ukraine .

the sanctions barred eu nationals and companies from providing loans to five major russian state - owned banks and barred trade in new bonds , equity , or similar financial instruments with a maturity exceeding 30 days , issued by the same banks .

the same restrictions were also extended to three major russian defense companies and three major energy companies .

the eu banned certain services necessary for deep water oil exploration and production , arctic oil exploration or production , and shale oil projects in russia .

the eu has also banned exporting dual - use goods and technology for military use in russia .

the eu also added new persons to its travel ban and asset freeze list .

in december 2014 , the eu banned or restricted most european investment , trade , and tourism with russian - occupied crimea .

as of january 2015 , the eu has sanctions on 150 persons and 28 entities .

the eu is currently considering additional sanctions in response to russian support for a separatist offensive in eastern ukraine in january and february 2015 .

in an announcement published in the u.s. federal register on september 2 , 2015 , the u.s. administration said it was adding 29 people to its sanctions list .

some of those added have ties to kremlin - linked insiders and companies who were previously sanctioned , including gennady timchenko , a wealthy oil trader believed to be close to president vladimir putin .

a total of 33 companies or other entities were cited , including subsidiaries of state - owned oil giant rosneft , headed by putin ally igor sechin , and the company that manufactures kalashnikov assault rifles .

on september 1 , 2016 , the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) updated the specially designated nationals list and the sectoral sanctions identifications list to target sanctions evasion and other activities related to the conflict in ukraine .

included in the new sanctions were some 37 individuals , as well as multiple subsidiaries of russian gas giant gazprom , some 18 companies operating in crimea , including a number of defense and shipbuilding firms , 11 crimean officials , and 7 companies directly involved in the construction of the 11-mile road - and - rail connection across the kerch strait in crimea .

on december 20 , 2016 , the united states blacklisted an additional 15 russian individuals and companies for their dealings in crimea and ukraine .

the treasury department designated seven individuals and eight corporate entities involved in a range of projects , including the construction of a bridge connecting russia to the crimean peninsula .

it also targeted businesspeople who are associates of president vladimir v. putin or are involved in activities that aid in russia's destabilization of ukraine .

