this report provides background information and issues for congress on the aegis ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program , which is carried out by the missile defense agency ( mda ) and the navy , and gives navy aegis cruisers and destroyers a capability for conducting bmd operations .

the issue for congress is whether to approve , reject , or modify department of defense ( dod ) acquisition strategies and proposed funding levels for the aegis bmd program .

congress's decisions on the aegis bmd program could significantly affect u.s. bmd capabilities and funding requirements , and the bmd - related industrial base .

for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the aegis bmd program may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

 table 2 summarizes congressional action on the fy2020 request for mda procurement and research and development funding for the aegis bmd program .

appendix a. aegis bmd flight tests table a - 1 presents a summary of aegis bmd flight tests since january 2002 .

as shown in the table , since january 2002 , the aegis bmd system has achieved 33 successful exo - atmospheric intercepts in 42 attempts using the sm - 3 missile ( including 4 successful intercepts in 5 attempts by japanese aegis ships , and 2 successful intercepts in 3 attempts attempt using the aegis ashore system ) , and 7 successful endo - atmospheric intercepts in 7 attempts using the sm - 2 block iv and sm - 6 missiles , making for a combined total of 40 successful intercepts in 49 attempts .

in addition , on february 20 , 2008 , a bmd - capable aegis cruiser operating northwest of hawaii used a modified version of the aegis bmd system with the sm - 3 missile to shoot down an inoperable u.s. surveillance satellite that was in a deteriorating orbit .

including this intercept in the count increases the totals to 34 successful exo - atmospheric intercepts in 43 attempts using the sm - 3 missile , and 41 successful exo - and endo - atmospheric intercepts in 50 attempts using sm - 3 , sm - 2 block iv , and sm - 6 missiles .

