the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) was established by the national and community service trust act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-82 ) .

operating as an independent federal agency , the cncs oversees all national and community service programs authorized by the national and community service act of 1990 ( ncsa ) and the domestic volunteer service act of 1973 ( dvsa ) .

the ncsa and dvsa were last reauthorized by the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( p.l .

111-13 ) .

although authorization of appropriations under the serve america act expired in fy2014 , ncsa and dvsa programs have continued to receive funding through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education and related agencies appropriations act ( labor - hhs - ed ) .

cncs programs are funded through the end of fy2018 under the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

the final enacted appropriations law for fy2018 included $1.064 billion for cncs .

the overall fy2018 funding level for cncs is 3% above the fy2017 level of $1.030 billion .

this report provides a summary of each ncsa and dvsa program and compares funding under labor - hhs - ed in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) ; the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) ; the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) ; and the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

the purpose of the ncsa is to address unmet human , educational , environmental , and public safety needs and to renew an ethic of civil responsibility and community spirit in the united states by encouraging citizens to participate in national service programs .

the ncsa was enacted in 1990 as p.l .

101-610 and last reauthorized in 2011 by the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( p.l .

111-13 ) .

ncsa programs include americorps state and national grants , the national service trust , the national civilian community corps ( nccc ) , and learn and serve america ( lsa ) .

see table a - 1 for ncsa funding information .

program focus : created in 1993 , programs under americorps state and national grants identify and address critical community needs , including tutoring and mentoring disadvantaged youth , managing or operating after - school programs , helping communities respond to disasters , improving health services , building affordable housing , and cleaning parks and streams .

grants include formula grants to states and territories , and competitive grants to states , territories , indian tribes , and national nonprofit organizations .

volunteer eligibility : individuals aged 17 and older .

amount of volunteer service : full - time or part - time for a 9- to 12-month period .

volunteer benefits : some full - time americorps members receive a living allowance , health coverage , and child care for those who qualify .

participants in americorps may receive educational awards for their service through the national service trust ( see the following section of this report ) .

americorps members can also obtain loan forbearance ( i.e. , postponement ) in the repayment of their qualified student loans while participating in these programs and have the interest on their accrued loans paid from the trust once they earn an educational award .

administrative entity : each state and territory governor appoints members of a service commission to manage , monitor , and administer annual grant applications for the state .

cncs reviews the state commission formula package and makes the awards .

for multistate or national awards , grantees are selected competitively by the cncs headquarters office .

the national service trust , a special account in the u.s. treasury , provides educational awards for participants in americorps grants , nccc , and volunteers in service to america ( vista ) .

an individual may not receive more than an amount equal to the aggregate value of two awards for full - time service .

the educational award for full - time service is equal to the maximum amount of a pell grant in effect at the beginning of the federal fiscal year in which the corporation approves the national service position .

americorps members serving in programs funded in fy2018 will receive an education award of up to $5,920 , which is the pell grant maximum in the year the positions were approved .

prorated awards are also made for other terms of service , such as half - time ( see table 1 ) .

americorps members aged 55 or older at the beginning of a term of service may transfer the education award to a child , grandchild , or foster child .

americorps state and national participants can serve a maximum of four terms of service .

full - time , half - time , reduced half - time , quarter time , and minimum time terms of service each count as one term of service .

in addition to education awards , the national service trust provides interest payments on qualified student loans to recipients of americorps grants and participants in nccc or vista who have obtained forbearance ( postponement of loan repayment ) .

program focus : nccc is a full - time residential program that focuses on short - term projects that meet national and community needs related to disaster relief , infrastructure improvement , environment and energy conservation , environmental stewardship , and urban and rural development .

volunteer eligibility : individuals aged 18 to 24 .

by statute ( 42 u.s.c.s .

ยง12613 ( c ) ) , the corporation is required to take steps to increase the percentage of program participants who are disadvantaged to 50% of all participants .

amount of volunteer service : participants can serve up to two years full time .

full - time service is defined as 10 months each year .

volunteer benefits : nccc participants may receive a living allowance , room and board , limited medical benefits , and an educational award through the national service trust .

administrative entity : nccc programs are administered by the cncs .

cncs continues to have broad authority to fund a range of activities as authorized by subtitle i - h , investment for quality and innovation .

the serve america act established the following programs .

social innovation fund ( sif ) .

the social innovation fund leverages federal investments to increase state , local , business , and philanthropic resources to replicate and expand proven solutions and invest in the support of innovation for community challenges .

p.l .

115-141 does not include funding for the social innovation fund .

volunteer generation fund .

the volunteer generation fund awards competitive grants to state commissions and nonprofit organizations to develop and support community - based entities that recruit , manage , or support volunteers .

innovation , demonstration , and call to service .

the corporation supports innovative initiatives and demonstration programs , such as the call to service , which would engage americans in community needs , such as the martin luther king jr. national day of service and the september 11 th national day of service and remembrance .

since 1990 , ncsa has authorized community service programs benefitting students and communities through "service - learning," which integrates community service projects with classroom learning .

this program was last funded in fy2010 by the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the dvsa was enacted in 1973 as p.l .

93-113 .

like the ncsa , it was last reauthorized in 2011 by the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( p.l .

111-13 ) .

the purpose of dvsa is to foster and expand voluntary citizen service throughout the nation .

dvsa programs are designed to help the poor , the disadvantaged , the vulnerable , and the elderly .

administered by the cncs , dvsa programs include vista and the national senior volunteer corps .

see table a - 1 for dvsa funding information .

program focus : the vista program encourages americans to participate in community service in an effort to eliminate poverty .

volunteer eligibility : individuals aged 18 and older .

amount of volunteer service : vista members serve full time for up to five years .

volunteer benefits: vista members may receive a living allowance , student - loan forbearance , health coverage , relocation costs , training , and child care assistance .

vista members have the option of receiving an educational award , which is equivalent to the educational awards earned by americorps or nccc members , or they may choose to receive an end - of - service lump sum stipend of $1,500 instead .

like nccc members , vista members receive an educational award based on the pell grant .

full - time , half - time , reduced half - time , quarter time , and minimum time terms of service each count as one term of service .

administrative entity : cncs state offices .

the national senior service corps consists of three programs , summarized below: the retired senior volunteer program ( rsvp ) , the foster grandparent program ( fgp ) , and the senior companion program ( scp ) .

program focus : volunteers in rsvp may play community service roles in education , health and nutrition services , community and economic development , and other areas of human need .

volunteer eligibility : individuals aged 55 and older .

amount of volunteer service : participants can contribute up to 40 hours each week .

volunteer benefits : the rsvp offers no direct benefits ( eg , stipends or educational awards ) , with the exception of mileage reimbursement and insurance coverage during assignments .

administrative entity : cncs state offices .

program focus : fgp participants support children with exceptional needs by providing aid and services .

fgp participants mentor children and teenagers , teach model parenting skills , and help care for premature infants and children with disabilities .

volunteer eligibility : individuals must be 55 or older to participate in fgp and meet income eligibility requirements to receive a stipend .

amount of volunteer service : volunteer schedules , which range from 15 to 40 hours each week , average 20 hours per week .

volunteer benefits : income eligible participants may receive a tax - free hourly stipend .

participants may also receive mileage reimbursements and accident , liability , and automobile insurance coverage during assignments .

administrative entity : cncs state offices .

program focus : scp gives older adults the opportunity to assist homebound elderly individuals to remain in their own homes and to enable institutionalized elderly individuals to return to home care settings .

volunteer eligibility : individuals must be 55 or older to participate in scp and meet income eligibility requirements to receive a stipend .

amount of volunteer service : volunteer schedules , which range from 15 to 40 hours each week , average 20 hours per week .

volunteer benefits : participants may receive a stipend .

participants may also receive mileage reimbursements and accident , liability , and automobile insurance coverage during assignments .

administrative entity : cncs state offices .

