the civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) was created by president truman in 1951 .

as a result , the departments of commerce ( doc ) and defense ( dod ) formulated a contingency plan to meet the nation's airlift needs in times of crisis .

when the department of transportation ( dot ) was created , it assumed doc's role in the craf program , and today , dod and dot work together to manage the craf program .

this report provides background , analyzes current issues , and summarizes recent legislation for the craf .

the craf supports dod airlift requirements in emergencies when the need for airlift exceeds the capacity of dod's organic airlift fleet .

while dod strategic airlift aircraft are designed to carry outsized and oversized cargo , craf air carriers are primarily expected to transport passengers and cargo pallets .

all craf participants must be u.s. carriers fully certified by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , and meet the stringent standards of the federal aviation regulations pertaining to commercial airlines ( part 121 ) .

to join craf , a carrier must commit at least 30% of its craf - capable passenger fleet , and 15% of its craf - capable cargo fleet .

aircraft committed must be u.s. registered and air carriers must also commit and maintain at least four complete crews for each aircraft in craf .

air mobility command ( amc ) analysts implement a number of surveillance initiatives to monitor the carrier's safety record , operations and maintenance status , contract performance , financial condition and management initiatives , summarizing significant trends in a comprehensive review every six months .

these initiatives are supplemented by an open flow of information on all contract carriers between amc and the faa through established liaison officers .

craf presents benefits and opportunities for both the dod and the u.s. airline industry — by all accounts it appears to be a symbiotic relationship .

yet , as circumstances change , pressures and diverging interests may emerge that could bring changes to craf .

this section provides a summary of recent legislation regarding the department of defense's ( dod's ) civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) program .

the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) contained three provisions that affected the craf ( p.l .

110-181 ) .

first , section 356 called for a comprehensive and independent assessment of craf .

this assessment is designed to examine current and long - range issues associated with craf and make specific recommendations for preserving and improving the program .

the fy2008 ndaa required a report to be delivered to congressional defense committee no later than april 2008 .

an excerpt of section 356 is provided at appendix a .

second , section 378 of the fy2008 ndaa extended authorization of the aviation insurance program ( aip ) from march 30 , 2008 , to december 30 , 2103 .

as part of the aip , the faa offers a non - premium insurance program to air carriers that participate in the craf .

the congressional budget office estimated "that extending the craf program through 2013 would have no significant budgetary impact. .

third , section 1046 called for a dod study on the size and mix of the airlift force to specifically include how the craf could potentially affect dod's airlift fleet requirements .

this report is expected to be completed by january 2009 .

an excerpt of section 1046 is provided at appendix b .

many expect this study to inform force structure decisions regarding the optimal mix of dod's organic air mobility fleets and the craf .

in fy2007 , the senate version of the fy2007 ndaa contained a provision ( sec .

1052 ) that would allow the department of defense to guarantee higher minimum levels of business to u.s. civil reserve air fleet carriers than are currently authorized by law .

however , the provision was not adopted in the final legislation ( p.l .

109-364 ) .

section 131 of the fy2006 ndaa contained a provision that required dod to conduct an analysis of inter - theater airlift capabilities to include the impact of the craf on dod's inter - theater airlift force structure requirements ( p.l .

109-163 ) .

appendix a. fy2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) , section 356 section 356 of the conference report ( h.rept .

110-477 , december 6 , 2007 ) to h.r .

1585 stated the following: sec .

356 .

independent assessment of civil reserve air fleet viability ( a ) independent assessment required - the secretary of defense shall provide for an independent assessment of the viability of the civil reserve air fleet to be conducted by a federally - funded research and development center selected by the secretary .

 ( b ) contents of assessment - the assessment required by subsection ( a ) shall include each of the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the civil reserve air fleet as of the date of the enactment of this act , including an assessment of — ( a ) the level of increased use of commercial assets to fulfill department of defense transportation requirements as a result of the increased global mobility requirements in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; ( b ) the extent of charter air carrier participation in fulfilling increased department of defense transportation requirements as a result of the increased global mobility requirements in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; ( c ) any policy of the secretary of defense to limit the percentage of income a single air carrier participating in the civil reserve air fleet may earn under contracts with the secretary during any calendar year and the effects of such policy on the air carrier industry in peacetime and during periods during which the armed forces are deployed in support of a contingency operation for which the civil reserve air fleet is not activated ; and ( d ) any risks to the charter air carrier industry as a result of the expansion of the industry in response to contingency operations resulting in increased demand by the department of defense .

 ( 2 ) a strategic assessment of the viability of the civil reserve air fleet that compares such viability as of the date of the enactment of this act with the projected viability of the civil reserve air fleet 5 , 10 , and 15 years after the date of the enactment of this act , including for activations at each of stages 1 , 2 , and 3 — ( a ) an examination of the requirements of the department of defense for the civil reserve air fleet for the support of operational and contingency plans , including any anticipated changes in the department's organic airlift capacity , logistics concepts , and personnel and training requirements ; ( b ) an assessment of air carrier participation in the civil reserve air fleet ; and ( c ) a comparison between the requirements of the department described in subparagraph ( a ) and air carrier participation described in subparagraph ( b ) .

 ( 3 ) an examination of any perceived barriers to civil reserve air fleet viability , including — ( a ) the operational planning system of the civil reserve air fleet ; ( b ) the reward system of the civil reserve air fleet ; ( c ) the long - term affordability of the aviation war risk insurance program ; ( d ) the effect on united states air carriers operating overseas routes during periods of civil reserve air fleet activation ; ( e ) increased foreign ownership of united states air carriers ; ( f ) increased operational costs during activation as a result of hazardous duty pay , routing delays , and inefficiencies in cargo handling by the department of defense ; ( g ) the effect of policy initiatives by the secretary of transportation to encourage international code sharing and alliances ; and ( h ) the effect of limitations imposed by the secretary of defense to limit commercial shipping options for certain routes and package sizes .

 ( 4 ) recommendations for improving the civil reserve air fleet program , including an assessment of potential incentives for increasing participation in the civil reserve air fleet program , including establishing a minimum annual purchase amount during peacetime .

 ( c ) submission to congress - upon the completion of the assessment required under subsection ( a ) and by not later than april 1 , 2008 , the secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the assessment .

 ( d ) comptroller general report - not later than 90 days after the report is submitted under subsection ( c ) , the comptroller general shall conduct a review of the assessment required under subsection ( a ) .

appendix b. fy2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) , section 1046 section 1046 of the conference report ( h.rept .

110-477 , december 6 , 2007 ) to h.r .

1585 stated the following: sec .

1046 .

study on size and mix of airlift force .

 ( a ) study required - the secretary of defense shall conduct a requirements - based study on alternatives for the proper size and mix of fixed - wing intratheater and intertheater airlift assets to meet the national military strategy for each of the following timeframes: fiscal year 2012 , 2018 , and 2024 .

the study shall — ( 1 ) focus on organic and commercially programmed airlift capabilities ; ( 2 ) analyze the full - spectrum lifecycle costs of the various alternatives for organic models of each of the following aircraft: c - 5a / b / c / m , c - 17a , kc - x , kc - 10 , kc - 135r , c - 130e / h / j , joint cargo aircraft ; and ( 3 ) incorporate the augmentation capability , viability , and feasibility of the civil reserve air fleet during activation stages i , ii , and iii .

 ( b ) use of ffrdc - the secretary shall select , to carry out the study required by subsection  ( a ) , a federally funded research and development center that has experience and expertise in conducting similar studies .

 ( c ) study plan - the study required by subsection ( a ) shall be carried out under a study plan .

the study plan shall be developed as follows: ( 1 ) the center selected under subsection ( b ) shall develop the study plan and shall , not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this act , submit the study plan to the congressional defense committees , the secretary , and the comptroller general of the united states .

 ( 2 ) the comptroller general shall review the study plan to determine whether it is complete and objective , and whether it has any flaws or weaknesses in scope or methodology , and shall , not later than 30 days after receiving the study plan , submit to the secretary and the center a report that contains the results of that review and provides any recommendations that the comptroller general considers appropriate for improvements to the study plan .

 ( 3 ) the center shall modify the study plan to incorporate the recommendations under paragraph ( 2 ) and shall , not later than 45 days after receiving that report , submit to the secretary and the congressional defense committees a report on those modifications .

the report shall describe each modification and , if the modifications do not incorporate one or more of the recommendations , shall explain the reasons for not doing so .

 ( d ) elements of study plan - the study plan required by subsection ( c ) shall address , at minimum , the following: ( 1 ) a description of lift requirements and operating profiles for airlift aircraft required to meet the national military strategy , including assumptions regarding the following: ( a ) current and future military combat and support missions .

 ( b ) the planned force structure growth of the military services .

 ( c ) potential changes in lift requirements , including the deployment of the future combat systems by the army .

 ( d ) new capability in airlift to be provided by the kc ( x ) aircraft and the expected utilization of such capability , including its use in intratheater lift .

 ( e ) the utilization of intertheater lift aircraft in intratheater combat mission support roles .

 ( f ) the availability and application of civil reserve air fleet assets in future military scenarios .

 ( g ) air mobility requirements associated with the global rebasing initiative of the department of defense .

 ( h ) air mobility requirements in support of worldwide peacekeeping and humanitarian missions .

 ( i ) air mobility requirements in support of homeland defense and national emergencies .

 ( j ) the viability and capability of the civil reserve air fleet to augment organic forces in both friendly and hostile environments .

 ( k ) an assessment of the civil reserve air fleet to adequately augment the organic fleet as it relates to commercial inventory management restructuring in response to future commercial markets , streamlining of operations , efficiency measures , or downsizing of the participant .

 ( 2 ) an evaluation of the state of the current airlift fleet of the air force , including assessments of the following: ( a ) the extent to which the increased use of airlift aircraft in on - going operations is affecting the programmed service life of the aircraft of that fleet .

 ( b ) the adequacy of the current airlift force , including whether or not a minimum of 299 strategic airlift aircraft for the air force is sufficient to support future expeditionary combat and non - combat missions , as well as domestic and training mission demands consistent with the requirements of meeting the national military strategy .

 ( c ) the optimal mix of c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft for the strategic airlift fleet of the air force , to include the following: ( i ) the cost - effectiveness of modernizing various iterations of the c - 5a and c - 5b / c aircraft fleet versus procuring additional c - 17 aircraft .

 ( ii ) the military capability , operational availability , usefulness , and service life of the c - 5a / b / c / m aircraft and the c - 17 aircraft .

such an assessment shall examine appropriate metrics , such as aircraft availability rates , departure rates , and mission capable rates , in each of the following cases: ( i ) completion of the avionics modernization program and the reliability enhancement and re - engining program .

 ( ii ) partial completion of the avionics modernization program and the reliability enhancement and re - engining program , with partial completion of either such program being considered the point at which the continued execution of each program is no longer supported by the cost - effectiveness analysis .

 ( iii ) at what specific fleet inventory for each organic aircraft , to include air refueling aircraft used in the airlift role , would it impede the ability of civil reserve air fleet participants to remain a viable augmentation option .

 ( d ) an analysis and assessment of the lessons that may be learned from the experience of the air force in restarting the production line for the c - 5 aircraft after having closed the line for several years , and recommendations for the actions that the department of defense should take to ensure that the production line for the c - 17 aircraft could be restarted if necessary , including — ( i ) an analysis of the methods that were used and costs that were incurred in closing and re - opening the production line for the c - 5 aircraft ; ( ii ) an assessment of the methods and actions that should be employed and the expected costs and risks of closing and re - opening the production line for the c - 17 aircraft in view of that experience .

such analysis and assessment should deal with issues such as production work force , production facilities , tooling , industrial base suppliers , contractor logistics support versus organic maintenance , and diminished manufacturing sources .

 ( e ) assessing the military capability , operational availability , usefulness , service life and optimal mix of intra - theater airlift aircraft , to include — ( i ) the cost - effectiveness of procuring the joint cargo aircraft versus procuring additional c - 130j or refurbishing c - 130e / h platforms to meet intra - theater airlift requirements of the combatant commander and component commands ; and ( ii ) the cost - effectiveness of procuring additional c - 17 aircraft versus procuring additional c - 130j platforms or refurbishing c - 130e / h platforms to meet intra - theater airlift requirements of the combatant commander and component commands .

 ( 3 ) each analysis required by paragraph ( 2 ) shall include — ( a ) a description of the assumptions and sensitivity analysis utilized in the study regarding aircraft performances and cargo loading factors ; and ( b ) a comprehensive statement of the data and assumptions utilized in making the program life cycle cost estimates and a comparison of cost and risk associated with the optimally mixed fleet of airlift aircraft versus the program of record airlift aircraft fleet .

 ( e ) utilization of other studies - the study required by subsection ( a ) shall build upon the results of the 2005 mobility capabilities studies , the on - going intra - theater airlift fleet mix analysis , the intra - theater lift capabilities study , the joint future theater airlift capabilities analysis , and other appropriate studies and analyses , such as fleet viability board reports or special aircraft assessments .

the study shall also include any testing data collected on modernization , recapitalization , and upgrade efforts of current organic aircraft .

 ( f ) collaboration with united states transportation command - in conducting the study required by subsection ( a ) and preparing the report required by subsection ( c ) ( 3 ) , the center shall collaborate with the commander of the united states transportation command .

 ( g ) collaboration with cost analysis improvement group - in conducting the study required by subsection ( a ) and constructing the analysis required by subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) , the center shall collaborate with the cost analysis improvement group of the department of defense .

 ( h ) report - not later than january 10 , 2009 , the center selected under subsection ( b ) shall submit to the secretary and the congressional defense committees a report on the study required by subsection ( a ) .

the report shall be submitted in unclassified form , but shall include a classified annex .

