since the september 11 , 2001 attacks , there has been significant interest in terroristfinancing .

following the attacks , the administration's strategy to combat terrorist financing wasfocused foremost on freezing terrorist assets .

according to the u.s. department of the treasury , theaim of u.s. policy was "starving the terrorists of funding and shutting down the institutions thatsupport or facilitate terrorism. .

 ( 2 ) in the months immediately following the attacks , substantial fundswere frozen internationally .

after this initial sweep , however , the freezing of terrorist assets sloweddown considerably .

according to the department of the treasury's terrorist assets report , as of december 2004,programs targeting assets of international terrorist organizations have resulted in the blocking in theunited states of almost $10 million .

of the $1.6 billion in state sponsors of terrorism's assets locatedin the united states , $1.5 billion have been frozen by u.s. economic sanctions .

of that $1.5 billion,the assets of libya , which were blocked on september , 20 , 2004 , made up all but $425 million .

 ( 3 ) according to many analysts , these numbers are very small and seem to support the 9 / 11commission's conclusion that the united states must "[e]xpect less from trying to dry up terroristmoney and more from following the money for intelligence , as a tool to hunt terrorists , understandtheir networks , and disrupt their operations. .

 ( 4 ) as detailed in the march 2005 u.s. department of state international narcotics controlstrategy report , ( 5 ) theunited states has a three - tiered anti - money laundering - counter - narcotics / counterterrorist financingstrategy that employs: traditional and non - traditional law enforcement techniques and intelligenceoperations to disrupt and dismantle terrorist financiers networks .

 ( these efforts may includeinvestigations , diplomatic actions , criminal prosecutions , designations , among otheractions ) ; capacity building programs to improve the domestic financial , legal , andregulatory institutions of u.s. allies ; and global efforts to deter terrorist financing .

implementing this strategy requires coordination of many different elements of nationalpower including intelligence gathering , financial regulation , law enforcement , and buildinginternational coalitions .

following a review of legislation on terrorist financing , this report providesan agency - by - agency survey of these u.s. efforts .

 ( 6 ) .

"money laundering" has traditionally been understood to mean the process by which "dirty"money derived from illegal activity is disguised as legitimate - - or "clean" - - by virtue of how it isdistributed among financial institutions .

the federal government stepped up its efforts to targetmoney laundering in 1970 with the passage of the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) and subsequentamendments .

in the years following the enactment of the bsa , congress added criminal and civilsanctions for money launderers .

the threat posed by terrorists , however , forced congress in 2001to bring terrorist financing - - which often is accomplished with legally - derived funds - - within therange of activities punishable under the federal money laundering laws .

what follows is an overviewof these laws .

the bank secrecy act .

congress laid thefoundations of the federal anti - money laundering ( aml ) framework in 1970 when it passed thebsa , ( 8 ) the major moneylaundering provisions of which make up the currency and foreign transaction reporting act ( cftra ) .

the bsa framework focuses on financial institutions' record - keeping , so that federalagencies are able to apprehend criminals by tracing their money trails .

 ( 9 ) under this statute andsubsequent amendments to it , primary responsibility rests with the financial institutions themselvesin gathering information and passing it on to federal officials .

cftra also contains civil ( 10 ) and criminal ( 11 ) penalties forviolations ofits reporting requirements .

under cftra , financial institutions must file reports for cash transactions exceeding theamount set by the secretary of the treasury in regulations .

 ( 12 ) the secretary has set theamount for filing these currency transaction reports ( ctrs ) at $10,000 .

 ( 13 ) the secretary alsorequires financial institutions to file suspicious activity reports ( sars ) for transactions of at least$5,000 in which the bank suspects or has reason to suspect the transaction involves illegally - obtainedfunds or is intended to evade reporting requirements .

 ( 14 ) cftra contains significant requirements related to foreign - based monetary transactions .

citizens are required to keep records and file reports regarding transactions with foreign financialagencies , and the treasury secretary must promulgate regulations in this area .

 ( 15 ) the statute also requiresthe filing of reports by anyone who exports from the united states or imports into the united statesa monetary instrument of more than $10,000 .

 ( 16 ) the internal revenue service has certain authorities and responsibilities under the bsa ( seep .

21 ) .

the international emergency economic powersact .

under the international emergency economic powers act ( 17 ) ( ieepa ) , enacted in 1977,the president has broad powers pursuant to a declaration of a national emergency with respect to athreat "which has its source in whole or substantial part outside the united states , to the nationalsecurity , foreign policy , or economy of the united states. .

 ( 18 ) these powers include theability to seize foreign assets under u.s. jurisdiction , to prohibit any transactions in foreignexchange , to prohibit payments between financial institutions involving foreign currency , and toprohibit the import / export of foreign currency .

 ( 19 ) the money laundering control act .

congresscriminalized money laundering in 1986 with the passage of the money laundering control act .

 ( 20 ) defining moneylaundering as conducting financial transactions with property known to be derived from unlawfulactivity in order to further or conceal such activity , the act made three specific types of moneylaundering illegal: 1 ) domestic money laundering ; 2 ) international money laundering ; and 3 ) attempted money laundering uncovered as part of an undercover sting operation .

 ( 21 ) if the transaction is foran amount in excess of $10,000 , the government does not have to show that the defendant knew thetransaction in question was meant to further or conceal an illegal act , only that the defendant knewthe property was procured via illegal activity .

 ( 22 ) the annunzio - wylie anti - money launderingact .

with the passage of the annunzio - wylie anti - money laundering act ( 23 ) in 1992 , congressincreased the penalties for depository institutions that violate the federal anti - money laundering laws .

in addition to authorizing the secretary of the treasury to require filings of the aforementionedsars , the act made it possible for banking regulators to place into conservatorship banks and creditunions that violate these laws .

 ( 24 ) in addition , the act gave the office of the comptroller of thecurrency ( occ ) the power to revoke the charters of national banks found to be guilty of moneylaundering or cash reporting offenses , ( 25 ) and gave the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) theauthority to terminate federal insurance for guilty state banks and savings associations .

 ( 26 ) the annunzio - wylie actalso introduced federal penalties for operating money transmitting businesses ( 27 ) operating without licensesunder state law .

 ( 28 ) the money laundering suppression act .

in theearly 1990s it became apparent that the number of currency transaction reports being filed greatlysurpassed the ability of regulators to analyze them .

so , in 1994 , congress passed legislation ( 29 ) mandating certainexemptions from reporting requirements in an effort to reduce the number of ctr filings by30% .

 ( 30 ) in addition,the act directed the treasury secretary to designate a single agency to receive suspicious activityreport filings .

 ( 31 ) underthis statute , money transmitting businesses are required to register with the treasury secretary .

inaddition , the act clarified the bsa's applicability to state - chartered and tribal gamingestablishments .

 ( 32 ) the money laundering and financial crimes strategyact .

congress in 1998 directed the treasury secretary to develop a nationalstrategy for combating money laundering .

 ( 33 ) as part of this strategy , the treasury secretary - - in consultationwith the u.s. attorney general - - must attempt to prioritize money laundering enforcement effortsby identifying areas of the u.s. as "high - risk money laundering and related financial crimes areas" ( hifcas ) .

 ( 34 ) inaddition , the treasury secretary may issue grants to state and local law enforcement agencies forfighting money laundering in hifcas .

 ( 35 ) title iii of the usa patriot act .

in the wakeof the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress passed the usa patriot act .

 ( 36 ) congress devoted titleiii of this act to combating terrorist financing .

 ( 37 ) given that funds used to finance terrorist activities are often notderived from illegal activities , prosecution for funding terrorist activities under the pre - usapatriot act money laundering laws was difficult .

title iii , however , made providing materialsupport to a foreign terrorist organization a predicate offense for money laundering prosecutionunder section 1956 of title 18 of the u.s. code .

 ( 38 ) under title iii , the treasury secretary may require domestic financial institutions toundertake certain "special measures" if the secretary concludes that specific regions , financialinstitutions , or transactions outside of the united states are of primary money launderingconcern .

 ( 39 ) in additionto retaining more specific records on financial institutions , these special measures include obtaininginformation on beneficial ownership of accounts and information relating to certainpayable - through ( 40 ) andcorrespondent accounts .

 ( 41 ) the treasury secretary is also empowered to prohibit or restrictthe opening of these payable - through and correspondent accounts , ( 42 ) and u.s. financialinstitutions are required to establish internal procedures to detect money laundered through theseaccounts .

 ( 43 ) in addition,financial institutions and broker - dealers are prohibited from maintaining correspondent accounts forforeign "shell banks," i.e. , banks that have no physical presence in their supposed homecountries .

 ( 44 ) institutionsare subject to fines of up to $1 million for violations of these provisions .

 ( 45 ) title iii allows for judicial review of assets seized due to suspicion of terrorist - relatedactivities and the applicability of the "innocent owner" defense , ( 46 ) although the governmentis permitted in such cases to submit evidence that would not otherwise be admissible under thefederal rules of evidence , if following those rules would jeopardize national security .

 ( 47 ) title iii also allows forjurisdiction over foreign persons and financial institutions for prosecutions under sections 1956 and1957 of title 18 of the u.s. code .

 ( 48 ) the usa patriot act permits forfeiture of property traceable to proceeds from variousoffenses against foreign nations .

 ( 49 ) the act also permits forfeiture of accounts held in a foreign bankif that bank has an interbank account in a u.s. financial institution ; in essence , law enforcementofficials are authorized to substitute funds in the interbank account for those in the targeted foreignaccount .

 ( 50 ) forfeitureis also authorized for currency reporting violations and violations of bsa prohibitions againstevasive structuring of transactions .

 ( 51 ) title iii requires each financial institution to establish an anti - money laundering program,which at a minimum must include the development of internal procedures , the designation of acompliance officer , an employee training program , and an independent audit program to test theinstitution's anti - money laundering program .

 ( 52 ) in order to allow for meaningful inspection of financialinstitutions' aml efforts , title iii requires financial institutions to provide information on their amlcompliance within 120 hours of a request for such information by the treasury secretary .

 ( 53 ) also , financial institutionsapplying to merge under the bank holding act or the federal deposit insurance act mustdemonstrate some effectiveness in combating money laundering .

 ( 54 ) financial institutions areallowed to include suspicions of illegal activity in written employment references regarding currentor former employees .

 ( 55 ) title iii extends the suspicious activity reports filing requirement to broker - dealers , ( 56 ) and gives the treasurysecretary the authority to pass along sars to u.s. intelligence agencies in order to combatinternational terrorism .

 ( 57 ) anyone engaged in a trade or business who receives $10,000cash in one transaction must file a report with the treasury department's financial crimesenforcement network ( fincen ) identifying the customer and specifying the amount and date of thetransaction .

 ( 58 ) inaddition , the usa patriot act makes it a crime to knowingly conceal more than $10,000 in cashor other monetary instruments and attempt to transport it into or outside of the united states .

thisoffense carries with it imprisonment of up to five years , forfeiture of any property involved , andseizure of any property traceable to the violation .

 ( 59 ) significantly , the usa patriot act requires financial institutions to establish proceduresso that these institutions can verify the identities and addresses of customers seeking to openaccounts , and check this information against government - provided lists of known terrorists .

 ( 60 ) title iii also allows thetreasury secretary to promulgate regulations that prohibit the use of concentration accounts todisguise the owners of and fund movements in bank accounts .

 ( 61 ) under title iii , fincen has statutorily - based authority to conduct its duties within thetreasury department .

 ( 62 ) significantly , the act requires fincen to maintain a highly secure network so that financialinstitutions can file their bsa reports electronically .

 ( 63 ) the suppression of the financing of terrorism conventionimplementation act .

in order to implement the international convention for thesuppression of the financing of terrorism , congress in 2002 made it a crime to collect or providefunds to support terrorist activities ( or to conceal such fund - raising efforts ) , regardless of whetherthe offense was committed in the united states or the accused was a united states citizen .

 ( 64 ) the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of2004 .

section 362 of the usa patriot act required the secretary of thetreasury to establish within fincen a "highly secure network" to process bsa reports and toprovide information to financial institutions regarding patterns of suspicious activity gleaned fromthese reports .

with the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) , congress authorized the appropriation of $16.5 million for the development of fincen's"bsa direct" program , which is designed to improve the aforementioned network by making iteasier for law enforcement to access bsa filings and improving overall data management .

 ( 65 ) the act also authorizesan additional $19 million for improvements related to - - among other things - - telecommunicationsand analytical technologies , ( 66 ) and makes permanent the amendments to the bsa contained intitle iii of the usa patriot act .

 ( 67 ) the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 requires the treasurysecretary to issue regulations mandating the reporting of cross - border transmittals by certainfinancial institutions , ( 68 ) and to submit a report to congress on the treasury department's efforts to combat money launderingand terrorist financing .

 ( 69 ) in addition , under irtpa , a federal financial institutionexaminer who leaves the federal government is required to wait one year before accepting a job withan institution that the examiner was responsible for examining .

 ( 70 ) .

in approving the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , congressestablished the position of the director of national intelligence ( dni ) and created the new nationalcounterterrorism center ( nctc ) , where a panoply of the u.s. government's counterterrorismorganizations are now co - located under the dni's control .

among them is the foreign terroristasset targeting group ( ftatg ) , the executive branch's principal inter - agency analytic group,which is charged with assessing intelligence on terrorist financing , and providing the nationalsecurity council's ( nsc ) terrorist finance policy coordinating committee ( pcc ) "intelligenceassessments" of individuals and groups suspected of financially supporting terrorists .

ftatg engages in joint discussions with member agencies of the targeting action groupunder the terrorist financing pcc , developing suggested actions - - ranging from the freezing ofassets to diplomatic options - - that policymakers can consider taking against suspected terroristfinanciers .

although ftatg's first two directors were immigration and custom enforcement detailees,the nsc in november 2004 restructured ftatg and named a federal bureau of investigationspecial agent as director and an immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) special agent as deputydirector .

until then , both positions had been vacant for eight months , a period during which ftatgfoundered , according to some observers .

as part of the restructuring , the nsc narrowed ftatg'sfocus to providing intelligence assessments of terrorist financing targets designated by the nsc'sterrorist financing pcc .

prior to the restructuring , ftatg in some instances would identifytargets , but now serves strictly as the nsc's research arm .

in january 2005 , ftatg's memberagencies ( 72 ) eachcommitted to providing staff to serve at ftatg .

the group currently has slightly over half its staffcomplement in place .

in may 2000 president bill clinton announced the establishment of the foreign terroristasset tracking center ( ftatc ) , ftatg's predecessor , ( 73 ) as part of a $300 million counterterrorism initiative , $100 millionof which was to be used to establish ftatc and target terrorist financing .

 ( 74 ) congress authorizedfunding in october 2000 .

 ( 75 ) the clinton initiative followed the prevention the previous year of a planned series of osamabin laden terrorist attacks to mark the millennium .

although the intelligence community ( ic ) successfully disrupted those attacks before they could occur , administration officials remainedtroubled by the ic's continuing inability to identify , track and disrupt al qaeda's financial supportnetwork .

 ( 76 ) vowing to gain a better understanding of the terrorists' financial network - - particularly itsfund - raising component - - white house officials conceived of and pushed for the establishment offtatc as a way to improve the government's understanding of how terrorists fund theiroperations .

 ( 77 ) officialsenvisioned ftatc as an inter - agency all - source terrorist - financing intelligence analysis center , andsuccessfully pushed to have it located at the department of the treasury .

 ( 78 ) but , at the time , some ofthe key agencies expected to participate and contribute resources , including the treasury departmentitself , did not attach a priority to collecting and analyzing terrorist financing intelligence .

indeed,treasury officials made no mention of terrorist financing in their national security money launderingstrategy .

 ( 79 ) the cia,in turn , saw little utility in tracking terrorist financing .

 ( 80 ) despite this skepticism , president bush's national securityadviser condoleezza rice determined by spring of 2001 that terrorist financing proposals wereworth pursuing .

by this time , a year had passed since the clinton white house initially establishedterrorist finance analysis as a priority , and , yet , the treasury department still had not stood up acenter .

instead , treasury officials continued their planning , intending at some future point toestablish a 24-analyst strong office .

 ( 81 ) on the eve of the september 11 , 2001 attacks , treasury still had taken no concrete steps toestablish a center .

by then , sixteen months had passed since the clinton administration announcedits intention to establish the center .

more than seven months had elapsed since the incoming bushadministration had adopted the concept .

and despite numerous post - 9 / 11 declarations to thecontrary ( 82 ) - - ftatc,prior to 9 / 11 , remained a plan rather than a reality .

even before the 9 / 11 attacks , signs of frustrationwere becoming evident .

treasury officials had begun blaming cia for adopting a posture of "benignneglect" toward ftatc .

 ( 83 ) three days after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , treasury officials finally took action,establishing the center ( 84 ) and placing it under the control of the department's office offoreign asset control .

at the time , a treasury spokeswoman denied that there had been any unusualdelay in launching the center , citing the logistical difficulties involved in bringing togetherrepresentatives of a number of investigative agencies .

senator charles e. grassley , however,expressed concern as to whether the delay "is indicative of larger problems. .

 ( 85 ) initially , the center was comprised of the same member agencies as operation green quest,a multi - agency , financial enforcement initiative set up to identify , disrupt , dismantle and ultimately"bankrupt" terrorist networks and their sources of funding .

 ( 86 ) ftatc's mission was toprovide intelligence assessments of individual and group terrorist financing targets identified bygreen quest , which was responsible for conducting investigative operations .

 ( 87 ) in september 2001 , the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) , in a reportaccompanying its approved fiscal year ( fy ) 2002 intelligence authorization bill , endorsed ic effortsto exploit financial intelligence , and noted that the treasury department's ftatc concept showedpromise in providing terrorist financial analysis .

but the committee cautioned that ftatc , "...tothe extent it will function as an element of the intelligence community , has not been coordinatedadequately with the director of central intelligence nor reviewed by this committee. .

 ( 88 ) the committee directedthe dci and the treasury secretary to jointly prepare a report "assessing the feasibility andadvisability of establishing an element of the federal government to provide for effective andefficient analysis and dissemination of foreign intelligence related to the financial capabilities andresources of international terrorist organizations. .

the committee instructed that the report containan evaluation of ftatc's suitability for the task and , if appropriate , a plan for ftatc'sdevelopment .

 ( 89 ) by may 2002 , the executive branch had yet to complete the requested report , despite asubsequent statutory requirement contained in the usa patriot act requiring that it do so .

thessci noted its dissatisfaction and included a provision in the fy2003 intelligence authorization,subsequently approved by the house , establishing the ftatc at cia , and placing it under dcicontrol .

 ( 90 ) despite the statutory requirement that the ftatc be under the dci's control , the executivebranch placed ftatc under the supervision of the nsc's office of combating terrorism .

as notedearlier , the executive branch also renamed ftatc .

following the enactment of the 2004intelligence reform act , the dni assumed control of ftatg .

the national security council is responsible for the overall coordination of the interagencyframework for combating terrorism including the financing of terrorist operations .

given divergentconcerns among various departments and agencies only the nsc may be in a position to chooseamong alternative approaches and make tactical decisions when disagreements emerge .

the nscstaff inevitably has a significant influence on the decisionmaking process although great reliance isplaced on interagency policy coordination committees some of which are headed by departmentalofficials and some by the national security adviser .

a pcc specifically on terrorist financing was not included in the list of pccs published bythe white house in february 2001 , but media accounts indicate that a pcc for this issue wasestablished in the aftermath of the events of september 11 .

 ( 92 ) since the introduction ofthe pcc , it has been argued that a new position on the nsc staff should be established - - a specialassistant to the president for combating terrorist financing .

the individual , who would not havedepartmental responsibilities , would chair meetings of the pcc on terrorist financing and would beassisted by a team of directors on the nsc staff in coordinating and directing all federal efforts onthe issue .

this team would "focus its attention on evaluating the all - source intelligence available onterrorist organizations , conducting link analysis on the organizations with information and technicalintelligence available from other departments and agencies , and developing tactics and strategies todisrupt and dismantle terrorist financial networks. .

 ( 93 ) there are , however , arguments that can be made against establishing new positions on thensc staff .

size of the white house staff and expanding the span of control of the national securityadviser are one set of issues .

another question is the desirability of having tactics and strategiesdeveloped by the nsc staff rather than operating departments .

for instance , the tower boardestablished in the wake of the iran - contra affair in the reagan administration , recommended that"as a general matter , the nsc staff should not engage in the implementation of policy or theconduct of operations .

this compromises their oversight role and usurps the responsibilities of thedepartments and agencies. .

 ( 94 ) arguably , the best approach would have the pcc developstrategies against terrorist financing , resolve inter - departmental disagreements on tactics , and bringdifferences to the attention of the nsc for resolution .

it may be , however , that the perspectives ofagencies and departments are so different that there need to be arrangements more permanent thanregular pcc meetings to maintain requisite coordination .

others would argue that while a separatestaff within the larger nsc staff may not be necessary , it would be better to have the pcc headedby the national security adviser or her / his designee rather than an official with other importantresponsibilities and loyalties .

the nation's financial institutions , their regulators , and certain offices within the u.s.department of the treasury share primary responsibility for providing information on financialtransactions that could be helpful in detecting , disrupting , and preventing the use of the nation'sfinancial system by terrorists and terrorist organizations .

congress has statutorily required newreporting to improve the timeliness of terrorist financing detection , suppression , and control.historically , such information has aided law enforcement authorities in dealing with moneylaundering to hide the gain from crimes , and is now being used to track possible terrorist financing.figures for this kind of activity have been available only with a long time lag .

even longer lags characterize inspector general and reported internal assessments of the effectiveness of antiterroristfinancing efforts .

parts of the usa patriot act are scheduled to expire on december 31 , 2005 .

differentlegislation has been passed by both houses that would reauthorize these sections ( h.r .

3199 and s. 1389 ) .

 ( 96 ) while the expiring provisions of the act are nonfinancial ( titleii ) , congressional reauthorization initiatives might well expand to amend the financial title iii .

andaccording to senate banking committee chairman richard shelby: "the committee will continueits thorough series of hearings on terror finance .

as part of our country's anti - terror efforts , thecommittee will continue to conduct hearings and a review of our national money launderingstrategy. .

 ( 97 ) thegovernment accountability office ( gao ) has a study under way for this committee on suchpolicies and practices .

 ( 98 ) the offices within the department of thetreasury .

offices within the treasury include the office of terrorism and financialintelligence ( tfi , formerly the executive office for terrorist financing and financial crimes ) ,established in april 2004 .

tfi is charged with developing and implementing strategies to counterterrorist financing and money laundering both domestically and internationally .

it participates indeveloping regulations in support of both the bank secrecy act and usa patriot acts .

it alsorepresents the united states at international bodies that focus on curtailing terrorist financing andfinancial crime , including the financial action task force ( fatf ) whose "forty recommendations"and "eight special recommendations" are the basic frameworks for anti - money laundering andterrorist financing efforts internationally .

two offices with antiterrorist financing responsibilitieswithin tfi are the office of foreign assets control and the financial crimes enforcement network .

fincen originated in the treasury in 1990 as the data - collection and analysis bureau for thebsa .

it provides a government - wide , multi - source intelligence network under which it collects suspicious activity reports and currency transaction reports from reporting financial institutions ( with assistance from the internal revenue service ) , tabulates the data in a large database that hasbeen maintained since 1996 , and examines them to detect trends and patterns that might suggestillegal activity .

fincen then reports what it finds back to the financial community as a whole to aidfurther detection of suspicious activities .

there have been eight sar activity review s issued sinceoctober 2000 , the most recent dated april 2005 and covering data through june 2004 .

betweenapril 1 , 2003 , and june 30 , 2004 , 2175 suspicious activity reports were submitted to fincen ofwhich 51% came from money services businesses and 47% came from depository institutions .

therest came from casinos and securities and futures institutions .

 ( 99 ) sars from depositoryinstitutions are responsible for most of the reporting accuracy problems .

nevertheless , such reportsare a part of fincen's outreach and education efforts on behalf of financial regulators and lawenforcement agencies .

while fincen has no criminal investigative or arrest authority , it uses itsdata analysis to support investigations and prosecutions of financial crimes , and refers possible casesto law enforcement authorities when warranted .

it also submits requests for information to financialinstitutions from law enforcement agencies conducting of criminal investigations .

according to treasury testimony , a terror hotline established by fincen after 9 / 11 resultedin 853 tips passed on to law enforcement through april 2004 .

in the same time period , financialinstitutions filed 4,294 sars involving possible terrorist financing , of which 1,866 had possibleterrorist financing as their primary impetus .

 ( 100 ) the inspector general ( ig ) of the department of the treasury has conducted a series of auditsof the fincen sar database and raised some potentially troubling issues .

the ig found that thedatabase lacks critical information and is filled with inaccuracies .

an analysis of a sample of 2,400sars , for example , determined that most of the reports did not detail the specific actions that ledto suspicion , did not give a location for possible illegal transactions , or omitted the narrativedescription required in the reports entirely .

in june 2004 , the ig testified that subsequent auditsrevealed little or no improvement .

 ( 101 ) more recent ig reports on fincen and the use of fincen'sbsa e - filing of sar reports continues to give fincen low grades in eliminating ongoing problemsconcerning enforcement of the bank secrecy act and usa patriot act .

 ( 102 ) following the ig audit , fincen announced it would collect information from the agenciesresponsible for bank secrecy act compliance on their examination procedures , cycles and resources ; on any significant deficiencies in reporting by financial institutions ; and other data including formaland informal actions taken by regulators to correct reporting failures by financial institutions .

fincen has created an internal office of compliance to support the work of financial regulators .

the office of foreign assets control is designed primarily to administer and enforceeconomic sanctions against targeted foreign countries , groups , and individuals , including suspectedterrorists , terrorist organizations , and narcotics traffickers .

ofac acts under general presidentialwartime and national emergency powers as well as legislation , to prohibit financial transactions andfreeze assets subject to u.s. jurisdiction .

ofac lists those persons , groups , or countries whosetransactions it has been instructed to block or assets to be frozen by financial institutions .

ofac hasclose working relations with the financial regulatory community and maintains telephone "hotlines"through which it receives information about in - progress questionable transactions .

ofac alsoworks closely with the federal bureau of investigation and with the department of commerce'soffice of export enforcement , and cooperates with the united nations in imposing sanctions onforeign governments .

the most recent ig audit was completed in april 2002 and concluded that ofac ishampered because of its reliance on regulators' examinations of the financial institutions that supplydata under the bsa .

the ig recommended that treasury inform congress that ofac lackedsufficient authority to ensure that financial institutions comply with foreign sanctions , after findinginstances in which institutions either did not have databases on foreign sanctions , or did not updatethem .

further , some institutions did not routinely follow guidance in processing rejected financialtransactions and did not report blocked assets .

 ( 103 ) the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 addressed financial sectorcounterterrorism .

section 6303 required the treasury secretary to report on governmental ways tocurtail terrorist financing , including organizational changes as well as procedural ones .

section 7802stated that: "it is the sense of congress that the secretary of the treasury , in consultation with thesecretary of homeland security , other federal agency partners , and private - sector financialorganization partners , should - - ( 1 ) furnish sufficient personnel and technological and financialresources to educate consumers and employees of the financial services industry about domesticcounter terrorist financing activities , particularly about - - ( a ) how the public and private sectororganizations involved in such activities can combat terrorism while protecting and preserving thelives and civil liberties of consumers and employees of the financial services industry ; and ( b ) howthe consumers and employees of the financial services industry can assist the public and privatesector organizations involved in such activities ; and ( 2 ) submit annual reports to congress on effortsto accomplish subparagraphs ( a ) and ( b ) ...." president bush's fy2006 budget request for the treasury department includes more fundingfor combating terrorist and other illegal financing .

fincen would receive $73.6 million in directlyappropriated funds , an increase of about 2% .

in addition , $1.5 million would flow into fincen asoffsets and reimbursements from other agency accounts .

tfi's new internal office of intelligenceanalysis would essentially double in size , receiving $1.8 million in funding .

ofac would receive$23.8 million , up almost 8% .

additional funding of $0.6 million would increase tfi's other effortsto detect illegal activities .

 ( 104 ) the financial institution regulators .

thetreasury delegates responsibility for examining financial institutions for compliance with the bsato the financial regulators of those institutions .

these regulators are already responsible for thesafety and soundness examinations of the institutions they supervise , and generally conduct theirbsa examinations concurrently with those routine inspections .

when there is cause do so , however,any of the regulators may carry out a special bsa examination .

the primary regulators for depository financial institutions are all participants in the federalfinancial institutions examination council ( ffiec ) .

ffiec prescribes uniform principles,standards , and reporting forms for all banking and other depository institution examinations .

it alsoworks to promote uniformity in all depository supervision .

as a result , all the depository financialinstitutions follow similar procedures in enforcing the bsa .

ffiec has formed an additionalworking group to enhance coordination of regulatory agencies , law enforcement , and privatefinancial institutions to strengthen current arrangements .

all , including the non - depositoryregulators , are also part of the national anti - money laundering group ( namlg ) , first formed in1997 by the office of the comptroller of the currency to set up guidelines for depositories to followwith respect to training of employees to detect illegal transactions , a system of internal controls toassure compliance , independent testing of compliance , and daily coordination and monitoring ofcompliance .

the continuing purpose of the group , which also includes the department of justiceand banking industry trade groups , is to identify institutions at high risk of being used for moneylaundering or terrorist financing .

 ( 105 ) for federal budgetary purposes , the financial regulatory agencies are essentially self - funding.thus , most of their increasing spending on antiterrorist and money laundering efforts comes fromgeneral operating funds , including assessments and fees on their regulated institutions and portfoliointerest earnings , rather than federal appropriations .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) is the regulator for just over 2,000nationally chartered banks and the u.s. branches and offices of foreign banks .

the occ conductson - site examinations of each national bank at least three times within every two - year period .

alongwith loan and investment portfolios , it reviews internal controls , internal and external audits , andbsa compliance .

according to the occ , it conducted about 1,340 bsa examinations of 1,100institutions in 2003 , and nearly 5,000 bsa examinations of 5,300 institutions since 1998 .

 ( 106 ) when the occ finds violations or deficiencies in filing sars and ctrs , it may take eitherformal or informal action .

not generally made public , informal actions result when examinersidentify problems that are of limited scope and size , and when they consider managements ascommitted to and capable of correcting the problems .

informal actions include commitment letterssigned by institution management , or memoranda of understanding , and matters requiring boardattention in the examination reports .

formal enforcement actions are made public because they aremore severe .

such actions include cease and desist orders and formal agreements requiring theinstitution to take certain actions to correct deficiencies .

formal actions may also be taken againstofficers , directors and other individuals , including removal and prohibition from participation in thebanking industry , and civil fines .

from 1998 through 2003 , the occ issued a total of 78 formalenforcement actions based , at least in part , on bsa problems .

the number of informal enforcementactions has been characterized as "countless. .

 ( 107 ) the most recent case of severe bsa problems involved riggsbank .

in this case , according to the occ , deficiencies had been noted for many years before a $25million penalty was imposed in may 2004 .

riggs has ended operations and has been sold to pncfinancial services group .

the federal reserve system ( fed ) supervises about 950 state - chartered commercial banksthat are members of the system and more than 5,000 bank and financial holding companies .

alongwith the occ , it also supervises some international activities of national banks .

the fed uses bothon - site examination and off - site surveillance and monitoring in its supervision process .

eachinstitution is to be examined on - site every 12 to 18 months .

regulators' in - house examiners are toexamine larger institutions continuously .

the board of governors of the fed coordinates theexamination and compliance activities of the 12 regional banks .

in early 2004 , the fed created a newsection within the board's division of banking supervision and regulation - - the anti - moneylaundering policy and compliance section - - to improve control .

according to the fed , from 2001 through 2003 , it took 25 formal enforcement actions againstfinancial institutions under the bsa .

in every case , the examination process identified violationsthat were severe enough to require action .

 ( 108 ) recent public action involved a $100 million fine againstubs for transmitting u.s. currency to trade - sanctioned nations through the fed of new york's ownsystems .

 ( 109 ) it alsosanctioned the holding company for riggs bank .

 ( 110 ) the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) regulates about 4,800 state - charteredcommercial banks and 500 state - chartered savings associations that are not members of the fed .

italso insures deposits of the remaining 4,000 depository institutions without regulating them .

thefdic examines its supervised institutions about once every 18 months .

the fdic also serves as thepoint of contact for fincen to communicate identities of suspected terrorists to banking regulatorsand institutions .

since 2000 , the fdic has conducted almost 1,100 bsa examinations and from 2001 , hasissued formal enforcement actions ( cease and desist orders ) against 25 institutions and bans or civilfines against three individuals for violations .

the fdic also has taken 53 informal actions since2001 .

the inspector general of the fdic has audited the fdic twice , covering the period 1997through september 2003 to assess the fdic's bsa examinations and its implementation of the usapatriot act .

the ig generally concluded that fdic examiners have insufficient guidance for bsaexaminations , which were judged to be inadequate .

during the audit period , 2,672 institutions werecited for bsa failures to report , and 458 had repeat violations .

further many citations were forserious violations such as a failure to comply with record - keeping and reporting requirements forctrs .

 ( 111 ) whilesome transactions of over $10,000 are exempt - - such as regular and routine business , includingmeeting payroll or depositing receipts , by known customers - - the citations involved unambiguousrequirements to report .

in 30% of the cases , the fdic was found to have waited until the nextexamination to follow up on bsa violations and taken more than a year in 71% of the cases to act,with many violations taking five years before the fdic acted .

the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) supervises about 950 federally chartered savingsassociations , savings banks , and their holding companies ( thrifts ) .

like the occ , the ots is locatedwithin , but is independent of the treasury .

the ots is to conduct on - site examinations of eachinstitution at least three times every two years .

data on actions taken are from the treasury ig'saudit of ots actions covering a period from january 2000 through october 2002 .

during that time,examiners found substantive problems at 180 thrifts , and took written actions against eleven .

according to the ig , in five cases the action was not timely , was ineffective , and did not evenaddress all violations found .

the ig also took exception to the extent to which the ots relied onmoral suasion instead of money penalties to gain compliance: in a sample of 68 violations , forexample , the ots took such actions in 47 cases but failed to make any positive difference incompliance in 21 cases .

the national credit union administration ( ncua ) currently regulates 8,945 federallychartered credit unions and another 3,442 federally insured , state - chartered credit unions .

mostcredit unions are small and considered to have limited exposure to money laundering activities .

inat least one case , however , penalties were assessed against a credit union for ctr deficiencies .

in2000 , the polish and slavic federal credit union in new york city was assessed $185,000 forwillful failure to file ctrs and improperly granting exemptions from filings for somecustomers .

 ( 112 ) in 2003 , the ncua examined 4,400 credit unions and participated with state regulators in another 600 examinations of state - chartered institutions .

they found 334 bsa violations in 261credit unions .

most deficiencies were inadequate written policies , inadequate customeridentification , or inadequate currency reporting procedures .

ncua reported that 99% of violationswere corrected during or soon following the on - site examinations .

ncua actions are generallyinformal but may involve memoranda of understanding .

 ( 113 ) the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) regulates to protect investors againstfraud and deceptive practices in securities markets .

it also has authority to examine institutions itsupervises for bsa compliance .

this covers securities markets and exchanges , securities issuers,investment advisers , investment companies , and industry professionals such as broker - dealers .

thesec supervises more than 8,000 registered broker - dealers with approximately 92,000 branch officesand 67,500 registered representatives .

the depth and breadth of the securities markets are such thatthey could arguably prove to be efficient mechanisms for money laundering .

the sec's approach to bsa monitoring and enforcement is a joint product of the namlgand modified from that used by depository institution regulators .

much of the securities industry isoverseen by self - regulating organizations ( sros ) , such as the new york stock exchange .

thus,most examinations are carried out jointly by the sec's office of compliance inspections andexaminations ( ocie ) and the relevant sro .

the sec does not make public its findings of bsaviolations .

agency efforts are focused on educating the securities industry on its complianceresponsibilities .

this may be in part because compliance rules for the industry are relatively recent .

for example , fincen and the sec released specific regulations for customer identificationprograms for mutual funds in june 2003 .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) protects market users and thepublic from fraud and abusive practices in markets for commodity and financial futures and options .

the cftc delegates bsa examinations to its designated self - regulatory organizations ( dsros ) , ofwhich the most prominent are the national futures association ( nfa ) , the chicago board of trade,and new york mercantile exchange .

nfa membership covers more than 4,000 firms and 50,000individuals .

the regulatory process generally starts at registration , when the sro screens firms andindividuals seeking to conduct futures business .

the dsros monitor business practices and , whenappropriate , take formal disciplinary actions that could prohibit firms from conducting any furtherbusiness .

covered businesses include all registered futures commission merchants , "introducingbrokers," commodity pool operators , and commodity tracing advisers , who are required to reportsuspicious activity and verify the identity of customers , as well as monitor certain types of accountsinvolving foreigners .

according to the cftc , in 2003 , the nfa conducted 365 examinations of the 180 futurescommission merchants and 605 introducing brokers .

these examinations resulted in 238 auditreports of which 54 reflected anti - money laundering deficiencies at nine merchants and 45 brokers .

primary deficiencies cited were failures to comply with annual audit and training requirements .

 ( 114 ) .

to help finance its operations and its many spending programs , the federal government leviesincome taxes , social insurance taxes , excise taxes , estate and gift taxes , customs duties , andmiscellaneous taxes and fees .

the federal agency responsible for administering all these taxes andfees - - except customs duties - - is the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

in managing that hugeresponsibility , the irs receives and processes tax returns and related documents , payments , andrefunds , enforces compliance with tax laws and regulations , collects overdue taxes , and provides avariety of services to taxpayers intended to answer questions , help them understand their rights andresponsibilities under the tax code , and resolve disputes in ways that seek to avoid protracted andcostly litigation .

as the lead foreign policy agency , the department of state is tasked with formulating andconducting the foreign policy of the united states .

within that broad mission , the department ofstate has responsibilities for fighting terrorism in five categories: military , intelligence , lawenforcement , diplomatic , and financial .

the bureaus within state that are concerned withcounterterrorism finance programs include the office of the coordinator for counterterrorism ( s / ct ) , the bureau of economic and business affairs ( eb ) , and the bureau for internationalnarcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) .

 ( 171 ) following is a description of the state department's primary responsibilities to block the flowof terrorist financing .

 ( 172 ) .

in response to concerns expressed by the 9 / 11 commission that the u.s. government "hasbeen less successful in persuading other countries to adopt financial regulations that would permitthe tracing of financial transactions," ( 174 ) some observers have recommended the establishment of acounter - terrorist financing certification regime as a means of securing greater cooperation andcompliance with international counter - terrorist financing standards .

in congress , legislativeproposals to enact such a regime are currently under consideration .

h.r .

1952 wouldestablish a certification regime modeled on the existing illicit drug certification process that wouldrequire the department of the treasury to identify countries of concern based on non - compliancewith the requirements of the international convention for the suppression of the financing ofterrorism .

the bill would require the withholding of 50% of foreign assistance act assistance anddirect opposition voting by u.s. representatives to multilateral financial institutions with regard tocountries of concern .

the bill provides for a presidential national security interest waiver subjectto congressional review .

h.r .

1952 has been read and referred to the house committeeon international relations and the house committee on financial services .

while the current campaign against terrorist finance reportedly has diminished terrorists'abilities to gather and transmit finances , significant funds still appear to be available .

efforts tofurther regulate and introduce transparency into the global financial system are welcome steps ; yetthey will not completely reduce terrorists' striking capacity because most of the proposed measurescannot with certainty separate out terrorists from other types of lawbreakers .

terrorists' ability toexploit non - bank mechanisms of moving and storing value , as well as their decentralizedself - supporting network of cells represent additional challenges to law enforcement .

these challenges and concerns lead to numerous policy questions that may be relevant forcongress as it debates both a u.s. strategy to counter terrorist financing and to reorganize the u.s.government in order to best implement this strategy .

among those questions are: should the u.s. strategy emphasize freezing assets or following financialtrails ? .

in the wake of the 9 / 11 report , this does not appear to be answered .

more importantly , whoshould author the u.s. government terrorist financing strategy ? .

although the current terroristfinancing strategy is drawn up by the state department , many would argue that treasury maintainsmore expertise on the issue and , having prepared the previous anti - money laundering strategies,would be better suited to draft a national counterterrorist financing strategy .

does the current architecture of the u.s. government display clear jurisdictionamong the various federal departments and agencies involved in the fight against terrorist financing ? .

the preceding analysis points to many possible overlaps among the various investigatory agencies ( fbi / doj and dhs ) as well as between treasury and state in policy setting and providing technicalassistance to foreign allies .

to what extent has the administration analyzed each federal agencybudget allocation for combating terrorist financing to reconcile duplication of efforts ? .

what future efforts can be put in place to further inter - departmental andinter - agency coordination on both policy - setting and enforcement ? .

how well are the functions of thepanoply of new and legacy departments and agencies being coordinated ? .

who is best suited tocoordinate these functions ? .

how well is the congressional oversight mechanism designed to assess federalperformance on countering terrorist financing ? .

the senate banking and finance committees agreedto joint jurisdiction over the treasury's office of terrorism and financial intelligence .

several othercommittees have potential relevance in the overall fight against terrorist financing .

reform ofcongressional jurisdiction is an historically tricky issue , yet some argue that reevaluating howcongress oversees the fight against terrorism and terrorist financing may lead to more effectiveexecutive branch action .

considering terrorists' increased use of alternative remittance systems , is thereany way to regulate these practices ? .

what would the costs be to register all informalmoney - transmitters and bring them in line with usa patriot act requirements ? .

many smallremittance services cater to immigrant communities without reliable access to the formal bankingsector .

making alternative remittance systems illegal is likely impractical and could create a swellof resentment among the immigrant population in the united states .

if the u.s. government wantsto license and regulate alternative remittance systems , some say it may be necessary to offer fundsand technical assistance to small remittance providers to help insure theircompliance .

how effectively is the united states cooperating with other countries andinsuring their cooperation in implementing and enforcing national regulations to restrict terroristfinancing ? .

if a u.s. bank , charity , or remittance system is based in the u.s. , or has u.s. operations,it is subject to u.s. jurisdiction .

when such entities lie outside u.s. jurisdiction , the united statesis often at the mercy of other governments to first enact legislation making terrorist financing illegaland , more importantly , rigorously enforce this legislation .

creating a legal and regulatory system islikely meaningless if it is not enforced .

aml - anti - money laundering aphis - animal and plant health inspection service atf - bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives bsa - bank secrecy act cbp - bureau of customs and border protection cbrs - currency banking retrieval system cftc - commodity futures trading commission cftra - currency and foreign transaction reporting act ci - criminal investigation cidad - the organization of american state's inter - american drug abuse control commission ctr - currency transaction report dci - director of central intelligence dea - drug enforcement agency dhs - department of homeland security dni - director of national intelligence dsro - designated self - regulatory organizations eb - bureau for economic and business affairs fatf - financial action task force fbar - report of foreign bank and financial accounts fbi - federal bureau of investigation fcs - financial crimes section fdic - federal deposit insurance corporation fed - federal reserve system ffiec - federal financial institutions examination council fid - financial investigations division fincen - financial crimes enforcement network fip - financial investigative program fsrbs - fatf style regional bodies ftatc - foreign terrorist asset tracking center ftatg - foreign terrorist asset targeting group hifca - high - risk money laundering and related financial crimes areas ic - intelligence community ice - bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ig - inspector general imf - international monetary fund ins - immigration and naturalization service ieepa - international emergency economic powers act irs - internal revenue service irtpa - intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 itfwg - international terrorism financing working group jttf - joint terrorism task forces ldc - garden city ( garden city , ny ) counterterrorism lead development center menafatf - middle east and north africa financial action task force mlcc - money laundering coordination center moa - memorandum of understanding msb - money service business namlg - national anti - money laundering group nctc - national counterterrorism center nfa - national futures association nsc - national security council occ - office of the comptroller of the currency oecd - organization for economic cooperation and development ofac - office of foreign assets control ots - office of thrift supervision pcc - policy coordinating committee sars - suspicious activity reports sb / se - small business and self - employed taxpayers division s / ct - office of the coordinator for counterterrorism sec - securities and exchange commission ssci - senate select committee on intelligence te / ge - tax - exempt and government entities division tfi - office of terrorism and financial intelligence tfos - terrorist financing operation section tfwg - terrorist finance working group tsa - transportation security administration unscr - united nations security council resolutio .

