the promotion of alternatives to petroleum , including fuel ethanol , has been an ongoing goal of u.s. energy policy .

this promotion has led to the establishment of significant federal policies beneficial to the ethanol industry , including tax incentives , import tariffs , and mandates for ethanol use .

the costs and benefits of ethanol — and the policies that support it — have been questioned .

areas of concern include whether ethanol yields more or less energy than the fossil fuel inputs needed to produce it ; whether ethanol decreases reliance on petroleum in the transportation sector ; whether its use increases or decreases greenhouse gas emissions ; and whether various federal policies should be maintained .

this report provides background and discussion of policy issues relating to u.s. ethanol production , especially ethanol made from corn .

it discusses u.s. fuel ethanol consumption both as a gasoline blending component and as an alternative to gasoline .

the report discusses various costs and benefits of ethanol , including fuel costs , pollutant emissions , and energy consumption .

it also outlines key areas of congressional debate on policies beneficial to the ethanol industry .

fuel ethanol ( ethyl alcohol ) is made by fermenting and distilling simple sugars .

it is the same compound found in alcoholic beverages .

the biggest use of fuel ethanol in the united states is as an additive in gasoline .

it serves as an oxygenate , to prevent air pollution from carbon monoxide and ozone ; as an octane booster , to prevent early ignition , or "engine knock" ; and as an extender of gasoline stocks .

in purer forms , it can also be used as an alternative to gasoline in automobiles specially designed for its use .

it is produced and consumed mostly in the midwest , where corn — the main feedstock for domestic ethanol production — is grown .

the initial stimulus for ethanol production in the mid - 1970s was the drive to develop alternative and renewable supplies of energy in response to the oil embargoes of 1973 and 1979 .

since the 1970s , production of fuel ethanol has been encouraged through federal tax incentives for ethanol - blended gasoline .

the use of fuel ethanol was further stimulated by the clean air act amendments of 1990 , which required the use of oxygenated or reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) established a renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) , which mandates the use of ethanol and other transportation renewable fuels .

approximately 99% of fuel ethanol consumed in the united states is "gasohol" or "e10" ( blends of gasoline with up to 10% ethanol ) .

about 1% is consumed as "e85" ( 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline ) , and alternative to gasoline .

fuel ethanol is usually produced in the united states from the distillation of fermented simple sugars ( eg , glucose ) derived primarily from corn , but also from wheat , potatoes , or other vegetables .

however , ethanol can also be produced from cellulosic material such as switchgrass , rice straw , and sugar cane waste ( known as bagasse ) .

the alcohol in fuel ethanol is identical chemically to ethanol used for other purposes such as distilled spirit beverages and industrial products .

corn constitutes about 95% of the feedstock for ethanol production in the united states .

the other 5% is largely grain sorghum , along with some barley , wheat , cheese whey and potatoes .

corn is used because it is a relatively low cost source of starch that can be relatively easily converted to simple sugars , and then fermented and distilled .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) estimates that about 3.2 billion bushels of corn will be used to produce about 6 billion gallons of fuel ethanol during the 2007 / 2008 corn marketing year ( september 2007 through august 2008 ) .

this is roughly 25% of the projected 13 billion bushels of total corn utilization for all purposes .

however , it should be noted that ethanol production capacity is expanding rapidly , and corn demand for ethanol production may exceed usda's projection .

in the absence of the ethanol market , lower corn prices probably would stimulate increased corn utilization in other markets , but sales revenue would not be as high .

the lower prices and sales revenue would likely result in higher federal spending on corn subsidy payments to farmers , as long as corn prices were to stay below the price triggering federal loan deficiency subsidies .

according to the renewable fuels association , about 80% of the corn used for ethanol is processed by "dry" milling plants ( which use a grinding process ) and the other 20% is processed by "wet" milling plants ( which use a chemical extraction process ) .

the basic steps of both processes are similar .

first , the corn is processed , with various enzymes added to separate fermentable sugars from other components such as protein and fiber ; some of these other components are used to make coproducts , such as animal feed .

next , yeast is added to the mixture for fermentation to make alcohol .

the alcohol is then distilled to fuel - grade ethanol that is 85% - 95% pure .

then the ethanol is partially dehydrated to remove excess water .

finally , for fuel and industrial purposes the ethanol is denatured with a small amount of a displeasing or noxious chemical to make it unfit for human consumption .

in the united states , the denaturant for fuel ethanol is gasoline .

ethanol is produced largely in the midwest corn belt , with roughly 70% of the national output occurring in five states: iowa , nebraska , illinois , minnesota and south dakota .

because it is generally less expensive to produce ethanol close to the feedstock supply , it is not surprising that the top corn - producing states in the u.s. are also the main ethanol producers .

this geographic concentration is an obstacle to the use of ethanol on the east and west coasts .

most ethanol use is in the metropolitan centers of the midwest , where it is produced .

when ethanol is used in other regions , shipping costs tend to be high , since ethanol - blended gasoline cannot travel through petroleum pipelines , but must be transported by truck , rail , or barge .

however , due to clean air act requirements , concerns over other fuel additives , and the establishment of a renewable fuels standard , ethanol use on the east and west coasts is growing steadily .

for example , in 1999 california and new york accounted for 5% of u.s. ethanol consumption , increasing to 22% in 2003 , and 33% in 2004 .

the potential for expanding production geographically is one motivation behind research on cellulosic ethanol .

if regions could locate production facilities closer to the point of consumption , the costs of using ethanol could be lessened .

furthermore , if regions could produce fuel ethanol from local crops , there could be an increase in regional agricultural income .

historically , ethanol production was concentrated among a few large producers .

however , that concentration has declined over the past several years .

table 2 shows that currently , the top five companies account for approximately 42% of production capacity , and the top ten companies account for approximately 48% of production capacity .

critics of the ethanol industry in general — and specifically of the ethanol tax incentives — have argued that the tax incentives for ethanol production equate to "corporate welfare" for a few large producers .

however , the share of production capacity controlled by the largest producers has been dropping as more producers have entered the market .

section 1501 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the energy policy act of 2005 required the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to study whether there is sufficient competition in the u.s. ethanol industry .

the ftc concluded that "the level of concentration in ethanol production would not justify a presumption that a single firm , or a small group of firms , could wield sufficient market power to set prices or coordinate on prices or output. .

further , they concluded that the level of concentration has been decreasing in recent years .

overall , at the beginning of 2008 , domestic ethanol production capacity was approximately 8 billion gallons per year , and is expected to grow to 13 billion gallons per year , counting existing plants and plants under construction .

under various federal and state laws and incentives , consumption has increased from 1.8 billion gallons per year in 2001 to 6.8 billion gallons per year in 2007 .

domestic production capacity will continue increasing to meet the growing demand , including increased demand resulting from implementation of the renewable fuels standard established by the energy policy act of 2005 .

fuel is not the only output of an ethanol facility , however .

coproducts play an important role in the profitability of a plant .

in addition to the primary ethanol output , the corn wet milling process generates corn gluten feed , corn gluten meal , and corn oil , and dry milling process creates distillers grains .

corn oil is used as a vegetable oil and is priced higher than soybean oil ; the other coproducts are used as livestock feed .

in 2004 , u.s. ethanol mills produced 7.3 million metric tons of distillers grains , 2.4 million metric tons of corn gluten feed , 0.4 million metric tons of corn gluten meal , and 560 million pounds of corn oil .

revenue from the ethanol byproducts help offset the cost of corn used in ethanol production .

the net cost of corn relative to the price of ethanol and the difference between ethanol and wholesale gasoline prices are the major economic determinants of the level of ethanol production .

higher the corn prices lead to lower profits for ethanol producers ; higher gasoline prices lead to higher profits .

recently , high corn prices have cut into corn ethanol producers' profits .

approximately 7 billion gallons of ethanol fuel were consumed in the united states in 2007 , mainly blended into e10 gasohol ( a blend of 10% ethanol and 90% gasoline ) .

this figure represents only 5% of the approximately 140 billion gallons of gasoline consumption in the same year .

under the renewable fuels standard , motor fuel will be required to contain 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel annually by 2022 .

it is expected that much of this requirement will be met with ethanol .

ethanol consumption in 2007 accounted for approximately 4% of combined gasoline and diesel fuel consumption .

because of its physical properties , ethanol can be more easily substituted for — or blended into — gasoline , which powers most passenger cars and light trucks .

however , heavy - duty vehicles are generally diesel - fueled .

for this reason , research is ongoing into ethanol - diesel blends .

a key barrier to wider use of fuel ethanol is its cost relative to gasoline .

even with tax incentives for ethanol use ( see the section on " economic effects " ) , the fuel is often more expensive than gasoline per gallon .

further , since fuel ethanol has a somewhat lower energy content per gallon , more fuel is required to travel the same distance .

this energy loss leads to a 2% - 3% decrease in miles - per - gallon vehicle fuel economy with 10% gasohol .

this is due to the fact that there is simply less energy in one gallon of ethanol than in one gallon of gasoline , as opposed to any detrimental effect on the efficiency of the engine .

however , ethanol's chemical properties make it very useful for some applications , especially as an additive in gasoline .

the oxygenate requirement of the clean air act reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) program provided a major boost to the use of ethanol .

oxygenates are used to promote more complete combustion of gasoline , which reduces carbon monoxide ( co ) emissions and may reduce volatile organic compound ( voc ) emissions .

in addition , oxygenates can replace other chemicals in gasoline , such as benzene , a toxic air pollutant .

conversely , the higher volatility of ethanol - blended gasoline can in some cases lead to higher voc emissions ( see " air quality " below ) .

the two most common oxygenates are ethanol and methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) .

until recently , mtbe , made primarily from natural gas or petroleum products , was preferred to ethanol in most regions because it was generally much less expensive , easier to transport and distribute , and available in greater supply .

because of different distribution systems and gasoline blending processes , substituting one oxygenate for another can lead to significant transitional costs , in addition to the cost differential between the two additives .

despite the cost differential , there are several possible advantages of using ethanol over mtbe .

since ethanol is produced from agricultural products , it has the potential to be a sustainable fuel , while mtbe is produced from fossil fuels , either natural gas or petroleum .

in addition , ethanol is readily biodegradable , eliminating some of the potential concerns about groundwater contamination that have surrounded mtbe ( see the section on mtbe ) .

however , there is concern that ethanol use can increase the risk of groundwater contamination by benzene and other toxic compounds .

both ethanol and mtbe also can be blended into otherwise non - oxygenated gasoline to raise the octane rating of the fuel .

high - performance engines and older engines often require higher octane fuel to prevent early ignition , or "engine knock. .

other chemical additives may be used for the same purpose , but some of these alternatives are highly toxic , and some are regulated as pollutants under the clean air act .

furthermore , since these other additives do not contain oxygen , their use may not lead to the same emissions reductions as oxygenated gasoline .

a key barrier to ethanol's expanded role in u.s. fuel consumption is its price differential with gasoline .

since a major part of the total production cost is the cost of feedstock , reducing feedstock costs could lead to lower wholesale ethanol costs .

for this reason , there is a great deal of interest in producing ethanol from cellulosic feedstocks .

cellulosic materials include low - value waste products such as recycled paper and rice hulls , or dedicated fuel crops , such as switchgrass and fast - growing trees .

a dedicated fuel crop would be grown and harvested solely for the purpose of fuel production .

however , as the name indicates , cellulosic feedstocks are high in cellulose .

cellulose forms a majority of plant matter , but it is generally fibrous and cannot be directly fermented .

it must first be broken down into simpler molecules , which is currently expensive .

a 2000 study by usda and the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) estimated a 70% increase in production costs with large - scale ethanol production from cellulosic biomass compared with ethanol produced from corn .

therefore , federal research has focused on both reducing the process costs for cellulosic ethanol and improving the availability of cellulosic feedstocks .

the natural resources defense council estimates that with mature technology , advanced ethanol production facilities could produce significant amounts of fuel at $0.59 to $0.91 per gallon ( before taxes ) by 2012 , a price that is competitive with energy information administration ( eia ) projections for gasoline prices in 2012 .

other potential benefits from the development of cellulosic ethanol include lower greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions and a higher energy balance than corn - based ethanol .

further , expanding the feedstocks for ethanol production could allow areas outside of the midwest to produce ethanol with local feedstocks .

in his 2006 state of the union address , president bush announced an expansion of biofuels research at the department of energy .

a stated goal in the speech is to make cellulosic ethanol "practical and competitive within six years," with a potential goal of reducing middle east oil imports by 75% by 2025 .

this goal would require an increase in ethanol consumption to as much as 60 billion gallons , from 4.9 billion gallons in 2004 .

as part of the fy2007 doe budget request , the administration sought an increase of 65% above fy2006 funding for "biomass and biorefinery systems r&d," which includes research into cellulosic ethanol .

in his 2007 state of the union address , president bush further defined a goal of increasing the use of renewable and alternative fuels to 35 billion gallons by 2017 .

this would mean a roughly seven - fold increase from 2006 levels .

such an increase would most likely be infeasible using corn and other grains as feedstocks .

therefore , the president's goal will likely require significant breakthroughs in technology to convert cellulose into motor fuels .

as stated above , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) expanded the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) .

further , starting in 2016 , and increasing share of the rfs must come from "advanced biofuels," such as cellulosic ethanol , ethanol from sugar cane , and biodiesel .

further , of the advanced biofuel mandate ( which reaches 21 billion gallons in 2022 ) , there is a specific carve - out for cellulosic biofuels ( reaching 16 billion gallons in 2022 ) .

ethanol's relatively high price is a major constraint on its use as an alternative fuel and as a gasoline additive .

as a result , ethanol has not been competitive with gasoline except with incentives .

wholesale ethanol prices , excluding incentives from the federal government and state governments , are significantly higher than wholesale gasoline prices .

with federal and state incentives , however , the effective price of ethanol is reduced .

furthermore , gasoline prices have risen recently , making ethanol more attractive as both a blending component and as an alternative fuel .

before 2004 , the primary federal incentive supporting the ethanol industry was a 5.2 cents per gallon exemption that blenders of gasohol ( e10 ) received from the 18.4¢ federal excise tax on motor fuels .

because the exemption applied to blended fuel , of which ethanol comprises only 10% , the exemption provided for an effective subsidy of 52 cents per gallon of pure ethanol .

the 108 th congress replaced this exemption with an income tax credit of 51 cents per gallon of pure ethanol used in blending ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

table 4 shows that ethanol and gasoline prices are competitive on a per gallon basis when the ethanol tax credit is factored in .

however , the energy content of a gallon of ethanol is about one third lower than a gallon of gasoline .

as table 4 shows , on an equivalent energy basis , ethanol can be significantly more expensive than gasoline , even with the tax credit .

the comparative cost figures in table 4 are for ethanol as a blending component in gasoline .

however , the use of e85 in flexible fuel vehicles has been associated with improved combustion efficiency .

the national ethanol vehicle coalition estimates that ffvs run on e85 experience a 5% to15% decrease in miles - per - gallon fuel economy , as opposed to the 29% drop in btu content per gallon .

therefore , on a per - mile basis , e85's cost premium is likely in the middle of these above estimates .

many proponents and opponents agree that the ethanol industry might not survive without tax incentives .

an economic analysis conducted in 1998 by the food and agriculture policy research institute , concurrent with the congressional debate over extension of the excise tax exemption , concluded that elimination of the exemption would cause annual ethanol production from corn to decline roughly 80% from 1998 levels .

the tax incentives for ethanol are criticized by some as "corporate welfare," encouraging the inefficient use of agricultural and other resources and depriving the government of needed revenues .

in 1997 , the general accounting office estimated that the excise tax exemption reduced highway trust fund by $7.5 to $11 billion over the 22 years from fy1979 to fy2000 .

proponents of the tax incentive argue that ethanol leads to better air quality and reduced greenhouse gas emissions , and that substantial benefits flow to the agriculture sector due to the increased demand for corn to produce ethanol .

furthermore , they argue that the increased market for ethanol reduces oil imports and strengthens the u.s. trade balance .

one often - cited benefit of ethanol use is improvement in air quality .

the clean air act amendments of 1990 ( p.l .

101-549 ) created the reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) program , which was a major impetus to the development of the u.s. ethanol industry .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) made significant changes to that program that directly affect u.s. markets for gasoline and ethanol .

recent congressional interest in ethanol fuels has mainly focused on six policies and issues: ( 1 ) the renewable fuel standard ; ( 2 ) "boutique" fuels ; ( 3 ) the alcohol fuel tax incentives ; ( 4 ) ethanol imports through caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) countries ; ( 5 ) fuel economy credits for dual fuel vehicles ; and ( 6 ) the role of biofuels in the upcoming farm bill .

in the 109 th and 110 th congresses , several of these issues were debated during consideration of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) and the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) .

although the use of fuel ethanol has been limited to date ( only about 3% to 5% of gasoline consumption ) , it has the potential to significantly displace petroleum demand .

however , the overall benefits in terms of energy consumption and greenhouse gases are limited , especially in the case of corn - based ethanol .

with only a slight net energy benefit from the use of corn - based ethanol , transportation energy demand is essentially transferred from one fossil fuel ( petroleum ) to another ( natural gas and / or coal ) .

there may be strategic benefits from this transfer , especially if the replacement fuel comes from domestic sources or from foreign sources in more stable areas .

however , the benefits in terms of greenhouse gas emissions reductions is limited .

cellulosic feedstocks have the potential to dramatically improve the benefits of fuel ethanol .

their use could significantly decrease the energy ( from all sources ) required to produce the fuel , as well as decreasing associated greenhouse gases .

however , technologies to convert cellulose to ethanol at competitive costs seem distant .

for this reason , there is wide support for increased federal r&d .

federal incentives for ethanol use — including tax incentives , the rfg oxygenate standard , and the renewable fuels standard — have promoted significant growth in the ethanol market .

annual u.s. ethanol production increased from 175 million gallons in 1980 to 6.8 billion gallons in 2007 , largely as a result of these incentives .

federal incentives drive demand for the fuel , as well as making its price competitive with gasoline .

enacted as part of the energy policy act of 2005 and expanded by the energy independence and security act of 2007 , the renewable fuels standard will continue to drive growth in the ethanol market , as it mandates a minimum annual amount ( increasing yearly ) of renewable fuel in gasoline .

while other fuels will be used to some extent to meet the standard , the a large share of the mandate will be met with ethanol .

the increasing demand for ethanol may lead to price pressures on motor fuel .

these price pressures — and ethanol supply concerns in general — could increase interest in eliminating the tariff on imported ethanol .

congress will likely continue to show interest in ethanol's energy and environmental costs and benefits , as well as its effects on u.s. fuel markets .

any discussion of u.s. energy policy includes promotion of alternatives to petroleum .

with limited petroleum supplies , high prices , and instability in some oil - producing regions , these discussions are unlikely to end any time soon .

