on january 28 , 2010 , president obama announced the first round of grants from the $8 billion for intercity passenger rail and high speed rail .

among the awards was $112 million for improvements to the northeast corridor .

other grants will fund projects that include improvements to amtrak stations and routes that are used , but not owned , by amtrak .

in december 2009 congress passed the fy2010 transportation appropriations act ( division a of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , p.l .

111-117 ) , which provided amtrak $1.565 billion for fy2010 .

the administration had requested $1.502 billion for amtrak ; amtrak itself requested $1.840 billion .

the legislation also provided $2.5 billion for grants for high - speed rail and intercity passenger rail projects and rail network congestion mitigation projects , funding for which amtrak is among the eligible recipients .

the legislation also requires amtrak to implement procedures to allow passengers to transport firearms in checked baggage by december 2010 .

in december 2009 the amtrak board extended interim ceo joseph boardman's one - year appointment to "indefinite. .

boardman , the former administrator of the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , was chosen to succeed alexander kummant , who resigned in november 2008 .

in march 2009 congress passed the fy2009 transportation appropriation act ( division i of the omnibus appropriations act of 2009 , p.l .

111-8 ) , which provided $1.490 billion for amtrak for fy2009 , $165 million more than in fy2008 .

in february 2009 congress appropriated $1.3 billion for capital grants to amtrak , and $8 billion for intercity passenger rail infrastructure grants ( for which amtrak is among the eligible recipients ) in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

in october 2008 , the 110 th congress passed an amtrak reauthorization bill , the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( division b of p.l .

110-432 ) .

this bill authorizes nearly $10 billion over the five - year life of the bill ( fy2009-fy2013 ) specifically for amtrak , including $5.3 billion in capital grants , nearly $3 billion in operating grants , and $1.4 billion for debt service .

in addition , congress authorized a total of $1.9 billion over these five fiscal years in intercity passenger rail capital grants to the states on an 80-20 federal / state matching basis .

congress also authorized $1.5 billion in capital grants to states and / or amtrak for the development of 11 authorized high - speed rail corridors , and $325 million in rail network congestion mitigation grants .

in all , congress authorized an annual average of $2.7 billion for intercity passenger rail , roughly twice the amount congress has appropriated for that purpose in recent years ( around $1.3 billion ) .

the act established a procedure for interested public or private entities to submit proposals for the financing , design , construction , and operation of high - speed rail in the 11 authorized corridors .

however , putting a proposal into action would require further legislation from congress .

the act established a role for the surface transportation board , a railroad economic regulatory body , in enforcing amtrak priority over freight trains on track over which both types of trains operate and in facilitating negotiations between commuter rail operators and freight railroads concerning access to freight - owned rights - of - way .

amtrak — officially , the national railroad passenger corporation — is the nation's only provider of intercity passenger rail service .

amtrak is structured as a private company , but virtually all its shares are held by the united states department of transportation ( dot ) .

amtrak was created by congress in 1970 to maintain a minimum level of intercity passenger rail service , while relieving the railroad companies of the financial burden of providing that money - losing service .

although created as a for - profit corporation , amtrak , like intercity passenger rail operators in other countries , has not been able to make a profit .

during the 35 years from 1971-2006 , federal assistance to amtrak amounted to approximately $30 billion .

from fy2007-fy2010 , amtrak has received $7.0 billion in federal assistance .

amtrak's approximately 19,000 employees operate trains and maintain its infrastructure .

the company operates approximately 44 routes over 21,000 miles of track .

most of that track is owned by freight rail companies ; amtrak owns about 625 route miles of track .

the section it owns — the northeast corridor ( nec ) — includes some of the most heavily used segments of track in the nation .

amtrak "is distinctly a minority user on certain portions of the nec .

by far , the greatest volume of nec traffic is represented by" commuter and freight trains .

amtrak operates corridor routes ( covering distances under 400 miles ) and long - distance routes ( over 400 miles in length ) .

some of amtrak's corridor routes are supported in part by assistance from the states they serve .

amtrak also operates commuter service under contract with state and local commuter authorities in various parts of the country .

amtrak's fy2005-fy2009 strategic plan called for more than $8 billion in federal assistance over five years .

the administration consistently requested significantly less funding than that for amtrak ; in fy2006 , no funding was requested for amtrak .

but congress split the difference , providing an average of around $1.3 billion annually — enough to keep amtrak operating , but not enough to prevent the deferral of some significant maintenance projects — until midway through fy2009 , when , with a new administration that was more supportive of amtrak , congress appropriated a total of $2.8 billion , bringing amtrak's five - year total to $7.9 billion , very nearly the amount called for in the strategic plan .

amtrak has not yet issued a strategic plan for the period fy2010-fy2014 ; its fy2010-fy2014 financial plan is based on the funding levels in its current authorization .

according to the department of transportation inspector general ( dot ig ) , amtrak needs about $2 billion a year to restore the system to a state - of - good - repair and develop corridor service , or $1.4 billion simply to keep the system from falling into further disrepair .

more fundamentally , the dot ig has stated that a new federal intercity passenger rail strategy is needed: the current model for providing intercity passenger service continues to produce financial instability and poor service quality .

despite multiple efforts over the years to change amtrak's structure and funding , we have a system that limps along , is never in a state - of - good - repair , awash in debt , and perpetually on the edge of collapse .

in the end , amtrak has been tasked to be all things to all people , but the model under which it operates leaves many unsatisfied .

on november 3 , 2005 , the gao released a report that was highly critical of amtrak's management and performance .

on november 9 , 2005 , amtrak's president and ceo , david gunn , was fired by amtrak's board of directors .

gunn was opposed to some of the more far reaching restructuring proposals sought by the administration and the amtrak board , such as splitting the infrastructure component and the operating component on the northeast corridor ( nec ) into two separate entities .

on september 28 , 2006 , amtrak's new ceo , alexander kummant , testified before the house railroads subcommittee that he was committed to operating a national system of trains and that he believed long - distance trains were an important part of the nation's transportation network .

he also testified that the fastest growing service was in rail corridors between city pairs of 300-500 miles and that developing these corridors was going to be the driving force of amtrak's future .

amtrak has demonstrated that rail can play a significant role in intercity passenger travel in certain corridors .

slightly more people travel by train than fly between new york city and washington , dc , while slightly fewer people travel by train than fly between new york city and boston .

congress has included provisions in amtrak's recent appropriations , beginning in fy2003 ( p.l .

108-7 ; 117 stat 11 ) , intended to bring greater transparency to amtrak's finances and to increase dot's control over amtrak's use of its appropriation .

amtrak is required to submit a strategic plan to congress , updated annually , and is prohibited from making expenditures not programmed in the strategic plan without advance notice to congress .

amtrak is also required to submit a monthly financial statement to congress .

also , congress changed the way amtrak receives its funding ; the funding no longer goes directly to amtrak , but is allocated to the secretary of transportation , who makes quarterly grants to amtrak .

amtrak is required to submit grant applications to dot for each route to receive this funding .

additional requirements were imposed in the reauthorization legislation in 2008 ( p.l .

110-432 ) .

these include a requirement for performance improvement plans for amtrak's long - distance routes , periodic reviews of amtrak's compliance with accessibility requirements , reports on service delays on certain amtrak routes , and an assessment of amtrak management's implementation of the provisions of the reauthorization act .

amtrak runs a deficit of over a billion dollars each year .

virtually all of amtrak's 44 or so routes lose money but the long - distance routes lose the most .

according to the dot ig , "in 2004 , long - distance trains cumulatively incurred operating losses of more than $600 million ( excluding interest and depreciation ) . .

however , by his calculation , even eliminating long - distance service entirely would only have reduced amtrak's operating losses by about $300 million , far too little to make amtrak profitable .

in congressional testimony , the dot ig stated that long distance trains accounted for only 15% of total intercity rail ridership and that 77% of long - distance train passengers traveled along only portions of the routes , not end - to - end trips .

trips mostly ranged from 500-700 miles , slightly longer than corridor trips .

the ig estimated that amtrak could realize "annual operating savings of between $75 million and $158 million , and an additional $79 million in planned annual capital expenditures that could be avoided" by eliminating the highly subsidized sleeper class service from its long - distance trains .

sleeper class service includes a sleeping room and prepaid meals in the train's dining car ; coach class passengers on long - distance trains sleep in their seats on overnight trips , and usually buy food in the train's lounge car .

on october 10 , 2006 , the dot ig reported that amtrak had begun restructuring sleeper class service and expected to save up to $20 million in fy2007 from this restructuring .

in addition to its annual deficit , amtrak has major liabilities due to deferred maintenance and accumulated debt .

lacking money to complete all its capital repair and maintenance projects , amtrak has deferred many maintenance projects .

this has led the dot ig to observe that amtrak's continued deferral of maintenance increases the risk of a major failure on its system .

amtrak has an estimated $6 billion in backlogged capital maintenance needs , of which about $4 billion is needed on the nec .

these include replacement of aging bridges , signal equipment , and catenary ( the power source for the northeast corridor trains ) , improvements to tunnels and track , repair of wrecked equipment , and overhaul of aging equipment .

the ig has criticized some of the capital spending choices amtrak has made , such as refurbishing sleeper cars instead of replacing aging bridges .

the amtrak reform council and the dot ig both estimated that amtrak requires around $1.5 billion to $2 billion in federal operating and capital support annually .

this is a higher level of federal funding than amtrak has ever consistently received , though amtrak's current authorization authorizes funding in this range .

in recent years amtrak has stopped borrowing , trimmed its workforce , and cut its expenses , while at the same time achieving increases in ridership .

however , the cuts in expenses have been small relative to amtrak's annual deficit , and increases in ridership have been relatively modest as well .

in this context , the dot ig has observed that "it is difficult to see how amtrak can achieve further reductions within its federal operating subsidy without addressing state - supported routes , route restructuring , and labor contracts. .

amtrak did not gain any flexibility in work rules in its latest labor agreement .

while amtrak competes with freight and commuter railroads to retain its workforce , it competes with the airlines ( on its corridor routes ) in terms of labor productivity .

amtrak's internal options for significantly reducing its annual deficit in the short term are limited .

its two major cost categories are the operating losses of the long - distance trains and maintenance costs of the northeast corridor .

reducing the size of its system could , in the long run , significantly reduce amtrak's deficit and the long - run cost to the federal government , although amtrak would still run a short - term deficit even if it eliminated all its long - distance trains , because of severance payments to employees .

additionally , the costs of maintaining the northeast corridor would remain , whatever the fate of long - distance service .

amtrak interprets 49 u.s.c .

24701 to require it to provide service nationwide , which it takes to mean service that spans the nation , rather than service in different parts of the nation .

thus , amtrak is unlikely to eliminate or restructure long - distance routes without explicit direction from congress .

many members of congress continue to support a nationwide amtrak network .

amtrak's same - route ridership has grown since fy2004 .

however , it appears unlikely that amtrak could increase its revenues enough to eliminate its deficits .

total revenues in fy2008 were $588 million more than in fy2004 , but total expenses also increased .

amtrak has narrowed its overall annual loss by $128 million , from $1.331 billion in fy2004 to $1.160 billion in fy2008 .

amtrak appropriations are provided as part of the department of transportation funding .

a summary of its recent appropriations is provided in table 1 .

amtrak's previous authorization expired in december 2002 .

the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-134 ; 111 stat .

2570 ) authorized amtrak for the period december 1997 through december 2002 .

it required that amtrak operate without federal operating assistance after 2002 ; this was not accomplished .

between 2002 and 2008 , reauthorization of amtrak was stalled by disagreement over the future of u.s. passenger rail policy .

although numerous bills were introduced and various approaches were advanced , congress was unwilling to decide what kind of passenger rail policy it would be willing to fund .

during that period , congress neither provided amtrak with the level of funding that amtrak requested nor required an amtrak restructuring that would be consistent with the level of funding that congress provided .

as congress considered reauthorization of amtrak , the range of options for passenger rail included ( 1 ) providing higher levels of funding to support an expanded passenger rail system ; ( 2 ) providing funding for operating and maintaining the current system ; ( 3 ) focusing available resources on providing service only to those corridors that can be justified on economic grounds ; ( 4 ) reducing amtrak funding and eliminating much of the present passenger rail network ; ( 5 ) eliminating funding for amtrak and reorganizing passenger rail service in the united states .

although various combinations of those options were possible , the dot ig stated that the "status quo" option was unsustainable and that federal funding for amtrak of between $1.4 billion and $1.5 billion would be necessary to prevent cuts in service , but would not be enough to restore the system to a state - of - good - repair nor permit investment in new corridor development .

in regard to amtrak reauthorization , the dot ig urged congress to consider three points: ( 1 ) without competition , amtrak has few incentives , other than the threat of budget cuts or elimination , for cost control ; ( 2 ) states , rather than amtrak , should decide where and how intercity passenger rail service is provided ; and ( 3 ) the federal government must be willing to provide adequate funding ( but not directly to amtrak ) to bring the infrastructure into a state - of - good - repair .

in the 110 th congress , senator frank r. lautenberg and then senator trent lott introduced an amtrak reauthorization bill , the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2007 ( s. 294 ) , on january 16 , 2007 .

this bill would have authorized a total of $3.3 billion in operating grants and $6.3 billion in capital grants for fiscal years 2007 through 2012 to be administered by the dot to amtrak .

of the $6.3 billion in capital grants , a certain percentage of that amount , ranging from 3% in fy2007 to 33% in fy2012 , would be directed to states rather than to amtrak .

the bill would also allow states to use operators other than amtrak to provide rail service on particular routes , thus potentially opening up competition for amtrak .

the bill created a capital match program for a state or group of states for the purpose of providing new or improved intercity rail service .

the federal share of this program would be 80% .

while the bill would have repealed the requirement that amtrak become financially self - sufficient , it would have required amtrak to reduce operating subsidies by 40% over the life of the bill .

the bill would have expanded amtrak's board of directors to 10 members , including the secretary of transportation , the president of amtrak , and eight members selected by the administration with no more than five of these from the same political party and representing the geographic regions that amtrak currently serves , to the extent possible .

s. 294 was approved ( with amendments ) by the committee on commerce , science , and transportation on april 25 , 2007 , and was passed ( with amendments ) by the full senate on october 20 , 2007 .

during senate floor debate , among the amendments rejected was an amendment to limit the per - passenger subsidy amount on amtrak routes and an amendment to increase the number of routes to be made available for competitive bid .

amendments accepted included an amendment to require amtrak to publish annual revenue and cost amounts for each route , an amendment giving additional consideration to states with limited amtrak service when considering new routes , and an amendment expressing the sense of congress of the need to maintain amtrak as a national passenger rail system .

the house version of an amtrak reauthorization bill ( h.r .

6003 ) was introduced on may 8 , 2008 , and ordered to be reported by the house committee on transportation and infrastructure on may 22 , 2008 .

it was passed by the house with amendments on june 11 , 2008 , by a vote of 311 to 104 .

for fy2009-fy2013 , h.r .

6003 would have authorized a total of $6.7 billion in capital grants to amtrak , of which $2.5 billion would have been provided to states in a capital matching program ; $3.0 billion in operating grants ; $1.7 billion for debt service ; and $1.1 billion for ada compliance .

the house bill also would have provided $1.8 billion over the life of the bill ( $350 million per fiscal year ) for the development of up to two high - speed rail corridors , one of which would be between washington , dc , and new york city .

in this instance , high - speed rail was defined as at least 110 mph , and in the case of the washington , dc , and new york city corridor , travel time for express trains between those two cities would have to be under two hours .

under this provision , private companies would bid for the financing , design , construction , and operation of these high - speed rail corridors .

dot and a commission would evaluate and rank the proposals and report their findings to congress .

the house bill also required amtrak to submit a plan for restoring service between new orleans and sanford , florida .

the house bill would have restructured amtrak's board of directors in the same way as the senate bill .

both the house and senate bills would have involved the surface transportation board ( stb ) in resolving disputes between freight railroads and passenger train interests , but for different purposes .

the senate bill ( section 209 ) would allow amtrak or states subsidizing amtrak service to petition the stb to investigate when amtrak's on - time performance falls below a certain level .

if the stb finds that the host freight railroad is at fault , it may award damages or provide some other relief .

the provision would also allow freight railroads to petition the stb if they believe passenger trains are negatively affecting their business on a certain route .

the house bill ( section 401 ) would require the stb to conduct non - binding mediation between freight railroads and public transit authorities seeking access to freight railroad right - of - ways for passenger service , in circumstances where the two parties cannot reach agreement .

congress reauthorized amtrak in the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 , enacted on october 16 , 2008 .

for the period fy2009-fy2013 , the act authorized a total of $9.8 billion in funding for amtrak , divided as follows: operating grants: $2.9 billion .

capital grants: $5.3 billion .

grants for repayment of long - term debts and capital leases: $1.4 billion .

funding for amtrak's inspector general: $108 million .

total authorized amtrak funding averages $1.955 billion annually , a significant increase over the $1.3 billion amtrak was appropriated in fy2007 and fy2008 .

the act also authorizes three new federal intercity passenger rail grant programs for which amtrak is eligible: intercity passenger rail service corridor capital assistance program ( §301 ) : authorizes dot to make grants to states , public agencies , or amtrak ( in cooperation with a state ) for the capital costs of facilities , infrastructure , and equipment to provide or improve intercity passenger rail transportation ; federal share not to exceed 80% ; total authorized funding $1.9 billion over fy2009-fy2013 .

high - speed rail corridor development: authorizes dot to make grants to states , public agencies , or amtrak for capital projects ( eg , acquiring , constructing , or improving rail structures and equipment ) on designated high - speed lines that would result in train operating speeds of 110 mph or more ; federal share not to exceed 80% ; total authorized funding $1.5 billion over fy2009-fy2013 .

congestion relief ( §302 ) : authorizes dot to make grants to states , public agencies , or amtrak to reduce congestion or facilitate ridership growth in heavily traveled intercity rail passenger corridors ; federal share not to exceed 80% ; total authorized funding $325 billion over fy2010-fy2013 .

the act directs fra and amtrak to jointly develop measurement criteria , and minimum standards , to measure amtrak's performance and service quality ; directs fra to develop objective methodologies for amtrak to use in making decisions regarding adding , altering , or eliminating routes and service levels ; and directs fra to establish a standard methodology for allocating costs between amtrak and states for state - supported routes .

it allows amtrak or states subsidizing amtrak service to petition the stb to investigate when amtrak's on - time performance falls below a certain level .

if the stb finds that the host freight railroad is at fault , it may award damages or provide some other relief .

freight railroads may petition the stb if they believe passenger trains are negatively affecting their business on a route .

and it requires the stb to conduct non - binding mediation between freight railroads and public transit authorities seeking access to freight railroad right - of - ways for passenger service , in circumstances where the two parties cannot reach agreement .

the act also increased the size of amtrak's board of directors from 7 to 9 persons , including the secretary of transportation , the president of amtrak , and 7 persons appointed by the president , not more than 5 of whom may be members of the same political party .

the act also removed the prohibition on having board members who were representatives of rail labor or rail management .

