h.r .

4772 , styled the private property rights implementation act of 2006 , combines process and substance .

its process provisions would ease or eliminate certain current hurdles to a federal takings or substantive due process claim being adjudicated in federal court on the merits , where government interference with property rights is alleged .

its substantive provisions would have the effect of facilitating success on the merits when such claims are brought , through "clarifications" of those same takings and substantive due process constraints .

the bill was reported by the house committee on the judiciary on september 14 , 2006 and passed the house on september 29 , 2006 ( 231-181 ) .

this report was prepared on the possibility that the senate may introduce similar legislation during the lame - duck session of 2006 , allowing some version of either bill to move toward enactment .

although h.r .

4772 has previous incarnations , the current congressional interest in the bill largely stems from the supreme court's 2005 decision in kelo v. city of new london .

that decision dealt with a related , but very different matter .

although h.r .

4772 seeks to facilitate takings lawsuits by land owners aggrieved by government interference , kelo addressed the permissible public purposes underlying direct condemnation suits by governments seeking to acquire land .

yet to be sure , both supreme court decision and bill speak to property rights and aspects of the fifth amendment takings clause's protection of property rights , and public concerns about property rights kindled by the decision plainly have enhanced interest in the bill .

this report comments only on the legal and legally related policy issues raised by h.r .

4772 .

h.r .

4772 's process features , as noted , seek to facilitate access to the federal courts by property owners with certain federal constitutional claims .

the process features do not affect the property owner's access to state courts for adjudicating those federal claims , which courts remain generally available .

rather , they offer the property owner a second forum for federal claims .

the key process features of the bill are as follows: 1. section 2 : in an action under 28 u.s.c .

§ 1343 in which the facts concern the uses of real property , limits when a federal district can abstain from deciding the action , requires that the court exercise jurisdiction even if the plaintiff has not first pursued his state - court remedies , and limits when the court can " certify " a related question of state law to the state courts ( asking the state court to clarify a point of state law and report back to the federal court ) , and 2. sections 2-4 : provides that takings actions brought under 42 u.s.c .

§ 1983 ( against political subdivisions of states ) or under the tucker acts ( against the united states ) shall be ripe for adjudication upon a " final decision , " which exists if ( a ) the government makes a definitive decision as to the permissible uses of the property , and ( b ) one meaningful application to use the property has been denied and the property owner has applied for but been denied one waiver and one appeal , unless unavailable or futile .

these process features closely track approaches used in the earlier bills .

there are a host of small changes , however .

for example , h.r .

1534 ( 105 th congress ) defines "final decision" to require the property owner to seek , but be denied , one waiver or one appeal .

in contrast , h.r .

2372 ( 106 th congress ) and h.r .

4772 require one waiver and one appeal , seemingly a more demanding ripeness standard .

h.r .

4772 's substantive features are as follows: 1. sections 5-6 : takings actions brought under 42 u.s.c .

§ 1983 ( against political subdivisions of states ) or under the tucker acts ( against the united states ) are subject to two "clarifications": ( 1 ) conditions or exactions on land development approvals shall be subject to the applicable takings test regardless of whether legislative or adjudicatory in nature , or whether in the form of a monetary fee or land dedication , and ( 2 ) each subdivided lot in a subdivision shall be regarded as a separate parcel , if so treated under state law , and 2. sections 5-6 : substantive due process actions under 42 u.s.c .

§ 1983 ( against political subdivisions of states ) or against the united states , where based on property deprivation , are subject to a "clarification": the judgment shall be based on whether the government action is " arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law. .

these substantive provisions have no counterpart in the earlier bills .

both h.r .

2372 ( 106 th congress ) and h.r .

4772 impose a "duty of notice to owners" — requiring federal agencies , when they limit the use of property in a manner that may be affected by the bill , to give notice to property owners explaining their rights under the bill .

finally , only h.r .

4772 contains a severability clause , stating that if any of the bill's provisions or their applications are held invalid , other provisions and their applications shall not be affected .

h.r .

4772 , like its precedents , raises some broad issues of legal policy .

the first arises from the aversion of federal judges , expressed in numerous decisions in recent decades , to inserting themselves into local land - use disputes .

for example , the eighth circuit cautioned that "we are concerned that federal courts not sit as zoning boards of appeals. .

the ninth circuit has said: "the supreme court has erected imposing barriers in [its leading takings ripeness decisions] to guard against federal courts becoming the grand mufti of local zoning boards. .

and the eleventh circuit echoed with "federal courts do not sit as zoning boards of review. .

there are many other such judicial statements .

quite recently , the supreme court suggested sympathy with this view , noting that "state courts undoubtedly have more experience than federal courts do in resolving the complex factual , technical , and legal questions related to zoning and land - use regulations. .

as this report shows , the federal judicial aversion to involvement in local land - use disputes may be manifested through use of several legal devices — abstention , certification of state law questions to state courts in the hope of a clarification that avoids the federal question in the case , declining to find a final decision by the local land - use authority , and most significantly , insisting ( per supreme court directive ) that federal takings claims be litigated first in the state courts , with the consequence that relitigation in federal court generally is barred under various legal theories .

h.r .

4772 embodies the contrary view , long espoused by property rights advocates , that takings claims are entitled to the same unobstructed access to federal courts as other federal constitutional claims , such as those under the first or fourth amendment .

they argue that a federal court would never turn away a free speech claim under section 1983 on the ground that its constitutionality had not first been tested in state court .

and , as noted , they contend that a federal forum should be available for the adjudication of a federal constitutional right , whether or not the constitution requires it .

whether this equating of the takings clause and other constitutional guarantees takes full cognizance of textual differences is another question , however .

the broader issue is federalism and the occasional congressional rhetoric to the effect that the federal government should minimize its involvement in local matters .

h.r .

4772 runs contrary to this ideal , but in doing so has much company .

congress in recent decades has fostered greater federal court involvement in formerly state court matters in such areas as product liability , criminal law , and class actions .

in the land use area at issue here , congress has articulated its own standard , enforceable in federal court , for the application of local land use restrictions to religious facilities .

finally , h.r .

4772 is likely to prompt charges that it will add more cases to an already overburdened federal judiciary .

it is beyond the scope of this report to address the merits of this potential criticism , nor has it stopped congress from approving new avenues for federal court litigation in the past .

