on march 16 , the crimean authorities held a referendum on crimea's annexation to russia .

crimea's union with russia was allegedly approved by 96.77% of those voting , with a turnout of 83.1% .

ukraine , the united states , the european union , and other countries denounced the referendum as illegal and not held in a free or fair manner .

president putin signed a "treaty" with crimean leaders on march 18 formally incorporating crimea into russia .

this move was also denounced by ukraine , the united states , the eu and other countries as a blatant violation of ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and a violation of international law .

until march 18 , the russian takeover of crimea had been achieved with no bloodshed with the ukrainian government forces on the peninsula , even in cases where russian troops forcibly seized ukrainian installations .

however , on that day one ukrainian soldier was killed when russian forces stormed a ukrainian base in simferopol .

on march 24 , ukraine announced that it would withdraw its remaining military personnel from crimea , due to threats against them and their families made by russian forces .

on march 28 , russian defense minister sergei shoigu said that military installations in crimea were under its control and that all ukrainian troops that remained loyal to ukraine had left the peninsula .

on march 17 , the administration announced visa bans and asset freezes against several senior figures from russia and the secessionist crimean government .

on march 16 and 20 , after russia moved to annex crimea , the administration issued two additional executive orders expanding the scope of sanctions .

they permit the administration to freeze the assets of persons working in key areas of the russian economy , including "financial services , energy , metals and mining , engineering , and defense and related materiel" ( see also below , " u.s. - russia relations after the occupation and annexation of crimea " ) .

on march 18 , 2014 , president putin signed a treaty with crimea annexing the region , and that same day presented it to the russian federal assembly ( legislature ) for ratification , along with a bill changing the constitution to add crimea and sevastopol as federal units of russia .

a speech he delivered was viewed by many observers as reprising themes he and other officials made over the last few weeks of the crisis , and as indicative of his thinking and grievances .

he emphasized the long history of russian domination over ukraine , but as depicted in soviet historiography on nationality issues , viewed the relationship as beneficial to both russians and ukrainians .

he did not distinguish between ukrainian and russian national identity , asserting that both nations were "one people , we cannot live without each other. .

he stressed that "crimea has always been an inseparable part of russia. .

he stated that in ukraine in early 2014 , "nationalists , neo - nazis , and anti - semites ... resorted to terror , murder , and riots," leading to a coup .

he asserted that "these ideological heirs of bandera , hitler's accomplice during world war ii," were russo - phobes aiming to repress russian - speakers in crimea .

russia created conditions for crimeans to freely vote on their future for the first time in history , he claimed .

he asserted that the crimean region of ukraine had the same right as ukraine itself took in 1991 to self - determination , and also averred that since kosovo albanians were encouraged by the united states and the west to claim independence , then russians , ukrainians , and crimean tatars could do the same .

in a second part of his speech , president putin outlined what he viewed as a long history of u.s. and western abuses against russia .

he asserted that what he viewed as the orchestration of a coup in ukraine had finally "crossed the line," that russia had been backed into a corner from which it could not retreat , and that an overwound spring would "snap back hard. .

ticking off grievances , he depicted the world since the collapse of the soviet union as unstable , with the united states sweeping aside international law and "ruling by the gun," believing in its own exceptionalism to unilaterally decide the destiny of the world .

the united states acts as it pleases , he asserted , either forcing international organizations to approve its actions or ignoring them , as it did in yugoslavia , afghanistan , and iraq .

he also appeared to identify the united states as orchestrating "color revolutions" in other countries to impose standards that violate the way of life , traditions , and culture of the peoples of those countries , leading to chaos and violence , and the "arab winter. .

such "color revolutions" have been aimed at ukraine and russia and against eurasian integration , he asserted .

he claimed that russia had to act to prevent nato from taking over crimea and threatening southern russia .

he termed the protection of russian - speakers a priority of all russians and hence a foundation principle of foreign policy .

he depicted those in russia who might object to the annexation as "national traitors" manipulated by the west , and argued that 95% of russian citizens and the great majority of crimeans support the annexation of the region .

on march 20 , the state duma ( lower legislative chamber ) almost unanimously approved the annexation treaty and the constitutional changes .

the next day , the federation council ( upper legislative chamber ) unanimously gave its approval .

putin signed the bill into law and the federal changes became part of the constitution .

he immediately appointed a presidential representative to administer the new federal district .

on march 27 , 2014 , the u.n. general assembly approved a resolution by the vote of 100-11 , with 58 abstentions , affirming ukraine's territorial integrity and terming the march 16 referendum in crimea illegitimate and not a basis for a change in the status of the region .

russia's u.n. ambassador vitaly churkin argued that russia could not ignore the right of crimeans to self - determination and that crimea had been "re - unified" with russia .

armenia and belarus joined russia in voting against the resolution , while azerbaijan , georgia , and moldova voted for it .

among other soviet successor states that attended the session , kazakhstan and uzbekistan abstained .

china , afghanistan , and pakistan also abstained .

kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and turkmenistan did not participate in the vote .

in late march 2014 , president obama expressed concern about the build - up of russian forces on ukrainian's borders and called for their pullback .

press reports citing unnamed u.s. intelligence officials put their number at about 30,000 , although the secretary of ukraine's national security and defense council has estimated them at about 100,000 .

although russia may not be as central to u.s. interests as was the soviet union , engagement between the two is essential in many areas .

russia remains a nuclear superpower .

it still has a major impact on u.s. national security interests in europe , the middle east , and asia .

russia has an important role in the future of arms control , the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , and the fight against terrorism .

u.s. - russia relations have faced severe challenges posed by russian foreign behavior , including in georgia in august 2008 and ukraine in february - march 2014 .

russia is a potentially important trading partner .

russia is the only country in the world with a greater range and scope of natural resources than the united states , including oil and gas reserves .

it is the world's second - largest producer and exporter of oil ( after saudi arabia ) and the world's largest exporter of natural gas .

it has a large , relatively well - educated labor force and scientific establishment .

also , many of russia's needs — food and food processing , oil and gas extraction technology , computers , communications , transportation , and investment capital — are in areas in which the united states is highly competitive , although bilateral trade remains relatively low .

the spirit of u.s. - russian "strategic partnership" of the early 1990s was replaced by increasing tension and mutual recrimination in succeeding years .

in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , the two nations reshaped their relationship on the basis of cooperation against terrorism and putin's goal of integrating russia economically with the west .

however , tensions soon increased on a number of issues that contributed to ever - growing discord in u.s. - russian relations .

cooperation continued in some areas , and then - presidents bush and putin strove to maintain at least the appearance of cordial personal relations .

in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , however , bilateral ties deteriorated to their lowest point since the cold war .

some observers have argued that this nadir in relations in 2008 is one bookend to the late february - march 2014 occupation and annexation of ukraine's crimea region , which constitutes the other bookend to the obama administration's 2009-2014 attempt to improve relations .

h.r .

4278 ( royce ) .

ukraine support act .

introduced on march 21 , 2014 .

passed the house on march 27 , 2014 .

authorizes $50 million for fy2014 for democratization assistance , reaffirms the $1 billion in loan guarantees to ukraine ( in h.r .

4152 , see below ) , authorizes up to $10 million for fy2014 for radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) and the voice of america to provide programming to ukraine , and authorizes $8 million for fy2014 for law enforcement assistance .

also calls for blocking assets and visas for russians who influence russian foreign policy , particularly with respect to violations of ukraine's sovereignty , and for those responsible for corruption in senior levels of the government .

states that it is the sense of congress that the united states should suspend meetings of the nato - russia council .

received in the senate on march 27 , 2014 .

h.r .

4152 ( rogers ) .

to provide for the costs of loan guarantees for ukraine .

introduced on march 5 , 2014 .

passed the house on march 6 , 2014 .

the house version called for amounts appropriated or otherwise made available under `economic support fund' in division k of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , and prior acts making appropriations for the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs , funding from unobligated balances shall be made available for the costs of loan guarantees for ukraine .

passed the senate with an amendment on march 27 , 2014 .

the amended version contains similar language calling for loan guarantees for ukraine .

authorizes $50 million to be appropriated for fy2015 for democratization assistance for ukraine .

authorizes $100 million to be appropriated for fy2015-fy2017 for enhanced security cooperation with ukraine .

calls for blocking assets and visas of persons threatening the peace , security , and sovereignty of ukraine , with a national security waiver .

calls for blocking assets and visas of russian government officials or associates responsible for corruption .

calls for a report on russian military power and objectives .

s. 2124 ( menendez ) .

support for the sovereignty , integrity , democracy , and economic stability of ukraine act of 2014 .

introduced on march 12 , 2014 .

reported to the senate by the foreign relations committee on march 12 , 2014 .

on march 13 , 2014 , a cloture motion on the motion to proceed was presented in the senate .

calls for the unobligated balance of amounts appropriated or otherwise made available under the heading `economic support fund' under title iii of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2014 ( division k of p.l .

113-76 ) loan guarantees for ukraine , authorizes $50 million for fy2015 to be appropriated for democracy and economic reforms in ukraine and eastern partnership countries , authorizes $100 million for fy2015-fy2017 to be appropriated for additional security assistance for central and eastern europe , including ukraine , calls for a visa ban and asset freeze on persons responsible for violence , gross human rights violations , or acts undermining stability and territorial integrity in ukraine , calls for a visa ban and asset freeze on officials of the russian government responsible for corruption in ukraine or russia , and appropriates an increase in the u.s. quota in the imf the dollar equivalent of 40.8718 billion in special drawing rights .

h.r .

4154 ( poe ) .

russia visa sanctions act .

introduced on march 5 , 2014 .

referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

4278 ( royce ) .

to support the independence , sovereignty , and territorial integrity of ukraine , and for other purposes .

introduced on march 21 , 2014 .

referred to the committee on foreign affairs and the committee on the judiciary .

h.res .

499 ( royce ) .

condemning the violation of ukrainian sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity by military forces of the russian federation .

introduced on march 5 , 2014 .

passed by the house on march 11 , 2014 .

s.res .

370 ( coats ) .

a resolution supporting the territorial integrity of ukraine and condemning russian military aggression in ukraine .

introduced on march 5 , 2014 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

s.res .

378 ( durbin ) .

a resolution condemning illegal russian aggression in ukraine .

introduced on march 11 , 2014 .

passed by the senate on march 11 , 2014 .

h.r .

1881 ( bishop ) / s. 17 ( vitter ) .

energy production and project delivery act of 2013 .

h.r .

1881 was introduced february 27 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on energy and natural resources .

sec .

305 prohibits the u.s. government from enforcing any regulations , proposals , or actions establishing any carbon dioxide or greenhouse gas emissions reductions until a certification is made that russia and others have enforced such measures .

a similar bill , s. 17 , was introduced may 8 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on natural resources , and in addition to the committees on energy and commerce , transportation and infrastructure , and the judiciary .

h.r .

893 ( ros - lehtinen ) .

iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation accountability act of 2013 .

introduced february 28 , 2013 ; referred to the to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on oversight and government reform , the judiciary , science , space , and technology , financial services , and transportation and infrastructure .

directs the president to impose sanctions on any foreign person , entity , or country that engaged in a uranium - related joint venture with iran , north korea , or syria , or with its agents .

prohibits the u.s. government transfer of extraordinary payments to russia in connection with the international space station unless the president reports to congress that it is russian policy to oppose the proliferation to or from iran , north korea , and syria of weapons of mass destruction and missile delivery systems and transfers that could contribute to iran's nuclear , biological , chemical weapons , or missile programs .

authorizes some payments under certain conditions .

h.r .

1128 ( brooks ) .

protecting u.s. missile defense information act of 2013 .

introduced march 13 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on armed services , and in addition to the committee on foreign affairs .

requires the president to submit a semi - annual report on any discussions on missile defense between the u.s. government and the russian government .

prohibits the use of certain fy2014 funds for missile defense cooperation with russia .

directs the president to encourage russia to disclose any support provided for the ballistic missile programs of china , syria , iran , or north korea .

h.r .

1692 ( mcgovern ) .

sudan peace , security , and accountability act of 2013 .

introduced april 24 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on financial services , oversight and government reform , and the judiciary .

requires a semi - annual report that includes a description of efforts to work with russia and other governments and persons that have significant influence or interests related to sudan to engage the government of sudan in achieving a comprehensive agreement for democratic reform .

h.r .

1793 ( connolly ) .

global partnerships act of 2013 .

introduced april 26 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on oversight and government reform , rules , and ways and means .

sec .

4384 calls for a congressional review period for licenses for export of commercial communications satellites for launch from russia .

h.r .

2281 ( mike rogers ) / s. 1111 ( ron johnson ) .

cyber economic espionage accountability act .

h.r .

2281 was introduced june 6 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on the judiciary , and financial services .

calls for u.s. diplomacy to emphasize cyber economic espionage as a priority issue in all economic and diplomatic discussions with russia and other countries determined to encourage , tolerate , or conduct cyber economic espionage .

calls on the department of justice should increase its efforts to bring economic espionage criminal cases against offending foreign actors .

calls for the denial of visas for u.s. entry of persons who are officials of a foreign government or persons acting on behalf of a foreign government that the president determines are responsible for cyber espionage .

a similar bill , s. 1111 , was introduced on june 6 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

2397 ( young ) .

department of defense appropriations act , 2014 .

introduced and reported by the committee on appropriations june 17 , 2013 , ( h.rept .

113-113 ) .

passed july 24 , 2013 .

received in the senate july 30 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on appropriations .

sec .

10033 prohibits funding to execute any u.s. - russia agreement pertaining to missile defense other than a treaty or to provide russia with information about the ballistic missile defense systems of the united states .

h.r .

2855 ( granger ) .

fy2014 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act .

introduced and reported ( h.rept .

113-185 ) july 30 , 2013 .

sec .

7072 directs that no bilateral economic assistance is to be provided for the russian government .

calls for the secretary of state to report on russian arms and other support for the syrian government and nuclear support for iran , as well as on the russian government's persecution of civil society organizations , corruption , discrimination against religious minorities , and efforts to prosecute law enforcement personnel alleged to have committed human rights abuses .

h.r .

3304 ( deutch ) .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 .

introduced october 22 , 2013 .

passed october 28 , 2013 .

passed the senate with amendments november 19 , 2013 .

house agreed to the senate amendments with an amendment december 12 , 2013 .

senate agreed to the house amendment to the senate amendment december 19 , 2013 .

signed into law december 26 , 2013 , ( p.l .

113-66 ) .

sec .

1051 expresses the sense of the congress that the president should not reduce dual - capable aircraft based in europe unless consideration is given to whether russia has undertaken such reductions .

also calls for notification of whether russia's force posture changed as a result of such plans .

sec .

1056 expresses the sense of the congress that the force structure required by the new start treaty should preserve minuteman iii intercontinental ballistic missile silos that contain a deployed missile .

sec .

1057 calls for the retention of the capability to deploy multiple independently targetable vehicles on minuteman iii missiles .

sec .

1060 expresses the sense of the congress that future u.s. - russia strategic nuclear arms reductions be pursued through a verifiable treaty and take into account the full range of nuclear weapons threatening the united states .

sec .

1246 expresses the sense of the congress that any missile defense cooperation with russia should not limit u.s. or nato missile defense capabilities , and should be mutually beneficial and reciprocal in nature , and that russia should not be provided with missile defense information that would compromise u.s. national security .

the section also limits the provision of certain missile defense information to russia .

sec .

1248 expresses the sense of the congress that the u.s. government elicit russian cooperation as part of a plan to reduce the proliferation of ballistic missile technology to iran , north korea , and syria .

sec .

1251 expresses the sense of the congress that any u.s. - russia executive agreement not limit the deployment or capabilities of u.s. or nato ballistic missile defense systems .

sec .

1254 calls for the secretary of defense to report on russia's security and military strategy and on u.s. - russia military cooperation .

sec .

1255 prohibits contracts or agreements with rosoboronexport for fy2014 , although a national security waiver is provided .

h.r .

3561 ( kingston ) .

prevent russian infiltration act of 2013 .

introduced november 20 , 2013 ; referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

prohibits department of state approval for the russian space agency to build or operate a ground monitoring station in the united states unless the station does not raise counterintelligence or other national security concerns .

h.r .

3547 ( lamar ) , consolidated appropriations act , 2014 .

introduced on november 20 , 2013 .

passed the house on december 2 , 2013 .

passed the senate on december 12 , 2013 .

house agreed to the senate amendment on january 15 , 2014 .

senate concurred in the house amendment on january 16 , 2014 .

signed into law on january 17 , 2014 , ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

sec .

8138 bans funding contravening sec .

1246 of the ndaa ( see above ) on providing certain missile defense information to russia .

sec .

7071 directs that before obligating assistance to the central government of russia , the secretary of state should consult with the committees on appropriations on how such assistance supports the national interests of the united states .

calls for funds appropriated to countries designated by the european union to be eastern partnership countries ( armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , georgia , moldova , and ukraine ) to be made available to advance the signing and implementation of association agreements , trade agreements , and visa liberalization agreements with the european union ( eu ) , and to reduce the vulnerability of the states to external pressure not to enter into such accords with the eu .

also calls for a report on pressure by russia on the eastern partnership states to prevent their further integration into europe , and an assessment of whether russia is erecting nontariff barriers against imports of goods from these countries , and a description of actions by the u.s. government to ensure that the countries maintain full sovereignty in their foreign policy decisionmaking .

also calls for a report describing efforts by russia to prosecute police and government personnel credibly alleged to be responsible for gross human rights violations against russians affiliated with civil society organizations , the private sector , opposition political parties , and the media .

also calls for a report detailing russia's support to syria , including arms sales , and to iran , including for nuclear research cooperation and sanctions relief .

h.con.res .

53 ( barbara lee ) .

urges all parties to the conflict in syria to resolve the crisis in syria through a negotiated political settlement and to work through the united nations and with the international community to hold the assad regime accountable .

introduced september 12 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs .

h.res .

24 ( bachmann ) .

expresses the deep disappointment of the house of representatives in the enactment by the russian government of a law ending inter - country adoptions of russian children by united states citizens and urges the russian government to reconsider the law and prioritize the processing of inter - country adoptions involving parentless russian children who were already matched with united states families before the enactment of the law .

introduced january 14 , 2013 ; referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

h.res .

34 ( christopher smith ) .

calls on the united states and russia to continue cooperation in securing safe and loving homes for un - parented children .

introduced january 15 , 2013 ; referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

h.res .

402 ( engel ) .

supports the european aspirations of the peoples of the european union's eastern partnership countries .

introduced november 12 , 2013 ; referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

ordered to be reported november 20 , 2013 .

calls on russia to respect the rights of states to make their own sovereign choices with regard to international partnerships , including to sign association agreements with the european union .

s. 960 ( menendez ) .

syria transition support act of 2013 .

introduced may 15 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

reported july 24 , 2013 , ( s.rept .

113-79 ) and placed on the legislative calendar .

calls for the secretary of state to submit a report on a strategy for ensuring a political transition in syria , providing humanitarian assistance , and limiting extremist and weapons proliferation threats , to include a description of efforts to establish a consensus with russia on ending russian financial and military support for the assad regime ; establishing a transition and post - transition period and government in syria ; and avoiding the expansion of extremist ideologies and terrorist groups in syria and the region .

s. 1021 ( shaheen ) .

next generation cooperative threat reduction act of 2013 .

introduced may 22 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

calls for the u.s. government to seek increased financial and other support from russia and other countries for stronger worldwide physical security for wmd - related weapons and materials and for other international nonproliferation efforts , particularly in the middle east and north africa .

s.res .

198 ( graham ) .

expresses the sense of the senate that russia should turn over edward snowden to u.s. authorities .

introduced july 18 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

s.res .

311 ( merkley ) .

calls on the international olympic committee ( ioc ) to strongly oppose russia's discriminatory law against the freedom of expression for lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender persons and to obtain written assurance that host countries of the olympic games will uphold all international human rights obligations for all persons observing or participating in the games regardless of race , sex , sexual orientation , or gender identity .

introduced november 21 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

s.res .

317 ( sessions ) .

expresses the sense of the senate on the continuing relationship between the united states and georgia .

introduced december 11 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

states that contrary to the 2008 russia - georgia ceasefire agreement , russia has constructed barriers along the administrative boundaries between south ossetia and the rest of georgia , declares that the united states supports georgia's sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity , and raises concerns over the continued russian occupation of south ossetia and abkhazia .

