title iv of the higher education act ( hea ) authorizes programs that provide student financial aid to support attendance at a variety of institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

these institutions include public institutions , private non - profit institutions , and private for - profit ( proprietary ) institutions .

during the 2005-2006 academic year , a total of 6,441 institutions were classified as title iv ihes .

of these , 39.9% were proprietary ( for - profit ) institutions , with the rest almost equally divided between public and private non - profit institutions .

it is estimated that title iv federal student aid programs made over $80 billion available to students attending ihes during the 2005-2006 academic year .

in order for students attending a school to receive federal title iv assistance , the school must: be licensed or otherwise legally authorized to provide postsecondary education in the state in which it is located , be accredited by an agency recognized for that purpose by the secretary of the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , and be deemed eligible and certified to participate in federal student aid programs by ed .

of the three components of this triad — state licensing , accreditation , and eligibility and certification — the first two were developed independently to serve purposes related to quality assurance and consumer protection , but not necessarily from a federal perspective .

to avoid generating concerns about federal interference in educational decision - making , the federal government ( ed specifically ) relies on accrediting agencies and state licensing to determine standards of program quality .

the federal government's only direct involvement in determining institutional eligibility for title iv programs is through the third arm of the triad , which focuses on protecting the administrative capacity and fiscal integrity of its funding programs through certification by ed .

in the 1992 reauthorization of the hea , a central goal of the congress was to reform the triad structure to address reported problems of fraud and abuse .

growing default costs in the guaranteed student loan program , as well as media and other reports of exploitation of the student aid programs , especially by proprietary institutions , focused attention on the need to improve the triad structure used to approve institutions for program participation .

the higher education amendments of 1992 ( p.l .

102-325 ) made numerous changes to the hea intended to strengthen program integrity , including revision of the definitions of eligible institutions and inclusion of provisions to reform the process by which institutions become eligible to participate in title iv student aid programs .

instead of singling out the proprietary school sector for special screening and oversight , the 1992 amendments reformed the institutional eligibility rules for all postsecondary institutions .

the amendments , however , have had the greatest impact on proprietary schools .

the higher education act amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) were signed into law by president clinton on october 7 , 1998 .

among the key provisions affecting institutional eligibility were: modification of the requirement that proprietary institutions of higher education derive at least 15% of their revenues from non - title iv sources to require proprietary institutions to derive at least 10% of their revenues from non - title iv sources , elimination of the requirement for accrediting agencies to conduct unannounced site visits at institutions , modification of refund policy requirements to apply only to title iv funds and to require pro - rata refunds for all title iv recipients who withdraw before the completion of 60% of the payment period or period of enrollment , establishment of a distance learning demonstration program , and addition of the requirement that any ihe with a teacher preparation program that has lost state approval or financial support because it has been designated as low - performing by the state is no longer eligible to accept or enroll any students in its teacher preparation program who are receiving title iv aid .

on february 8 , 2006 , president george w. bush signed the higher education reconciliation act of 2006 ( hera ) , title viii of the deficit reduction act of 2005 , into law ( p.l .

109-171 ) .

the hera made several changes to the hea related to institutional eligibility .

these changes affected program eligibility for participation in title iv programs , rules governing the percentage of courses offered through telecommunications and the percentage of students participating in courses offered through telecommunications , and requirements for the return of title iv funds by ihes and students .

each of these changes is discussed in detail in this report .

this report provides a general overview of hea provisions that affect institutional eligibility for participation in title iv student aid programs and , in some instances , discusses specific issues that may arise during the hea reauthorization process .

it begins with a general discussion of eligibility , both at the institutional level and program level .

the discussion of institutional eligibility provides a brief summary of several key rules that affect eligibility .

the second part of the report focuses on the program integrity triad: state authorization , accreditation , and eligibility and certification .

this is followed by an overview of three additional issues that are closely associated with institutional eligibility: program participation agreements , return of title iv funds policy , and distance education .

to participate in the federal student aid programs , institutions must meet specific criteria , including requirements related to program offerings , student enrollment , operations , and the length of academic programs .

this section discusses the definition of an eligible ihe for title iv purposes , academic year requirements , eligible program requirements , and reauthorization issues .

part h of title iv specifies the roles and responsibilities for the three aspects of the program integrity triad: state authorization , accreditation by an accrediting organization recognized by the secretary of education , and eligibility and certification by ed .

the triad is intended to provide balance in assuring the eligibility of institutions for title iv .

the state role is primarily one of consumer protection , while the accrediting agencies are intended to function as a quality assurance mechanism .

these two legs of the triad were developed independently of the federal government .

the federal government has historically relied on them to avoid generating concerns about federal interference in educational decision - making .

ed is responsible for oversight of compliance , the third leg of the triad ; that is , protecting the administrative and fiscal integrity of the federal student aid programs .

there are several other issues that affect institutional eligibility for title iv federal student aid programs .

this section focuses on three specific issues – program participation agreements ( ppa ) , the return of title iv funds , and distance education .

failure to meet the requirements associated with each of these areas may result in a loss of title iv eligibility .

ihes are required to enter into a program participation agreement with ed in order to participate in most programs authorized under title iv .

by signing the ppa , the institution agrees to comply with the laws , regulations , and policies governing the title iv programs .

in order to aid the institution in administering federal student aid programs in the appropriate manner , the ppa provides critical information about the institution's participation in the programs .

it includes the effective date of the institution's approval for participation , the date by which the institution must reapply for participation , the expiration date of its current approval , and the title iv programs in which the institution is eligible to participate .

the ppa also states the general terms and conditions for institutional participation in the fsa programs and contains information from the general provisions regulations ( 34 cfr part 668 ) by which the institution is bound .

the ppa also reiterates provisions discussed earlier in this report as additional requirements for institutional eligibility , including certifying the institution has a drug and alcohol abuse program , certifying the institution has established a campus security program , reporting general institutional information , and providing data on student athletes .

by signing the ppa , the institution also agrees to make a good faith effort to register students to vote unless the institution is located in a state that has implemented the motor vehicle - voter registration provision of the national voter registration act .

institutions are also required to provide a ged preparatory program to its students if it admits students without a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent .

the institution is also required to comply with the civil rights and privacy requirements contained in federal regulations that apply to all students .

one of the provisions of the ppa specifically prohibits the payment of commissions , bonuses , or other incentive payments to individuals based on their success in enrolling students or obtaining financial aid .

the provision was added during the 1992 reauthorization to eliminate abuses at trade institutions that were enrolling unqualified applicants in order to receive title iv funds .

through the negotiated rulemaking process , however , ed developed new regulations for incentive compensation that took effect july 1 , 2003 .

ed has created 12 "safe harbors" that ihes can use to avoid statutory prohibitions against incentive compensation for recruiters and other individuals .

without these safe harbors , ed determined that a strict interpretation of the statutory requirement would prohibit almost every compensation arrangement related to a student's admission to a postsecondary institution , including common business practices .

ed has interpreted the requirement as functioning as a safeguard against institutions providing incentives to staff to enroll unqualified students .

of the 12 safe harbors , one focuses on whether a particular compensation payment is considered an incentive payment .

it describes the conditions under which compensation may be paid by an ihe without it being considered an incentive payment .

the remaining 11 safe harbors address the conditions under which an incentive payment may be made based upon student enrollments .

examples of these safe harbors include allowing ihes to provide incentive payments to recruiters who enroll students in non - title iv eligible programs , providing compensation for internet - based recruitment and admission activities , and providing compensation through a profit - sharing or bonus plan .

during the 1992 reauthorization , a new federal requirement for program participation was added with respect to the return of title iv funds .

the intent was to eliminate incentives for institutions to enroll students and receive title iv funds without suffering any negative financial consequences if students dropped out .

the initial legislation established a refund policy that affected all funding ( eg , federal funding , state funding , scholarships , grants , parental support ) provided on behalf of first - time students who were receiving title iv funds .

according to the return of funds policy , funds were required to be returned to the federal government prior to returning funds to any other source .

this policy was substantially changed during the 1998 reauthorization .

the return of title iv funds policy currently applies to all students receiving title iv funds who withdraw from school , but only applies to title iv funding .

the policy was further revised by the hera .

the return policy is a statutory schedule used to determine how much title iv aid a student has earned at the time of his / her withdrawal from school .

the schedule requires a pro - rata calculation of the amount of aid earned through the 60% point in each payment period or period of enrollment .

after the 60% point , a student has earned 100% of title iv funds for that period .

ed has developed a specific process that institutions use to determine the amount of title iv funds earned by a student and the amount of title iv aid , if any , that needs to be returned to ed or disbursed to the student .

the process is briefly discussed in this section .

institutions initially determine how much title iv aid was received by the student .

ihes then calculate the percentage of title iv aid earned by the student , by determining the date of the student's withdrawal .

this is determined differently depending on whether the institution is required to take attendance .

at institutions required to take attendance , the student's withdrawal date is determined based on attendance records .

at institutions not required to take attendance , different procedures exist to determine the student's date of withdrawal depending upon whether the student provided official notification of his / her withdrawal .

the withdrawal date is used to determine the point at which the student withdrew , so that the percentage of the period of enrollment or payment period completed can then be calculated .

the calculation of the percentage of the period of enrollment or payment period completed differs depending of whether the student withdrew from a program using credit - hours or clock - hours .

if a student withdraws from a credit - hour program , the percentage of title iv aid earned is equal to the percentage of the enrollment or payment period completed .

the percentage of the period completed is determined by dividing the number of calendar days in the payment or enrollment period that the student completed by the total number of calendar days in the payment or enrollment period .

if the student completed over 60% of the payment or enrollment period , he / she has earned 100% of his / her title iv aid and no repayment of funds by the school or student is required .

if the student withdrew at or prior to the 60% point in the payment or enrollment period , the percentage of title iv aid earned is pro - rated .

for example , if the student withdrew at the 50% point , he / she has earned 50% of his / her title iv aid .

the percentage of title iv aid earned by a student who withdrew from a clock - hour program is based on the percentage of scheduled hours the student completed prior to withdrawing .

a student who withdraws after the point at which he / she was scheduled to complete 60% of the scheduled hours in the payment period or period of enrollment has earned 100% of his / her aid .

the percentage of payment period of period of enrollment completed is calculated by dividing the total number of clock hours scheduled to be completed as of the date the student withdrew by the total number of hours included in the payment period or period of enrollment .

the percentage of title iv aid earned is then multiplied by the sum of the title iv aid disbursed plus the title iv aid that could have been disbursed to the student or on the student's behalf to determine the amount of title iv aid earned by the student .

if the student received less title iv aid than the amount earned , the institution may make a post - withdrawal disbursement .

if the student received more title iv aid than the amount earned , the school , the student , or both must return the unearned funds .

the amount of aid that must be returned is based only on the amount of aid that was disbursed .

if it is determined that funds must be returned , the institution first calculates how much it must return .

the school must return the lesser of: ( 1 ) the amount of title iv funds awarded to the student that the student did not earn , or ( 2 ) the amount of institutional charges incurred by the student for the payment or enrollment period multiplied by the percentage of unearned funds .

funds are then returned to the title iv programs up to the net amount distributed .

the ihe has up to 45 days after the date it determines a student has withdrawn to return its portion of the unearned funds .

the student is responsible for all unearned title iv funds that the school is not required to return .

the initial amount owed by the student is the balance of unearned funds after the school returns its portion of unearned funds .

this is referred to as the initial amount due because a student does not have to make grant repayments in full , so it is possible that the student may be responsible for returning a smaller amount of funds than initially calculated .

the initial title iv grant overpayment is reduced by 50% .

the amount owed by the student is then recalculated , and the student repays the required funds .

this last provision in the calculation of title iv funds to be returned regarding the reduction of the grant amount had been somewhat controversial .

the statute had been interpreted to mean that the 50% reduction in grant funds referred to 50% of the amount due for grant repayment rather than 50% of the total grant .

for example , assume a student had received only a $1,650 pell grant , but has $825 in unearned title iv aid .

also assume the institution had to return $250 , leaving $575 as the initial amount to be repaid by the student .

the $575 would have been multiplied by 50% , reducing the amount owed to $287.50 .

the hera clarified the interpretation of this provision .

section 484b ( b ) ( 2 ) was amended to limit the amount of a grant overpayment to be repaid by a student to the amount by which the original grant overpayment exceeds 50% of the total title iv grant funds received by the student .

thus , in the previous example , instead of multiplying $575 by 50% , the total grant amount of $1,650 would be multiplied by 50% to determine the amount of grant aid that would not have to be repaid .

the result of this calculation is $825 .

since the amount by which any grant repayment would be reduced ( $825 ) is greater than the amount owed ( $575 ) , the student would not have to repay any of the pell grant .

this statutory change provides a greater benefit to the student .

in some cases , students who have withdrawn from an ihe may have earned more title iv aid than they actually received .

prior to the hera , if a student earned more grant or loan aid than he / she received , an ihe was required to make ( or offer ) a post - withdrawal disbursement to the student within 30 days of the date the ihe determined the student withdrew .

the hera added additional requirements that ihes must follow in making this disbursement .

prior to making a post - withdrawal disbursement of loan funds to a student who had withdrawn , the ihe must contact the student , explain the repayment obligations associated with accepting the funds , and confirm that the loan funds are still needed by the student .

the result of this contact and the final determination regarding the post - withdrawal disbursement must be documented in the student's file .

with the war in iraq , the issue of how to handle federal aid provided to student reservists called to active duty has become a more prominent issue .

based on the return of title iv funds policy , if these students officially withdraw from their ihe , the ihe must make a return of title iv funds calculation .

according to current ed guidance , the ihe must return any funds that it owes to ed but students should not be notified if they owe funds .

if , on the other hand , the student reservist takes a leave of absence to serve , the total leave of absence is currently capped at 180 days in a 12-month period , raising questions about how to handle extended periods of absence .

based on ed regulations , a student who takes a leave of absence for military duty must be able to resume his / her studies at the point at which those studies were interrupted .

the student cannot be obligated to pay additional institutional charges to complete the coursework .

students who withdraw are not afforded the same protections by statutory language or regulations .

ed , however , has encouraged institutions to provide students with a full refund of institutional charges or provide a credit for students to resume attendance at a later time .

ed has also encouraged institutions to develop flexible re - enrollment options for students affected by the military mobilization .

distance education refers to instructional modes where there is a separation in time and / or place between the instructor and the student .

the term "distance education" refers to both correspondence courses and telecommunications courses offered by television , audio or computer transmission , or over the internet .

historically , distance education courses have been used as a means to increase student access to postsecondary education by providing alternatives to the traditional mode of on - campus instruction .

recently , there has been substantial growth in the number and types of courses being offered by institutions due to the availability of new technology , such as the internet .

title iv program requirements , especially those related to the disbursement of funds , are based on student participation in term - based on - campus instruction .

existing requirements may restrict funding to students participating in distance education and may not be easily applied to distance education programs .

this issue was partially addressed by the higher education amendments of 1998 with the creation of the distance education demonstration program discussed below .

as previously discussed , the regulations governing the administration of title iv programs provide specific definitions for correspondence and telecommunications courses .

a correspondence course is a home study course offered by an institution .

the institution provides the student with instructional materials , including examinations .

upon the completion of a section of the instructional materials , the student takes the corresponding examinations and returns the examinations to the institution for grading .

a telecommunications course is a course that is offered via the application of technology .

this includes courses offered by television , audio or computer transmission , or over the internet .

if a correspondence course also includes telecommunications technology , the course is classified based on the predominant mode of instruction .

during the 1992 reauthorization , to combat cases of fraud and abuse in institutions that primarily delivered instruction through print - based media , congress established several requirements that are collectively known as the 50% rules .

these requirements affected both institutional eligibility and student eligibility for title iv aid , and were substantially revised by the hera .

the 1992 requirements are summarized below: if the sum of the telecommunications courses and correspondence courses equals or exceeds 50% of the total number of courses offered during that award year , telecommunications courses are considered correspondence courses .

an institution loses its title iv eligibility if more than 50% of its courses are offered by correspondence ( section 102 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ) .

an institution loses its title iv eligibility if 50% or more of its students are enrolled in correspondence courses ( section 102 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( b ) ) .

the first 50% rule discussed above had implications for an institution's eligibility to participate in title iv programs .

if the sum of an institution's telecommunications courses and correspondence courses equaled or exceeded 50% of all courses offered by an institution , all telecommunications courses were considered correspondence courses .

the hera eliminated the requirement that courses offered by telecommunications be considered correspondence courses .

based on the second 50% rule , if an institution offered more than 50% of its courses by correspondence then it would lose its eligibility to participate in title iv programs .

while this requirement continues to apply to institutions offering courses by correspondence , courses offered by telecommunications were specifically excluded from this requirement by the hera .

under the third 50% rule , an institution would lose its title iv eligibility if 50% or more of its students were enrolled in correspondence courses .

as with the second 50% rule , this rule continues to apply to student enrollment in correspondence courses , but courses offered by telecommunications were specifically excluded from this requirement by the hera .

the previous distinction between correspondence courses and telecommunications courses , and the 50% rule that resulted in telecommunications courses being considered correspondence courses , directly affected student eligibility for title iv funds .

for example , prior to the hera , students enrolled in telecommunications courses were eligible to receive title iv funds if they were enrolled in a degree program or a certificate program that was at least one year long .

for certificate programs of less than one year , telecommunications students were considered correspondence students and , therefore , were not eligible to receive title iv funds as correspondence students had to be enrolled in a degree - granting program to receive title iv aid .

as previously discussed , the hera eliminated the rule that required telecommunications courses to be considered correspondence courses and , as part of this change , eliminated the requirement that a telecommunications course had to be part of a program of study of one year or longer .

thus , students enrolled in distance education courses , rather than correspondence courses , are eligible to receive title iv aid if they are enrolled in degree - granting programs or certificate programs of any length , provided the program meets the program eligibility requirements for distance education programs .

students enrolled in correspondence courses , however , are only eligible for title iv aid if they are enrolled in a degree - granting program .

another distinction between students enrolled in distance education courses and correspondence courses also remains .

a student enrolled solely in correspondence courses cannot be considered more than a half - time student for the purposes of title iv aid regardless of the number of credits the student is taking .

students enrolled solely in telecommunications courses , however , can be considered full - time students for the purposes of title iv aid .

as previously mentioned , the hera added a definition of a distance education eligible program for title iv purposes .

an otherwise eligible program ( see previous discussion of program eligibility ) that is offered in whole or in part through telecommunications is eligible for the purposes of title iv if the program is offered by an institution , other than a foreign institution , that has been determined to have the capability to effectively deliver distance education programs by an accrediting agency recognized by the secretary .

the accrediting agency must have the evaluation of distance education programs within its scope of recognition .

currently , the secretary recognizes 19 accrediting agencies as having the evaluation of distance education programs within their scope of recognition .

during the 1998 hea reauthorization , congress recognized that with changes in technology , ihes are increasingly offering courses via distance education .

a demonstration program was established to: ( 1 ) examine the quality and viability of expanding distance education programs , the support of which was limited under the hea prior to hera ; ( 2 ) provide increased student access to postsecondary education through distance education ; and ( 3 ) determine the most effective ways to deliver distance education , statutory and regulatory modifications needed to increase access to distance education programs , and the appropriate level of title iv aid that should be made available to distance education students .

several program requirements for institutions participating in title iv programs were waived for the demonstration program .

for example , the 50% rules that applied to the percentage of correspondence courses offered by the institution and the percentage of students enrolled in correspondence courses were waived for many program participants .

in addition , under certain circumstances , the provision that defines a telecommunications course as a correspondence course was also waived .

other institutions received waivers of the definition of a full - time student to allow correspondence students to be considered full - time students .

an initial group of 15 participants were selected to participate in the program beginning july 1 , 1999 .

nine participants were invited to join the program at the beginning of its third year .

five additional participants joined the program in december 2003 .

there are currently 24 participants in the program – nine proprietary institutions , seven private non - profit institutions , four public universities , three consortia , and one public system .

generally , institutions were considered eligible to apply for the program if they were located in the united states and participated in title iv programs or provided a two - year or four - year program leading to an associate's degree or bachelor's degree , respectively , but were ineligible to participate in title iv programs because of limitations on the number of correspondence courses or the number of students participating in correspondence courses .

in april 2005 , ed submitted a third report to congress on the demonstration program .

enrollment in distance education programs offered by the eight program participants that reported data for eight years indicated that enrollment had increased from 7,930 in 1998-1999 to 63,350 in 2003-2004 – nearly a 700% increase in enrollment .

among the seven institutions in the second cohort of participants that provided data for all four years of their participation , enrollment grew by 400% .

the greatest growth occurred at institutions primarily serving adult students .

students served by institutions participating in the dedp tend to be female , enrolled part - time , and older than traditional college age .

ed concluded that granting waivers to program participants , including waivers of the 50% rules , had not led to increases in fraud and abuse .

they determined that the administrative capability and financial viability of an institution posed a greater risk to the integrity of federal student aid programs than the mode through which an institution provided instruction .

ed also found that while distance education may enable institutions to be innovative with respect to student access and flexibility , this innovation may be hampered by the administrative requirements of title iv student financial aid programs .

for example , some dedp participants have experienced difficulties administering federal student aid programs for non - traditional academic structures , as the federal student aid system was developed in an environment in which most institutions enrolled traditional students , offered programs on a semester or quarter basis , and students took summers off .

while hera made changes to the 50% rules and program eligibility requirements , additional issues related to distance education may be discussed during hea reauthorization .

examples of these topics are outlined below .

given the tremendous growth in distance education programs , congress may consider whether accrediting agencies should be required to have specific standards for evaluating the quality and quantity of distance education programs in order to be recognized as an accrediting agency by ed , or whether accrediting organizations should review distance education similarly as they review traditional education programs .

in addition , congress may consider adding safeguards to ensure that a student who registers for a distance education course is the same student who completes the coursework and receives the credit .

the congress may consider adding a specific definition of a telecommunications course to replace the existing definition of telecommunications included in section 484 ( l ) ( 4 ) .

ed has suggested that the definition should "specify that there be regular and substantive interaction between students and the instructor. .

the current definition does not address this interaction .

an increasing number of institutions are offering multiple start dates for courses , shorter courses , and overlapping terms .

this makes student aid calculation and disbursement complicated .

the congress may consider switching to an alternative model for aid calculation and disbursement based on an individual student's program of instruction , which could potentially alleviate some of this difficulty .

