influenza a / h5n1 is one of many strains of avian influenza that can cause illness in poultry .

bird ( or avian ) flu outbreaks have occurred at various times around the world .

until 1997 , there were no known human h5n1 cases .

that year , 18 people in hong kong contracted the virus ; of whom 6 died .

to contain the virus , 1.5 million birds were killed .

since 2003 , when the virus resurfaced and killed 4 people , scientists have closely monitored resurgent h5n1 outbreaks .

when analyzing the viral spread and severity of h5n1 , some health experts prefer to consider the average h5n1 human fatality rate since the virus emerged in 2003 ( more than 50% ) .

the world health organization ( who ) , however , considers the annual change of human fatality rates .

the overall human fatality rate was highest in 2004 ( 73% ) , followed by 63% to date in 2006 , and 43% in 2005 ( table 1 ) .

there has been some debate about whether h5n1 will cause a global pandemic .

who ranks the current global h5n1 outbreak in pandemic alert phase three , which means a virus new to humans is causing infections , but not spreading easily from one person to another ( table a - 1 ) .

some predict that if h5n1 were to become transmissible among humans , the virus could cause an "influenza pandemic" ( worldwide disease outbreak ) .

skeptics argue that such predictions are exaggerated , because if the virus were able to transform into a strain that is efficiently transmissible among people it would have already done so .

who warns that the virus is continuing to spread and that the threat has not been eliminated .

thus , in the latter view , governments should continue to prepare for some sort of pandemic and not become complacent even though h5n1 has not yet become transmissible between people .

at last count , h5n1 has infected birds in more than 50 countries and infected 261 people , of whom 157 have died .

more than 200 million birds in europe , the middle east and africa have either died from h5n1 or have been culled in containment exercises .

from december 2003 to august 2004 , nine asian countries reported h5n1 outbreaks in poultry .

in late july 2005 , russia identified h5n1 in its poultry for the first time .

by october 2005 , birds in croatia , kazakhstan , mongolia , romania , and turkey had contracted h5n1 .

in 2006 , human h5n1 cases were being reported outside of asia for the first time .

while iraq has reported human h5n1 cases , the strain has not been detected among its birds .

p.l .

109-13 , fy2005 emergency supplemental appropriations , provided the first appropriation for global avian flu efforts , though agencies and departments had already launched initiatives to combat the virus .

the act provided the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) $25 million for ongoing efforts to prevent and contain the global spread of h5n1 .

usaid transferred $15 million of the funds to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

the department of state ( dos ) transferred an additional $6.3 million of tsunami relief funds to usaid for international avian influenza activities , as permitted by the law .

including the latter transfer , fy2005 emergency supplemental appropriations provided $31.3 million for global avian flu efforts .

in fy2006 , the president submitted a $7.1 billion emergency supplemental request for avian and pandemic influenza preparedness .

congress provided $6.1 billion for those efforts in two supplemental appropriations ; appropriating $3.8 billion in p.l .

109-148 , fy2006 defense appropriations and $2.3 billion in p.l .

109-234 , fy2006 emergency supplemental appropriations .

u.s. agencies and departments might contribute additional resources to global avian flu efforts not specifically provided through these appropriations .

some activities that could support the control of avian flu include infectious diseases and influenza programs , global surveillance efforts , and influenza research initiatives .

in fy2007 , some appropriations bills included additional funds for global avian and pandemic influenza preparedness .

congress did not enact any of those measures .

instead , it amended p.l .

109-289 ( division b ) , which provides funding at the lessor of fy2006 enacted , fy2007 house - passed , or fy2007 senate - passed levels until february 15 , 2007 .

on november 1 , 2005 , the president released the national strategy for pandemic influenza .

the national strategy was to provide a framework for future u.s. planning efforts that were consistent with the national security strategy and the national strategy for homeland security .

the president requested $7.1 billion to fund the national strategy for pandemic influenza , some of which he suggested be set aside for international activities .

the majority of the funds , $6.7 billion , were requested for hhs .

one day later , on november 2 , 2005 , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) released its influenza plan .

the hhs plan provided a detailed explanation of how the department would implement its part of the national strategy .

some were disappointed by the relatively small proportion of funds reserved for international efforts in the national strategy and in hhs' plan .

advocates of greater spending on global avian flu efforts argued that if more resources were allocated to containing the virus abroad , americans would be better protected , domestic pandemic preparedness efforts would be enhanced , and the likelihood that h5n1 would continue to spread and become efficiently transmissible between people would be lessened .

of the $7.1 billion related to international activities , the president requested: $200.0 million for hhs to undertake a number of activities , including international pandemic preparedness planning initiatives and pandemic influenza disease surveillance ; $18.3 million for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to undertake research and development initiatives and to provide avian influenza surveillance and prevention technical assistance globally ; $120.0 million for the department of defense ( dod ) to increase worldwide surveillance and upgrade related equipment ; $10.0 million for dod to assist military partner nations in procuring protective equipment , portable field assay testing equipment , and related laboratory equipment ; $17.0 million for dos to implement public diplomacy , training , and international outreach activities related to avian influenza and pandemic preparedness ; $1.5 million for dos international visitors program to provide 100 additional professional exchanges of doctors , health practitioners , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) ; $75.2 million to usaid for efforts that encourage behavior change and raise awareness about avian flu awareness , diagnostic support initiatives , and pandemic preparedness and planning activities ; and $56.3 million for international disaster and famine assistance funds of usaid to pre - position supplies and equipment , such as antiviral medication and protective equipment .

in may 2006 , the white house released the implementation plan for the national strategy for pandemic influenza , which was released in november 2005 .

the plan outlined how various u.s. agencies and departments would integrate the implementation of more than 300 actions that respond to an influenza pandemic threat .

according to a status report on the plan , released in december 2006 , 92% of those actions have been completed and the united states has invested $434 million in international efforts ( table a - 2 ) .

the section below summarizes the role of each agency and department involved in international efforts , as outlined in the plan , and highlights appropriations congress provided to each .

in november 2005 , more than 600 delegates from over 100 countries convened in geneva , switzerland , to develop a global action plan to control avian influenza in animals and to limit the threat of a human influenza pandemic .

participants agreed that capital and other resources were needed to support countries which had already been affected by avian influenza , to assist countries bordering those with h5n1 cases , and to boost global capacity to identify and respond to a human pandemic if one were to occur .

at the conference , experts and officials discussed key financing needs for countries attempting to develop a comprehensive response to h5n1 .

the world bank estimated that countries would need some $1 billion over the next three years to meet their needs , though the estimate did not include the additional costs of developing human or animal vaccines , purchasing antiviral medicines , or compensating farmers who lose income when animals are culled .

in january 2006 , the world bank , the european commission , and the chinese government co - sponsored a donor's conference in beijing , china , to garner support for global avian and pandemic influenza action plans .

representatives from approximately 100 countries and 20 international organizations attended and ultimately pledged about $1.9 billion for avian flu assistance .

the top five donors included: the world bank ( $500 million ) , the united states ( $334 million ) , japan ( $159 million ) , the eu member states ( $138 million ) , and the european commission ( $121 million ) .

in june 2006 , members of the international community reconvened in vienna , austria , to confirm the financial resources already pledged at the beijing conference and to reconsider the financial needs of those nations contending with h5n1 .

since the last conference was held in beijing , the virus had spread to europe and africa , increasing the amount of funds and other resources that would be needed to contain the virus .

at the conference , the newly established alive platform estimated that african countries facing h5n1 cases needed an additional $700 million .

health experts also expressed concern about the continued spread of the animal virus in southeast asia , particularly in indonesia .

the united states announced at the conference that it would increase its pledge by about $28 million .

between december 6 and december 8 , 2006 , the international community met in bamako , mali , to assess progress made in controlling the spread of h5n1 avian flu since the previous conferences held in geneva , beijing , and vienna .

at the conference , donors pledged an additional $475 million to fighting h5n1 .

the united states again increased its pledge to reach a total of $434 million ( table a - 2 ) .

details were not provided on how the additional funds would be allocated .

some members have suggested that a greater portion of influenza pandemic preparedness funding be spent on global efforts .

during a house foreign operations subcommittee hearing on pandemic flu in march 2006 , representative kolbe stated that the $55 million that usaid requested for fy2007 global avian flu initiatives were insufficient , and encouraged the agency to request additional funds if necessary .

representative kolbe also questioned why such a small proportion of the fy2007 requested funds were allocated to africa ( less than $10 million ) .

appropriators did not enact any of the fy2007 appropriations that included specific funding for global avian flu activities .

instead , congress amended p.l .

109-289 ( division b ) , which provides funding at the lessor of fy2006 enacted , fy2007 house - passed , or fy2007 senate - passed levels until february 15 , 2007 .

supporters of greater spending on global avian flu efforts urge congress to provide additional funds for international efforts and to enact legislation in the 110 th congress similar to those bills introduced in the 109 th congress which sought to increase resources to global avian and pandemic influenza preparedness ( for a list of the bills see appendix ) .

intellectual property rights has become an increasingly contentious issue in global health , particularly since companies began threatening to produce generic versions of hiv / aids treatments without the patent holders' permission .

some drug manufacturers in developing countries have argued that tamiflu and other patented antivirals are too expensive for most poor countries .

in october 2005 , a representative from an indian drug manufacturer threatened that the company would develop and sell a generic version of tamiflu "at a humanitarian price" in developing nations , and not in the united states or europe .

since then , roche has granted sublicenses to manufacturers in china , india , south africa , and the united states .

in the event of a pandemic , some assert that the united states will not export the antivirals that it is stockpiling .

in that light , some observers are advocating that congress provide funds to support countries in developing the capacity to develop and purchase antivirals .

still others contend that the united states could help to contain the spread of h5n1 by exporting generic antivirals to non - producing countries that can not afford to purchase the drugs ( see h.r .

3369 , s. 969 , and h.r .

4392 ) .

some epidemiologists have expressed similar concerns related to h5n1 vaccine availability .

if h5n1 vaccines are developed , they would be a primary mechanism for controlling the spread of the virus and reducing associated mortality and morbidity .

due to a number of uncertainties , including unpredictable market demand and pricing , liability and intellectual property considerations , and regulatory and tax issues , global and domestic vaccine research and manufacturing capacity is limited .

global health experts contend that some of the most affected countries do not have the capacity to produce vaccines , nor will they have the ability to purchase sufficient quantities of the vaccine in the event of a pandemic .

one article in the journal of public health policy pointed out that "almost 40% of the world's supply of interpandemic influenza vaccines is used in countries that do not produce their own vaccines. .

some health experts would like congress to increase funding for hhs' activities related to improving global vaccine research and development capacity .

a number of health experts advocate greater u.s. investment in the strengthening of foreign health systems overall .

proponents argue that the spread of h5n1 and the inability of countries like indonesia to contain the virus demonstrates the need to increase support for public health systems .

supporters also argue that increased spending might encourage state openness and responsibility , and enhance global cooperation and containment efforts .

due to the poor state of health infrastructures in a number of countries , key sectors that are critical in identifying and containing the spread of h5n1 — such as disease surveillance and veterinary services — are ill - equipped .

many health experts are concerned that a pandemic might progress before it is discovered in a country where h5n1 is endemic .

supporters of this idea argue that ill - equipped surveillance systems will be slow to determine the source of a pandemic , evaluate the rate of viral transmission , ascertain whether h5n1 has become efficiently transmissible among humans , or rate the effectiveness of anti - flu initiatives .

some health experts would like congress to enact legislation in the 110 th congress , similar to measures introduced in the 109 th congress , that would strengthen health systems and veterinary health services in developing countries ( see h.r .

4476 , s. 1912 , s. 2170 , h.r .

4245 , and h.r .

4603 ) .

mass culling of infected poultry and in regions surrounding infected animals is the most widely used containment measure .

who has expressed concern that some farmers in poorer countries might not cull their poultry , because they depend on poultry farming and their governments might not be able to compensate them .

some scientists propose researching the effectiveness of alternative containment strategies , such as implementing cleaning days ( when all live markets are simultaneously emptied and cleaned ) and separating ducks and chickens in live poultry markets to decrease viral transmission .

others advocate the development of a global fund to support countries in their farmer compensation efforts .

some encourage members to enact legislation in the 110 th congress similar to bills introduced in the 109 th congress ( see h.r .

4062 , s. 1821 and h.r .

4603 ) .

in connection with the bamako conference on avian and pandemic influenza , the world bank released a report that predicted the economic impacts of a global influenza pandemic .

if the pandemic was mild , killing about 1.4 million people ( seasonal flu kills between 0.2 million and 1.5 million people annually ) , the world bank estimated global output would decline by less than 1% .

a more moderate pandemic , killing 14.2 million people , could cause global gdp to fall more than 2% , representing about $200 billion in one quarter or $800 billion over a year .

a severe pandemic , modeled after the 1918 spanish flu , could cut global gdp by almost 5% , constituting a major global recession .

the world bank predicts that developing countries would be hardest hit .

many economists assert that health and non - health related sectors could be severely affected by a global influenza pandemic , though it would be difficult to predict the costs of those effects .

for example , canadian and asian hospitality and tourism sectors were considerably impacted during the sars outbreak .

in 2002 and 2003 , sars cost the asia - pacific region about $40 billion .

additionally , flights to the region fell by about 45% , crippling the airline and hotel industries .

canada estimated that it lost approximately $1.2 billion , with about $763 million spent on the health - care system .

some analysts caution that congress should be prepared to respond to the impact that potential fluctuations in supply and demand from key asian markets might have on the u.s. economy .

in the 109 th congress , some members introduced legislation to establish a national pandemic influenza economic advisory committee that would prepare a report that comprehensively analyzes the potential economic gains and losses to the u.s. economy in a pandemic scenario due to changes in asia's economy ( see h.r .

4062 , s. 969 , and h.r .

3369 ) .

supporters of this idea suggest that congress enact similar legislation in the 110 th congress .

bills introduced in the 109 th congress that would have increased resources to global avian fl .

h.rept .

109-463 to h.r .

5384 , fy2007 agriculture appropriations , would have provided $4.5 million for u.s. department of agriculture's international avian flu efforts .

the senate did not include a specific amount for such efforts .

s.rept .

109-277 to h.r .

5522 , fy2007 foreign operations appropriations , would have provided $25 million for usaid's global avian flu efforts , $30 million below requested levels .

the house did not include a specific amount for such efforts .

s. 3708 , fy2007 labor , hhs , and education appropriations , proposed $40 million for international and domestic surveillance , diagnosis , and epidemic investigations .

additional funds would have been provided in the bill for pandemic preparedness and avian flu , though not specifically for global avian flu efforts .

for example , the committee proposed $130 million to expand laboratory capacity , research and support for detecting and characterizing influenza and other pathogens .

the house did not propose a specific amount for global avian flu efforts , though some funds would have been appropriated to avian flu and pandemic preparedness .

h.r .

4062 and s. 1821 , pandemic preparedness and response acts proposed developing a "pandemic fund"to augment ongoing u.s. and international avian flu and pandemic preparedness initiatives .

h.r .

4476 and s. 1912 , global network for avian influenza surveillance act s , would have increased support for initiatives that prevent the spread of h5n1 among animals .

h.r .

3369 and s. 969 , attacking viral influenza across nations acts , would have provided funds to support u.s. efforts to strengthen surveillance capacity within affected countries .

h.r .

4245 , influenza preparedness and prevention act , would have increased the number of international public health sites and staff abroad in countries impacted by pandemic influenza .

s. 2170 , global pathogen surveillance act of 2005 , would have provided $1 billion for a real - time international threat detection system , offers training and education for epidemiologists in developing countries , offered training and consultation on disease and syndrome surveillance , and provided assistance to developing countries for the purchase and maintenance of public health laboratory equipment and supplies .

h.r .

4603 , pandemic and seasonal influenza act of 2005 , would have provided funds to establish a global network for avian influenza surveillance , offer technical assistance to countries for disease detection , strengthen veterinary systems , and institute a coordinator of u.s. assistance to combat avian influenza .

h.r .

4392 , to provide for the importation of pharmaceutical products under a compulsory license as provided for under the world trade organization , would have permitted the united states to export generic antivirals to non - producing countries .

