allegations of north korean ( democratic people's republic of korea , or dprk ) drug production , drug trafficking , and other crime - for - profit activities have been an issue of concern for congress , the administration , the media , and the diplomatic community .

the issue is twofold .

first is general u.s. interest in halting criminal behavior ( upholding the rule of law and protecting u.s. citizens and assets from illicit activity ) .

second is how to deal with a government suspected of countenancing or sponsoring activity that may threaten u.s. diplomatic and security interests .

a challenge facing policy makers is how to balance pursuing anti - drug , counterfeiting , and crime policies vis - à - vis north korea against effectively pursuing other high - priority u.s. foreign policy objectives , including ( 1 ) limiting possession and production of weapons of mass destruction , ( 2 ) limiting ballistic missile production and export , ( 3 ) curbing terrorism , and ( 4 ) addressing humanitarian needs .

a core issue is whether the income from the dprk's reportedly widespread criminal activity has financed the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and has strengthened the dprk's ability to maintain , until recently , truculent , no - compromise positions on the issue of its nuclear weapons program .

some also speculate that the dprk's criminal smuggling networks could help facilitate the illicit movement of nuclear materials in and out of the country .

u.n .

resolution 1718 ( 2006 ) provides for economic sanctions against persons or entities engaged in or providing support for , including through illicit means , dprk's nuclear - related , other weapons of mass destruction - related and ballistic missile - related programs .

counterfeiting , copyright and trademark violations , and other illicit activity occur in virtually all countries of the world , but in the north korean case , numerous sources indicate that the state apparently had — and may continue to be — sponsoring some of these activities .

in this view , if the dprk is to join the larger international community of nations , it would be expected to cease state - sponsorship of such activities and to take appropriate measures against private parties engaged in such production and / or distribution .

as the six - party talks on north korea's nuclear program have proceeded in 2008 , it appears that the u.s. goal of denuclearization has outweighed concerns related to dprk illicit activity ( with the exception of proliferation of nuclear weapons technology and materials ) .

such illicit activity by north korea , however , could resurface as the six - party process proceeds and attention turns toward normalizing diplomatic ties with the dprk by the united states , japan , and south korea and allowing north korea to join international financial institutions such as the asian development bank , international monetary fund , and the world bank .

the role of congress in this issue includes overseeing u.s. policy , eliciting information and raising public awareness of the issue , and balancing u.s. interests when foreign policy goals may conflict with anti - crime activities .

congress also authorizes and appropriates funds for humanitarian and other economic assistance for north korea .

areas of dprk criminal activity commonly cited have included production and trafficking in ( 1 ) heroin and methamphetamine ; ( 2 ) counterfeit cigarettes ; ( 3 ) counterfeit pharmaceuticals ( eg , "usa" manufactured viagra® ) ; and ( 4 ) counterfeit currency ( eg , u.s. $100 bill "supernotes" ) .

media reports also have indicated that north korea may be engaged in insurance fraud , endangered species trafficking , and human trafficking as a matter of state policy .

news reporting on the subject reached its height in 2003 , when the bush administration was activity raising the issue of dprk's crime - for - profit activities at the highest levels .

since then , fewer public reports have surfaced to indicate that dprk illicit activities are continuing .

at the same time , no public reports indicate that dprk has completely halted its crime - for - profit activities .

in 2008 , the state department reports that while dprk's drug trafficking appears to have declined substantially , "dprk - tolerance of criminal behavior may exist on a larger , organized scale , even if no large - scale narcotics trafficking incidents involving the state itself have come to light. .

the estimated aggregate scale of dprk's crime - for - profit activity has been and may still be significant — and arguably provides important foreign currency resources to the heavily militarized north korean state .

dprk crime - for - profit activities are reportedly orchestrated by a special office charged with bringing in foreign currency under the direction of the ruling korean worker's party .

north korean drug trafficking , trade in counterfeit products , and the counterfeiting of u.s. currency , to the extent that it does indeed exist , have been a matter of concern in asian , european , and u.s. law enforcement , foreign policy , and national security communities .

at least 50 documented incidents , over decades , many involving arrest or detention of north korean diplomats , have linked north korea to drug trafficking .

such activity , particularly production and trafficking of methamphetamine and trade in counterfeit cigarettes , appears to be continuing .

with the caveat that dollar value estimates of clandestine activities are highly speculative , conservative estimates suggest north korean criminal activity generates as much as $500 million in profit per year , with some estimates reaching the $1 billion level .

one recent economic study by stephan haggard and marcus noland , however , places current illicit activity at a much lower level and considers the lower end of the various published estimates of profit as the upper bound .

for example , the haggard / noland study estimates drug trafficking in 2005-2006 at about $20 to $35 million .

in contrast , the ( south ) korea institute for defense analysis reportedly stated that north korea earns between $700 million and $1 billion per year from exporting weapons and trading drugs and counterfeit money .

in 2003 , an official from u.s .

forces korea reportedly stated that north korea's annual revenue from exports of illegal drugs was estimated at $500 million and from counterfeit bills at $15 to $20 million .

the official also stated that in 2001 , north korea exported ballistic missiles worth $580 million to the middle east .

more recently , some sources report that north korea has been exporting conventional military weapons to burma ( myanmar ) in contravention to current u.n. prohibitions against north korea .

one basis for the $500 million to $1 billion figure for illicit exports is that it can be inferred from international trade data and from reported anecdotes that markets in pyongyang have ample supplies of imported foreign goods .

in 2004 , north korea is estimated to have incurred a trade deficit of $1.8 billion .

this deficit rose to about $2.0 billion in 2005 , dropped to an estimated $1.3 billion in 2006 , and rose to an estimated $2.7 billion in 2007 .

some of this imbalance is financed through food and other aid , capital inflows , borrowing , remittances from north korean laborers working abroad ( especially in russia and the middle east ) , and tourism .

pyongyang , however , does little borrowing on international markets , and tokyo has been cracking down on remittances from ethnic north koreans in japan .

inflows of capital also seem small , although they are rising as china and south korea invest in enterprises in the north .

as a result , some surmise that in some years as much as $1 billion has been financed by illicit activity .

besides the production and distribution of illicit drugs , dprk appears to have been involved in the production and distribution of counterfeit foreign currencies as a means of generating foreign exchange .

the united states has accused dprk of counterfeiting u.s. $100 federal reserve notes ( supernotes ) and passing them off in various countries .

officials familiar with the bogus currency in question note its exceptional quality — so good that many cashier - level bank personnel would likely not be able to detect the forgeries .

in an april 2008 hearing , a treasury official stated that it has continued to work with the u.s. secret service to counteract north korea's counterfeiting of u.s. currency and that high - quality counterfeit bills produced by north korea , known as the "supernote," continue to surface .

media reports indicate that counterfeit $100 bills are used in north korean markets as currency and are valued at about the equivalent of $70 .

it is not clear , however , whether the counterfeit bills circulating are from existing stocks or are currently being produced .

the anti - counterfeiting security features incorporated into new u.s. bills make counterfeiting much more difficult .

in 2006 , u.s. officials cited the figure of $45-$48 million detected or seized since 1989 .

however , because counterfeiting is a form of clandestine criminal activity and north korea is a closed society , the amount of alleged dprk - produced counterfeit currency in circulation is speculative at best .

estimates of the profit such transactions bring to the pyongyang regime — to the extent they are based on open source material — are also speculative .

amounts commonly cited , which take into account many factors , range from $15 million to $25 million in profit per year .

u.s. policy has addressed north korea's crime - for - profit activities through several tracks , including diplomacy , law enforcement , economic sanctions , and economic incentives .

in some instances , the various tracks may overlap considerably , while in other cases , they may work at cross - purposes .

congress has played an active role in the oversight of u.s. policy toward north korea and may further consider evaluating u.s. efforts to reduce north korea's crime - for - profit activities or explore in more detail the dynamics and trends related to the regime's illicit financial channels .

one strategy on the diplomatic front has been to use fora such as the six - party talks on nuclear proliferation to address issues such as north korea's illicit activities .

this was the initial preference of the bush administration , but since sometime after the bda action in 2007 , this tactic no longer appears evident .

as the bush administration comes to a close , denuclearization is the primary emphasis of policy on north korea .

also , if the dprk is able to earn foreign exchange and receive more economic assistance , the pressure to generate foreign currency through illicit activities arguably will diminish .

the policy debate heretofore has been divided between those who argue to pressure north korea with unilateral tactics that cut dprk off from access to its illicitly generated profits through economic sanctions and a second group of policymakers more in favor of engagement who seek to resolve the north korean problem mainly by negotiations .

its goal is to change dprk's "bad behavior" by bringing the country into the circle of peaceful nations and inducing it to act in accord with international standards .

in 2008 , the latter argument seems to be carrying the day .

following recent developments in the six - party talks , a continued policy challenge for the united states is to receive a commitment by pyongyang to curtail its alleged crime - for - profit activities .

a possible vehicle for this discussion could be the working team on the normalization of diplomatic relations between the dprk and the united states .

since japan , south korea , and china also have considerable interest in protecting themselves from north korean illicit activity , it also may be addressed in the working team on normalizing relations between the dprk and japan as well as in other negotiations .

so far , however , the working teams have not appeared to have addressed north korean crime - for - profit activities .

on the law enforcement side are actions such as the prosecution of criminal behavior and those resulting from the bush administration's illicit activities initiative ( iai ) .

the iai was established in 2003 as an interagency effort aimed at curtailing north korean involvement in narcotics trafficking , counterfeiting , and other illicit activities .

the major purposes of the initiative have been to provide policy support for the six - party talks and to hold north korea to internationally accepted standards of behavior by enforcing relevant u.s. and other laws .

the iai has come to involve fourteen different u.s. government departments and agencies , and it has received cooperation from fifteen different governments and international organizations .

the banco delta macau action stemmed partly from the work of the iai .

the united states and other nations also are taking direct measures to halt shipments of illicit cargo from north korea .

the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) , for example , is aimed at stopping shipments of weapons of mass destruction , their delivery systems , and related materials by tracking and searching suspected ships or other conveyances transporting such cargo .

fourteen nations have signed on to the psi , and many more have endorsed the principles .

although not directed at illicit activities per se , the prospect of ships being inspected complicates north korean efforts to smuggle items such as illegal drugs , fake pharmaceuticals , and counterfeit currency .

a weakness of the psi , however , is that the dprk's immediate neighbors , china and south korea , have not joined the effort , though there is some speculation that seoul may join under new president lee myung - bak .

in addition , no north korean ships or airplanes have been halted by a psi operation .

the role of congress in this issue includes oversight of u.s. policy , eliciting information and raising public awareness of the issue , and in balancing u.s. interests when foreign policy goals may conflict with anti - crime activities .

congress also may be asked to provide funding for energy and food assistance to north korea as part of a resolution of the dprk's nuclear weapons program , because some contend that additional supplies of energy and food could reduce the need to rely on illicit activities in some north korean quarters .

congressional action also could be required to enable north korea to earn more foreign exchange through an increase in its legitimate exports or by attracting investments from u.s. businesses .

this could include , for example , granting the dprk normal trading nation status ( most favored nation status ) with respect to u.s. import duties , or by allowing goods from north and south korea's kaesong industrial complex to be included in the proposed korea - u.s. free trade agreement .

for those assuming that the pyongyang regime wants to curb its crime - for - profit activity , an important question yet unresolved is the degree to which the leadership will be able to do so .

analysts point out that in nations or regions where the crime has become institutionalized , income from such activity often becomes "addictive" to those involved in the criminal conduct .

in such instances , a class of criminal entrepreneurs is created and , in the case of north korea , analysts point to the systematic criminalization of the state , over years , and its growing intimate relationships with organized crime elements throughout asia .

that is not to say that north korean criminals , like other criminals , would not be able to switch emphasis from risky criminal activity , such as narcotics trafficking , to less risky and potentially even more lucrative large - scale manufacture and trade in counterfeit cigarettes and pharmaceuticals — a trend that may well be underway .

indeed , state countenanced — if not state sponsored — production of seemingly genuine japanese and u.s. cigarettes appears to be flourishing , as may large scale production of expertly packaged pharmaceuticals such as viagra® .

whereas the capacity to produce opium is dependent on the availability of suitable land and climatic conditions , methamphetamine production and a wide range of counterfeiting activities are not limited by agricultural production constraints .

reports of substantial dprk imports of ephedrine — an essential precursor for methamphetamine production — support the theory that the dprk has developed a significant production capacity for methamphetamine .

such activity is occurring at a time when ( 1 ) north korea urgently needs foreign currency , and ( 2 ) the southeast asian methamphetamine market continues to expand .

some see promise in the efforts by the international community to entice and / or pressure pyongyang into reducing its involvement in crime - for profit activity .

others , however , argue that the more legitimate the source of income , the greater the pressure for accountability on the regime , since revenue from illicit activities does not usually enter official records .

hence , they maintain that proposals to shift dprk crime - related income toward legitimate - source income ignore the fact that the current regime diverts some illicit earnings to slush funds designed to sustain the loyalty of a core of party elite and to underwrite weapons development programs .

they suggest , therefore , that prospects for a decrease in crime - for - profit activity are not good and that the current regime is likely to be neither willing nor able to change its dependence on income where no accountability is involved .

still , it appears that pyongyang is reducing much of its illicit activity as it finds other means to export and earn foreign exchange .

