federal forestry has historically been associated with agriculture , and with agriculture legislation .

forestry programs have been addressed in past farm bills and other agriculture legislation .

this report provides brief background on the house and senate agriculture committees' jurisdiction over forestry , with examples of bills addressed by the committees .

it then presents information on the forestry provisions in the 2008 farm bill , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) , organized by provisions in the forestry title and other provisions .

it concludes with some forestry issues that were debated and that might be discussed in the next farm bill .

the appendix includes a side - by - side description of the house , senate , and enacted provisions .

both the house and senate committees on agriculture have jurisdiction over "forestry in general" and acquired national forests .

thus , the committees have been able to exert considerable influence over federal forestry activities over the years .

for example , the forest and rangelands renewable resources planning act of 1974 ( rpa , p.l .

93-378 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1600-1614 ) and the national forest management act of 1976 ( nfma ; p.l .

94-588 ) , which guide forest service ( usfs ) planning and management , were both initially referred to the agriculture committees .

more recently , the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-148 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 6501-6591 ) was referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

in addition to forestry on federal lands , the agriculture committees have jurisdiction over forestry research and forestry assistance to states and to private landowners .

forestry research is governed largely by the forest and rangeland renewable resources research act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-307 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1641-1647 ) , which revised and updated the mcsweeney - mcnary act of 1928 .

forestry assistance is governed largely by the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( cfaa ; p.l .

95-313 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 2101-2111 ) , which revised and updated the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 .

both laws were referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

recent farm bills have also included forestry provisions , primarily addressing the forestry assistance programs .

the 1990 farm bill ( the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 , p.l .

101-624 ) contained a separate forestry title that: created four new forestry assistance programs ; revised two existing forestry assistance programs ; amended two forestry assistance programs ; revised the administrative provisions for forestry assistance ; created five special forestry research programs ; amended three existing forestry research programs ; authorized a private , non - profit tree planting foundation ; and created a new usfs branch: international forestry .

the 1996 farm bill ( the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 , p.l .

104-127 ) included only a few forestry provisions , extending the authorization for the one expiring assistance program and adding a new funding option within an existing program .

the 2002 farm bill ( the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) contained a separate forestry title .

the conference could not resolve many of the differences between the house and senate forestry provisions , and thus the conference report contained fewer provisions than either .

 ( some of the disputed provisions were enacted subsequently in the healthy forests restoration act. ) .

numerous programs were created , modified , and / or extended in the forestry title of the 2008 farm bill ( title viii ) .

the various provisions can be sorted into two groups: provisions amending the cooperative forestry assistance act ( cfaa ) , and other provisions .

forestry practices and woody biomass were addressed elsewhere in the 2008 farm bill , as well .

many conservation programs include forestry practices that qualify as conservation activities for cost - share assistance purposes .

also , many of the existing and proposed bioenergy programs include woody biomass as a possible feedstock .

programs that include forest - related activities , but are not focused primarily on these activities , are not included in this report ; two specific woody fuel energy programs in the 2008 farm bill are described below .

the provisions addressing softwood lumber imports from canada and taxation of forests and forestland owners are also discussed briefly .

reauthorization of the many agriculture programs is a prime reason for the periodic farm bills , but most forestry programs are permanently authorized .

this may reduce the pressure to include a forestry title in upcoming farm bills .

nonetheless , interest groups have raised various forestry issues other than the authorization levels for possible discussion within a future farm bill , such as forestry assistance funding , wildfire protection , invasive species , economic diversity , and markets for ecosystem services that have not traditionally been marketed .

federal funding for forestry assistance programs has generally been rising , but the increase has not been spread equally among the various programs .

since the severe 2000 fire season and the development of the national fire plan , funding for cooperative fire programs ( assistance to states and volunteer fire departments ) has risen substantially ( more than triple pre - 2000 funding ) , and has remained at very high levels .

funding for forest legacy ( acquisition of lands or easements on lands threatened with conversion to non - forest uses ) has also risen substantially , from less than $4 million in fy1998 to $50 million or more annually since fy2001 ( and a request of $100 million for fy2005 ) .

in contrast , the administration has proposed terminating funding for the economic action program ( economic assistance to rural , forest - dependent communities ) , and funding has fallen from a peak of $54 million in fy2001 to less than $5 million in fy2008 ( with no funds in fy2007 ) .

the adequacy of funding for private landowner assistance programs has been a concern for many .

these programs have provided cost - shares to qualified landowners for various forestry practices that increase tree growth , improve wildlife habitat , protect watersheds ( thus improving water quality ) , and more .

one of the changes enacted in the 2002 farm bill was to replace two programs — the forestry incentives program ( fip ) and the stewardship incentives program ( sip ) — with the forest land enhancement program ( flep ) .

because funding for fip and sip had been discretionary and either stagnant ( fip ) or absent ( sip ) , flep was given mandatory funding through the commodity credit corporation of $100 million total through the end of fy2007 .

however , some flep funds were borrowed to pay for firefighting and other funding was cancelled ; in total , about half of the $100 million "guaranteed" for flep was actually spent on landowner assistance .

even the existence of landowner cost - share assistance is in doubt .

forestry is included in many conservation programs that provide financial assistance to private landowners , but flep was not reauthorized in the 2008 farm bill .

for the first time since 1978 , no forestry - specific landowner assistance program is authorized .

some question whether a modest forestry - specific assistance program is needed , since a small share of the much larger conservation programs might provide more forestry assistance funding .

nonetheless , congress may revisit the issue of separate funding for forest landowner assistance programs .

the threat of wildfire damages to resources and property seems to have increased in recent years .

attention has focused on high biomass fuel levels ( particularly in federal forests ) and on homes in or near at - risk forests , an area known as the wildland - urban interface ( wui ) .

the 2002 farm bill ( § 8003 ) created a new community and private land fire assistance program to assist communities and private landowners in planning and other activities to protect themselves from wildfires .

the program was authorized at $35 million annually through fy2007 and "such sums as are necessary .. .

thereafter. .

the usfs has included such expenditures as authorized activities in its state fire assistance program .

however , congress has not appropriated funds explicitly for this program .

protecting private lands and structures from wildfires continues to garner congressional attention , as the threat of wildfire persists .

how to assist private landowners and communities , how to combine this assistance with other assistance and incentive programs , and how to fund such assistance could be debated in the farm bill context .

invasive species — non - native plants and animals that are displacing native ones — are becoming recognized as a substantial problem .

in a speech to the idaho environmental forum on january 16 , 2004 , then - usfs chief dale bosworth identified invasive species as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands .

the usfs's forest health management program has evolved from a mechanism to survey and control insects and diseases , to a program to address all forest pests , including invasive species .

several times , the bush administration proposed an emerging pests and pathogens fund to address rapidly developing problems of invasive species , but the appropriations committees rejected the request both years .

in its deliberations over a future farm bill , congress could address the structure and financing of programs to prevent and control invasive species on federal , state , and private forests .

the economies of many rural communities have evolved around the use — finding , extracting , processing , and selling — of natural resources .

in some of these areas , one resource ( eg , timber , minerals , livestock ) has traditionally dominated the local economy , but the economies of such areas can be devastated when that resource is depleted or when its markets are depressed ( permanently or even temporarily ) .

many communities have sought approaches to diversifying their economies , to mitigate the economic and social disruption that can occur when a dominant economic sector is depressed .

the national forest - dependent rural communities economic diversification act of 1990 was enacted in §§ 2372-2379 of the 1990 farm bill to authorize forestry and economic diversification technical assistance to "economically disadvantaged" rural communities .

under the title economic action program , funding rose from $14 million in fy1996 to $54 million in fy2001 , but has declined since , and president bush has proposed terminating the program in several budget requests .

in its future farm bill deliberations , congress might consider ways to perpetuate economic assistance programs for traditional wood products - dependent communities , either as a continued usfs program or as part of other usda rural assistance programs .

forests provide a broad array of environmental services — clean air and water , wildlife habitats , pleasant scenery , and more — for which private landowners are generally not compensated , because these services are typically not bought and sold in a marketplace .

a variety of interests have examined the possibilities of finding ways to compensate landowners for continuing to provide ecosystem services .

one means would be to develop such markets , and the 2008 farm bill included a provision ( § 2709 , discussed above ) that could facilitate such a development .

alternatively , some proposals are for federal "green payments" to directly reward farmers and other landowners who provide environmental benefits through their land management practices .

green payments for forest and other landowners' ecosystem services might be discussed in congress's deliberations in a future farm bill .

