on the morning of august 29 , 2005 , hurricane katrina made landfall on the gulf coastbetween the major cities of new orleans , louisiana , to the west , and mobile , alabama , to the east .

along the gulf coast and inland in the swath of the storm , hurricane katrina impacted hundreds ofthousands of families in three states ( louisiana , mississippi , and alabama ) and contributed to thedeaths of more than 1,000 people .

 ( 1 ) while crs estimates that 5.8 million people in three states mayhave experienced hurricane - force winds , the majority rode out the storm safely .

the geographicrange of katrina's hurricane - force winds corresponds quite closely with the 88 counties declared asdisaster areas by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ( 2 ) .

 ( see figure 1 , depictinghurricane katrina's storm track , estimated extent of hurricane and tropical force winds , countiesdesignated fema disaster areas , and county population density .

 ( 3 ) ) property damage , loss of life,and sizeable displacement of population appear to have been largely concentrated within a 100-mileradius of where the storm made landfall .

within this area , damage due to high winds and stormsurge resulted in significant devastation , but flooding , largely resulting from breached levees andflood walls , affected the greatest number of people , with much of new orleans flooded .

figure 1 .

hurricane katrina: storm track and counties designated eligible for disaster assistance ( fema individual assistance ) , with 2004 countypopulation density fourteen counties with a combined population of 2.5 million peopleexperienced some flooding and / or structural damage based on fema flood anddamage assessments .

all of these counties are within the 100-mile radius of thestorm's landfall .

included in this region are the cities of new orleans ( estimated tohave 445,000 people ) , the biloxi - gulfport - pascagoula mississippi metropolitan area ( estimated at 364,000 people ) , and mobile ( county ) alabama ( estimated at 393,000persons ) .

 ( 4 ) the populations of these 14 counties bore the brunt of the storm ; however,the impact was not uniform across the counties .

using a combination of femadamage assessment and census data , crs estimates that within these 14 counties,about 700,000 people may have been the most acutely impacted by hurricanekatrina , experiencing flooding and / or significant structural damage .

 ( see figure 2 ,which provides an overview of the areas most directly impacted by the storm. ) .

it isthis population - - those most severely impacted - - that is the report's primary focus .

structure of the report .

thisreport begins with a discussion of fema's disaster declaration process and itsapplication to hurricane katrina .

it then presents crs estimates of the population,living within 14 of the 88 counties designated as eligible for disaster assistance , whowere most affected and most likely displaced by the storm , in total and in each of thethree affected states: louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .

these estimates arebroken down by whether people were living in areas that experienced flooding and / or structural damage ( and further , by the level of structural damage ) .

thebalance of the report presents a social - demographic profile of this acutely affectedpopulation , looking at such characteristics as poverty and race / ethnicity status,homeownership and housing status .

separate discussions are also provided of theaged , children , and working - age adults .

although this report does not explicitlydiscuss policy implications , its findings are relevant to numerous aspects of thepost - katrina debate on how to address the immediate and ongoing needs of theaffected populations , both in their home counties as well as the many other parts ofthe country to which some have relocated .

figure 2 .

hurricane katrina: overview of areas affected by flooding and / or structural damage ( based on fema flood and damage assessments ) .

hurricane katrina likely made one of the poorest areas of the country evenpoorer .

among those displaced by the storm , many lost their homes , materialpossessions , and jobs .

some had insurance to replace their material property losses,received help from fema or small business loans to get by on an emergency basisor replace property , or received unemployment insurance or disaster unemploymentinsurance to replace lost wages .

however , some who lived in the areas mostimpacted by the storm may now be destitute ; while having financially gotten bybefore the storm , in the storm's aftermath they may have joined the ranks of the poor .

further , the socio - economic profile of the areas hardest hit by katrina indicates thatthese newly poor would join a population that was already disproportionately poorand disadvantaged .

before the storm , the 700,000 people acutely affected by katrina were more likely than americans overall to be poor ; minority ( most oftenafrican - american ) ; less likely to be connected to the workforce ; and more likely tobe educationally disadvantaged ( i.e. , not having completed a high school education ) .

both those who were poor before the storm , and those who have become poorfollowing the storm , are likely to face a particularly difficult time in reestablishingtheir lives , having few if any financial resources upon which to draw .

this report's analysis is based on the merger of fema flood and damageassessments ( data of september 21 , 2005 ) with census 2000 data .

the fema floodand damage assessments are derived from interpretations of satellite and aircraftoverflight imagery of the impacted area , combined with analysts' assessments on thescene .

the fema flood and damage assessments were primarily derived frominterpretations of aerial imagery , which may be limited by the range of the flightsas well as subject to errors in categorizing areas .

 ( the fema flood assessmentrepresents the high - water mark of hurricane - related flooding , not the level of floodingon september 21. ) .

although the data from census 2000 are now more than fiveyears old , they are the only currently available data at the geographic scale required ( census blocks and tracts ) to infer the social and demographic characteristics ofpopulations who were likely directly impacted by hurricane damage and / or flooding.the estimates presented in this report rely heavily on the completeness and accuracyof the fema flood and damage assessment data .

the fema data are likely to havecaptured most , but not all hurricane - related damage , and miss inland damage alongthe hurricane's storm track through mississippi ( mostly less than catastrophicdamage ) .

the data that were used in this report are not the only data being developedto assess hurricane katrina's impact .

more will become available as time goes on .

in terms of categorizing the damage , the noaa ( national oceanic and atmosphericadministration ) has continued to conduct flyovers of the impacted area and updateits data , especially as flood waters have receded .

further , local officials andinsurance adjusters have now gone into many of the impacted areas to conductthorough assessments of structural damage .

the american red cross has alsoconducted a structure - by - structure damage assessment .

using trained volunteers anddamage categories aligned with fema , the american red cross has estimated that885,791 structures were impacted by hurricane katrina , of which 492,576 wereeither destroyed ( 352,930 ) or sustained major damage ( 139,646 ) .

the breakdown,as of october 3 , 2005 , is as follows: source: greg tune , american red cross .

numbers verbally presented at housingstatistics users group meeting on tuesday , october 25 , 2005 at the nationalassociation of home builders headquarters , washington , dc .

note: more recent red cross data discussed below are not included in this tablebecause they include hurricane rita .

further assessments conducted by the american red cross suggest that thefema damage assessment does not capture the full extent of inland damage,concentrated largely along hurricane katrina's storm track in mississippi .

thefema damage assessment accounts for damage in just three mississippi counties - - hancock , harrison , and jackson - - that are situated directly on the gulf coast .

information obtained from the american red cross indicate 4,609 destroyeddwellings in areas that are outside of these three counties , accounting for 6.7% of alldestroyed dwellings ( 68,729 ) in mississippi .

 ( 21 ) the redcross's assessment identifies a total of 65,237 dwellings that suffered major damage ( eg , large portions of roofs missing , extensive wall damage ) in mississippi , ofwhich 45.9% ( 29,917 ) were located in inland counties , not included in the femaassessment and therefore not included in this crs analysis .

the best source of data about the families who were displaced as a result ofhurricane katrina is the fema database of registrants .

by early october , over 2million individuals and households ( not all necessarily displaced ) had registered withfema for disaster assistance as a result of hurricanes katrina and rita .

 ( 22 ) thatdatabase includes information about each person who has registered for assistanceafter the disaster , including information about where they lived prior to evacuationand where they are living after the disaster , based on postal zipcodes .

while notpublicly available , at least one newspaper has had access to the zipcode informationand has published a map showing where families were from and where they havegone .

 ( 23 ) while fema has stated it is concerned about the privacy rights of registrants , ( 24 ) it can beexpected that more information about displaced families will become available in thefuture from this database .

the estimates presented in this report are based on fema flood and damageassessment data , combined with census 2000 demographic and geographic boundarydata .

the fema flood and damage assessments are as of september 21 , 2005 .

 ( 25 ) theyreflect fema's assessment of areas affected by structural damage and / or flooding,based on remote sensing imagery ( satellite and aircraft ) interpretation , combined withanalysts' assessments on the scene .

 ( the fema flood assessment represents thehigh - water mark of hurricane - related flooding , not the level of flooding onseptember 21 ) .

fema data files showing the areas affected by flooding and / orstructural damage were obtained and mapped into a geographic information system ( gis ) by a library of congress cartographer .

among its other features , the giscontains u.s. census population and geographic boundary data , and provides thefacility for geo - spatial analysis and mapping .

the gis was used to apportion areasof assessed damage and / or flooding to census blocks , and then to aggregate censusblocks up to census tracts .

flood and damage apportionment factors were thenapplied to census 2000 tract - level data in order to assess impacted areas in terms ofthe social - demographic characteristics of the population most likely to have beendirectly affected by the hurricane .

as noted in the body of the report , the estimates are based on 2000 data,reflecting the number and characteristics of the population at that time - - as if thehurricane struck in april 2000 , as opposed to august 2005 .

numbers presented inthis report are estimates , providing a rough approximation of the numbers andcharacteristics of persons , families , and households that are most likely to have beenimpacted by the hurricane .

the estimates are based on the methodology describedabove , and rely heavily on the completeness and accuracy of the fema flood anddamage assessment data .

subsequent and ongoing assessments conducted by the american red crosssuggest that the fema damage assessment does not capture the extent of inlanddamage , concentrated largely along hurricane katrina's storm track throughmississippi .

the fema damage assessment accounts for damage in just threemississippi counties - - hancock , harrison , and jackson - - that are situated directlyon the gulf coast .

information obtained from the american red cross indicate4,609 destroyed dwellings in areas outside of these three counties , accounting for6.7% of all destroyed dwellings ( 68,729 ) in mississippi .

 ( 26 ) the redcross's assessment identifies a total of 65,237 dwellings that suffered major damage ( eg , large portions of roofs missing , extensive wall damage ) in mississippi , ofwhich 45.9% ( 29,917 ) were located in inland counties , not included in the femaassessment and therefore not included in this crs analysis .

the fema flooding and structural damage data are based on separateassessments .

consequently , areas with flooding and structural damage may overlap.structural damage is characterized at four different levels: catastrophic damage: most solid and all light or mobilestructures are destroyed ; extensive damage: some solid structures are destroyed ; mostsustain exterior and interior damage ( eg , roofs are missing , interior walls exposed ) ,most mobile homes and light structures are destroyed ; moderate damage: solid structures sustain exterior damage ( eg , missing roofs or roof segments ) ; some mobile homes and light structures aredestroyed , many are damaged or displaced ; limited damage: generally superficial damage to solidstructures ( eg , loss of tiles or roof shingles ) ; some mobile homes and light structuresare damaged or displaced .

recategorization into non - overlappingareas .

gis methods were applied to separate areas with floodingor structural damage only , from those areas where flooding and structural damageoverlapped , in order to avoid double counting .

ten mutually exclusive areas wereinitially derived: 1 ) flooding only , 2 ) catastrophic damage only , 3 ) extensivedamage only , 4 ) moderate damage only , 5 ) limited damage only , 6 ) flooding andcatastrophic damage , 7 ) flooding and extensive damage , 8 ) flooding and moderatedamage , 9 ) flooding and limited damage , 10 ) no flooding or damage .

apportion census block populations byflood / damaged areas .

the areas of assessed damage and / orflooding , defined above , were apportioned by census block ( the smallest unit ofcensus geography ) , based on the population in the block , and the block'soverlapping and non - overlapping habitable area ( i.e. , land , as opposed to water ) withthe assessed damage areas .

census block boundaries are not coincident with thegeographic boundaries of the assessed damaged and / or flooded areas .

in order toapportion the 10 mutually exclusive categories ( mentioned above ) , an arealpercentage of the overlapping damaged and / or flooded area was applied to thecensus 2000 block population .

to do this , we had to make the assumption thatpopulation is evenly distributed within the census block .

because of the small areageography of the census block , error introduced at the block level is less than itwould be if the apportionment methodology had been implemented directly at thetract level .

apportioned census block populations , by percent in flood areas , and / orareas with assessed structural damage , were then aggregated by census tract , toarrive at apportionment rates for the tract , for flooding and / or level of structuraldamage , based on the 10 non - overlapping areas , defined above .

the apportionment rates , derived above , were then applied to census 2000data , summarized at the census tract level .

 ( 27 ) thecensus 2000 summary tract level data provide the lowest level of geographical detailthat is publicly available on a broad range of social , demographic , income , andhousing characteristics of the population .

as an example , if a census tract had a population in 2000 of 3,200people ( 28 ) and 20% of its population was estimated to have lived in a flooded area based on thecensus block population apportionment rate procedure described above , then 640people would be estimated to have lived in flooded areas , and 2,560 in non - floodedareas .

if 40% of that census tract's population was african american ( 1,280 people ) , then , under the methodology employed , the same share for the tract's overallpopulation estimated to live in its flooded area ( i.e. , 20% ) , would be applied to theblack population in the tract ( 1,280 ) , to arrive at an estimate of 256 black peoplewho lived in the flooded area of the tract .

while the methodology estimatesproportionate shares of census blocks' populations affected by flooding and / orstructural damage at the aggregated census tract level , it does not distinguish withina census tract where individuals with different characteristics lived .

for example,it assumes at the census tract level , the entire population was affectedproportionately , regardless of their characteristics or where they lived within thetract .

the ten mutually exclusive areas of flooding and / or damage , describedearlier , were regrouped into areas presented in the analysis .

areas with catastrophicdamage were combined into one grouping , regardless of whether there was alsoflooding ( i.e. , categories 1 and 2 , above ) .

all areas with flooding , other than thosethat also had catastrophic damage ( 2 ) , were combined into flooded areas ( i.e , 1 , 7,8 , and 9 , above ) .

comprehensive data on the depth or duration of flooding by areawere not available when we conducted this analysis , so we are unable to distinguishthe severity of flooding .

areas without flooding , that had extensive ( 3 ) or moderatedamage ( 4 ) were combined into a single category .

lastly , areas with limiteddamage and no flooding ( 5 ) were combined with areas where there was no floodingor damage ( 10 ) .

among the 14 counties or parishes where any damage or flooding was assessed , the estimated populations in the redefined areas based on their april 2000census populations were as follows: catastrophic damage , regardless of flood status ( 40,000 ) ; flooded , excluding areas of catastrophic damage ( 652,000 ) ; non - flooded , extensive damage ( 5,600 ) ; non - flooded , moderate damage ( 13,700 ) ; no damage or flooding , or limited damage only ( 1,747,000 ) .

