the constitution , ratified in 1789 , provided for the creation and governance of a permanent home for the national government .

article i , section 8 , clause 17 , called for the creation of a federal district to serve as the permanent seat of the new national government and granted congress the power to exercise exclusive legislation , in all cases whatsoever , over such district ( not exceeding ten miles square ) as may , by cession of particular states , and the acceptance of congress become the seat of the government of the united states... .

proponents of voting representation contend that the district's unique governmental status resulted in its citizens' equally unique and arguably undemocratic political status .

citizens residing in the district have no vote in their national legislature , although they pay federal taxes and may vote in presidential elections .

opponents often note that the constitution grants only states voting representation in congress .

they argue that , given the district's unique status and a strict reading of the constitution , no avenue exists to provide district residents voting rights in the national legislature other than a constitutional amendment or the statehood process , which could be achieve by statute .

issues central to the district of columbia voting representation debate arguably revolve around two principles of our republican form of government: ( 1 ) the consent of the governed and ( 2 ) no taxation in the absence of representation .

the debate has also involved questions about how to reconcile two constitutional provisions: one creating the district and giving congress exclusive legislative power over the district ( article i , section 8 ) ; the other providing that only citizens of states shall have voting representation in the house and senate ( article 1 , section 2 and section 3 ) .

over the years , proposals to give the district voting representation in congress have sought to achieve their purpose through constitutional amendment to give district residents voting representation in congress , but not granting statehood ; retrocession of the district of columbia to maryland ; semi - retrocession , i.e. , allowing qualified district residents to vote in maryland in federal elections for the maryland congressional delegation to the house and senate ; statehood for the district of columbia ; and other statutory means such as virtual - statehood , i.e. , designating the district a state for the purpose of voting representation .

in the recent past , congress has restricted the ability of the district government to advocate for voting representation .

several provisions have been routinely included in district of columbia appropriation acts prohibiting or restricting the district's ability to advocate for congressional representation .

during the 10-year period between 1790 to 1800 , virginia and maryland residents that ceded land that would become the permanent "seat of the government of the united states" were subject to the laws for the state — including the right to continue to vote in local , state , and national elections in their respective states — until the national government began operations in december 1800 .

one year after establishing the district of columbia as the national capital , district residents began seeking representation in the national legislature .

as early as 1801 , citizens of what was then called the territory of columbia voiced concern about their political disenfranchisement .

a pamphlet published by augustus woodward , reportedly a protégé of thomas jefferson , captured their concern: this body of people is as much entitled to the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship as any other part of the people of the united states .

there can exist no necessity for their disenfranchisement , no necessity for them to repose on the mere generosity of their countrymen to be protected from tyranny , to mere spontaneous attention for the regulation of their interests .

they are entitled to participation in the general councils on the principles of equity and reciprocity .

congress has on numerous occasions considered legislation granting voting representation in the national legislature to district residents , but these attempts have failed to provide permanent voting representation for district residents .

during the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) , the district's delegate along with delegates from the territories of the virgin islands , guam , and american samoa , and the resident commissioner from puerto rico were allowed to vote in the committee of the whole under amended house rules .

although the change was challenged in court as unconstitutional , it was upheld by the u.s. district court in michel v. anderson , and affirmed by the court of appeals .

nevertheless , the new house republican majority repealed the rule early in the 104 th congress .

on january 24 , 2007 , the new democratic majority of the house passed a rules change ( h.res .

78 ) allowing resident commissioners and delegates to vote in the committee of the whole , during the 110 th congress .

over the years , proposals to give the district voting representation in congress have sought to achieve their purpose through a constitutional amendment , retrocession of part of the district back to maryland , semi - retrocession allowing district residents to be treated like citizens of maryland for the purpose of voting representation in congress , statehood and virtual statehood that allow congress to define the district as a state for the purpose of voting representation in congress .

each is discussed below .

over the two hundred year history of the republic , citizens of the district of columbia have sought political and judicial redress in their efforts to secure voting representation in congress .

in 2000 , the supreme court affirmed a decision by a three - judge panel of the united states district court of the district of columbia in the case of adams v. clinton , which rejected a petition from district residents seeking judicial redress in their effort to secure voting representation in the national legislature .

the court ruled that district residents did not have a constitutional right to voting representation in congress , but congress has the power to grant voting rights to district residents through the political process including options outlined in this report .

any of the options outlined in this report must be able to withstand political and constitutional challenges .

some , such as a constitutional amendment or retrocession are more problematic than others .

others such as statehood , which can be achieved by statute , may trigger other constitutional issues .

all must overcome what some observers consider conflicting provisions of the constitution .

namely , art .

1 , sec .

2 , of the constitution which states that the house of representative shall be composed of members chosen every two years by the people of the several states and art .

1 , sec .

8 , clause 17 which conveys exclusive legislative authority in all cases whatsoever over the affairs of the district of columbia .

it can be argued that , given the district's unique status as the seat of the national government and a strict reading of the constitution , the only fail - safe avenues that exist to provide district residents voting rights in the national legislature are a constitutional amendment or statehood , which could be achieved by statute .

the former — a constitutional amendment — offers a degree of finality and permanence in settling the question of district voting representation in the national legislature , but the process of winning approval of such an amendment is by no means easy .

to be successful , proponents of a constitutional amendment in support of district voting rights must win the support of two - thirds majority in both houses of congress .

the amendment must then be ratified by three - fourths of the states ( 38 states ) in a state convention or by a vote of the state legislatures ; or two - thirds of the state legislatures may call for a constitutional convention for the consideration of one or more amendments to the constitution .

if approved , the amendments must be ratified by three - fourths of the states ( 38 states ) in a state convention or by a vote of the state legislatures .

the amendment process could take years and prove unsuccessful , as was the case with the d.c. voting rights amendment of 1978 , which was ratified by 16 states , but expired in 1985 without winning the support of the requisite 38 states .

retrocession , the ceding of part of the district back to maryland , has not been fully tested in the courts .

retrocession as a strategy for achieving voting representation in congress for district residents arguably should address both political and constitutional issues and obstacles .

given the virginia experience , the process would require not only the approval of congress and the president , but also the approval of the state of maryland and , perhaps , the voters of the retroceded area .

although the supreme court reviewed the question of retrocession in phillips v. payne , in 1876 , it did not rule on its constitutionality .

moreover , retrocession would require some portion of the district to remain a federal enclave in conformance with article 1 , sec .

8 , clause 17 of the constitution , which requires congress to exercise exclusive legislative control over the "seat of the government of the united states. .

semi - retrocession bills would result in a unique arrangement between citizens of the district of columbia and maryland .

such bills would allow district residents to vote in maryland congressional elections based in part on the theory of residual citizenship , that is the idea that district residents retained residual rights as citizens of maryland , including voting rights after the land creating district was ceded to the federal government .

the theory was rejected by the supreme court .

in albaugh v. tawes , the supreme court rejected the contention that district residents retained residual rights as citizens of maryland , specifically , the right to vote in maryland .

the case involved a republican candidate who lost the nomination election for the united states senate .

the candidate , william albaugh , filed suit seeking a judgment declaring the district a part of maryland and ordering maryland state officials ( the governor and the secretary of state ) to declare the primary and any future elections voided because district residents did not vote .

the court held that district residents had no right to vote in maryland elections .

statehood is a much simpler process , but it is no less politically sensitive .

article iv of the constitution gives congress the power to admit new states into the union .

the article does not prescribe the method , and the process has varied over time .

congress could by statute , convey statehood to some portion of the district .

it must be noted that if congress conveyed statehood on what is now the district , a portion of the district would have to remain a federal enclave since article i , sec .

8 , clause 17 , of the constitution requires a portion of the district , not exceeding ten square miles , to be maintained as the "seat of government of the united states. .

the statehood option should include congress introducing a constitutional amendment repealing the 23 rd amendment granting district residents three votes in the electoral college .

observers argue that if the amendment is not repealed it could result in conveying significant political power in presidential elections to the few district residents remaining in the federal enclave .

bills that would convey voting rights to the district delegate to congress by defining the district as a state or congressional district ( virtual - statehood and other means ) may conflict with article i , sec .

2 , of the constitution which conveys voting rights to representatives of the several states .

despite the constraints of article 1 , sec .

2 , advocates of voting rights for district residents contend that the district clause ( art .

1 , sec .

8 ) gives congress the power to define the district as a state .

as congress has never granted the delegate from the district of columbia a vote in the full house or senate , the constitutionality of such legislation has not been before the courts .

in general however , courts such as the three - judge panel in adams v. clinton have not looked favorably upon the argument that the district of columbia should be considered a state for purposes of representation in the congress .

some commentators have suggested that congress , acting under its authority over the district , has the power to confer such representation .

other commentators , however , have disputed this argument .

in addition , district voting rights proponents can point to the uniform and overseas citizens absentees voting act , as an example of congress's authority to provide voting rights to citizens who are not residents of a state .

a full analysis of these legal arguments can be found at crs report rl33824 , the constitutionality of awarding the delegate for the district of columbia a vote in the house of representatives or the committee of the whole , by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix a. woodward proposal resolved that the following be recommended to the legislatures of the several states as an article in addition to , and amendment of the constitution of the united states .

article the territory of columbia shall be entitled to one senator in the senate of the united states ; and to a number of members in the house of representatives proportionate to its population .

before it shall have attained a population sufficient to entitle it to one representative it shall be entitled to a member , who shall have the right to deliberate and receive pay , but not to vote .

it shall also be entitled to one elector for a president and vice president of the united states , until it shall have attained a sufficient population to entitle it to one representative , and then it shall be entitled to an additional elector for every representative .

appendix b. anti - lobbying provisions in d.c. appropriations acts congress has restricted the ability of the government of the district of columbia to lobby for voting representation .

for several years , the general provisions of annual appropriation acts for the district have prohibited d.c. government from using federal or district funds to lobby for voting representation , including statehood .

recently , p.l .

109-115 — the departments of transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , the office of president , and independent agencies appropriations act of 2006 — prohibited the use of district and federal funds to support lobbying activities aimed at securing statehood or voting representation for citizens of the district .

in addition , the act specifically prohibited the district of columbia corporation counsel or any other officer or entity of the district government from providing assistance for any petition drive or civil action seeking to require congress provide for voting representation in congress for the district of columbia .

the act also prohibited the use of district and federal funds to finance the salaries , expenses , or other costs associated with the offices of statehood representative for district of columbia and statehood senator .

in 2005 , the district passed legislation that some analysts consider a circumvention of congress's prohibition on the use of district funds to advocate for voting representation in congress for citizens of the district of columbia .

on july 6 , 2005 , the council of the district of columbia unanimously approved the "fiscal year 2006 budget support emergency act of 2005" ( a16-0168 ) .

the act included as subtitle f of title i , the "support for voting rights educational - informational activities emergency act of 2005," which appropriated $1 million in local funds to the executive office of the mayor to support "educational and informational activities to apprise the general pubic of the lack of voting rights in the united sates congress for district residents. .

language of the act aimed at drawing a distinction between "educational and informational activities" and advocacy activities in support voting rights for district residents .

in fact , section 1026 ( b ) of the act prohibits funds from being used to support lobbying activities in support of voting rights for district residents .

on april 5 , 2006 , the mayor identified three entities who received a share of the $1 million to be used to conduct voter education activities .

they included dc vote ( $500,000 ) , the league of women voters of the district of columbia ( $200,00 ) and our nation's capital ( $300,000 ) .

most recently , congress considered provisions intended to relax restrictions on the use of district funds to lobby or support efforts to achieve voting representation for the district .

during the 110 th congress , house and senate versions of the financial services and general government appropriations act for fy2009 ( h.r .

7323 and s. 3260 ) included provisions that would have eliminated the prohibitions on the use of district funds in support of lobbying activities , the office of statehood representative , and voting rights for the district of columbia .

