in 1996 , congress passed the telecommunications act , the first major rewrite of our nation's telecommunications law since the enactment of the 1934 communications act .

the general objective of the 1996 act was to open up markets to competition by removing unnecessary regulatory barriers to entry .

congress attempted to create a regulatory framework for the transition from primarily monopoly provision to competitive provision of telecommunications services .

one key provision allowed the fcc to preempt enforcement of any state or local government statute , regulation , or legal requirement that acted as a barrier to entry in the provision of interstate or intrastate telecommunications service .

since the value of a network service , such as telecommunications service , increases as the number of other parties connected to the network increases , new entrants would have a very difficult time entering the market if they could not interconnect their networks with those of the incumbent carriers .

competitive provision of service would benefit consumers most if all carriers' networks were interconnected .

thus , another key provision of the 1996 act set obligations for incumbent carriers and new entrants to interconnect their networks with one another , imposing additional requirements on the incumbents because they might have the incentive and ability to restrict competitive entry by denying such interconnection or by setting terms , conditions , and rates that could undermine the ability of the new entrants to compete .

with competitive provision of service , many calls will originate on the network of the carrier to whom the calling party subscribes but end up on the network of another carrier ( to whom the called party subscribes ) .

while it might be possible to have the calling party pay its carrier for originating a call and the called party pay its carrier for terminating that call , for various reasons it has been traditional in the united states for the calling party's carrier to pay the called party's carrier for completing the call — this is called intercarrier compensation — and , in turn , for the calling party's carrier to recover those costs in the rates charged to its subscribers .

the 1996 act requires that intercarrier compensation rates among competing local exchange carriers be based on the "additional costs of terminating such calls. .

however , as discussed below , the framework created by the 1996 act set different intercarrier compensation rates for services that were not competing at that time but do compete today .

to foster competition in both the long distance and local markets , the 1996 act created a process by which the regional bell operating companies ( "rbocs" ) would be freed from the restriction on their offering long distance service ( which was one of the terms of the 1982 consent decree settling the government's antitrust case against the former bell system monopoly ) once they made a showing that their local markets had been opened up to competition .

because congress did not believe it would be viable for competitive entrants to fully build out their networks immediately , it included a provision requiring the incumbent local exchange carriers to make available to entrants , at cost - based wholesale rates , those elements of their network to which entrants needed access in order not to be impaired in their ability to offer telecommunications services .

prior to enactment of the 1996 act , universal service ( primarily for high - cost rural service ) had been funded through implicit subsidies in above - cost rates for the "access charges" that long distance carriers paid as intercarrier compensation to local telephone companies for originating and terminating their subscribers' long distance calls , above - cost business rates , and above - cost urban rates .

recognizing that new entrants would target those services that had above - cost rates , and thus erode universal service support , congress included in the 1996 act a provision requiring universal service support to be explicit , rather than hidden in above - cost rates .

this requirement has only been partially implemented , however , and therefore significant implicit universal services subsidies still remain in above - cost rates for certain services .

the regulatory framework created by the 1996 act was intended to foster "intramodal" competition within distinct markets , that is , competition among companies that used the same underlying technology to provide service , such as the development of competition between the incumbent local and long distance wireline carriers plus new competitive local exchange carriers , all of which used circuit - switched networks to offer voice services .

it did not envision the intermodal competition that has subsequently developed , such as wireless service competing with both local and long distance wireline service , voip competing with wireline and wireless telephony , ip video competing with cable television .

given the focus on intramodal competition and the lack of intermodal competition , there was little concern about statutory or regulatory language that set different regulatory burdens for different technology modes .

as a result , the current statutory and regulatory framework may be inconsistent with , or unresponsive to , current market conditions in several ways: service providers that are in direct competition with one another sometimes may be subject to different regulatory rules because they use different technologies ; economic regulations intended to protect against monopoly power may not be fully taking into account intermodal competition ; and the framework may not effectively address interconnection , access , and social policy issues for an ip architecture in which multiple applications ride on top of the physical ( transmission ) network layer .

at the same time , it might not be wise to simply replace the statutory provisions fostering intramodal competition with provisions fostering intermodal competition on the expectation that intermodal competition will always be effective .

for the foreseeable future , the primary source of competition in the telecommunications service market for large business ( "enterprise" ) customers will be intramodal , rather than intermodal .

cable networks were constructed to serve residential customers and therefore tend not to be ubiquitously deployed in business districts .

even the largest cable companies are only in selected geographic markets in the country , and may not be able to meet the needs of large , multi - locational business customers .

also , it is likely to take many years for wireless carriers to construct networks that can meet the bandwidth and security requirements of large corporations .

competitive provision of broadband services to these enterprise customers therefore is most likely to be intramodal .

but even intramodal competition may be decreasing in the enterprise market .

until recently , the long distance carriers , in particular at&t and mci , were the largest providers of service to enterprise customers , with various competitive local exchange carriers ( "clecs" ) also offering enterprise service .

in addition , as they began to meet the conditions in the 1996 act that allowed them to offer service outside their regions , the rbocs were becoming significant competitors to at&t and mci in the enterprise market .

the acquisitions of at&t by sbc ( with the new company renamed at&t ) and of mci by verizon have eliminated those two rbocs as competitors in the enterprise market and also in the internet backbone market .

also , although the remaining clecs have built fiber rings in business areas that connect directly to their major customers' locations , they have not captured sufficient traffic to capture the scale economies needed to justify buildout of a ubiquitous transport network .

rather , they have relied on the rbocs , at&t , and mci for transport facilities on many routes .

as a result , in approving those mergers , the department of justice and the fcc set a number of conditions intended to retain competitive options for enterprise and internet customers , including the divestiture of some key transport facilities and ensuring clecs and isps access to certain facilities or services at set rates for at least two years .

nonetheless , some enterprise customers and clecs remain concerned about their reduced options for retail services and transport facilities .

in a relatively short period of time , the telecommunications sector has evolved from monopoly provision of services over service - specific networks , to a brief period of limited intramodal competition ( from wireline competitive access providers and competitive local exchange carriers for the provision of telephone services and from a small number of cable "overbuilders" ) over service - specific networks , to incipient intermodal ( wireline , wireless , and cable ) competition over increasingly multiple - service broadband platforms .

these new broadband networks are the physical vehicle for bringing into the home the applications ( services ) of both the network providers , themselves , and the independent applications providers .

at this stage of the transition , however , most customers continue to receive services over legacy service - specific narrowband networks .

it is important to understand what this new environment — characterized by convergence of previously distinct markets and government policy focused on fostering facilities - based intermodal competition — is likely to yield .

the market convergence currently underway will not result in a multitude of broadband networks because the underlying cost structure for such networks ( the huge sunk up - front fixed costs that can only be recovered if the company can exploit significant economies of scale and scope ) will only support a limited number of networks .

this is the case for wireline or wireless networks .

moreover , market convergence is not simply the ability to bundle voice , data , and video services into a single product offering .

rather , it is a technological spillover ( from digital technology ) that reduces entry costs so that firms that already have single - use networks providing voice , data , or video services can now use those networks with relatively inexpensive upgrades to offer multiple services over a single platform .

for example , at far less cost than would be required to build an entirely new network , the incumbent local exchange carriers can deploy dsl equipment on their copper networks to offer data and video services or the cable companies can upgrade their networks to offer voip .

in this situation , in which underlying costs are likely to limit the number of network providers , public policy can nonetheless foster competition by removing impediments to single - use networks expanding into other markets .

at the same time , policy makers should remain vigilant that the few network providers not constrain the ability of independent applications providers that do not have their own broadband networks to compete in those applications markets .

in the new environment , there will be three broad categories of competition and innovation issues , tied together by one common issue .

these three categories are: intermodal competition and innovation among a small number of broadband network providers that offer a suite of voice , data , video , and other services primarily for the mass market ; intramodal competition and innovation among a small number of wireline broadband providers that serve multi - locational business customers who tend to be located in business districts ; and competition between those few broadband network providers and a multitude of independent service providers , often for applications that have a more specialized customer base .

the common issue: how many broadband networks will there be and how will that affect competition among network providers and competition between those network providers and the independent applications providers ? .

despite all the technological and market changes that have occurred and continue to take place , competition issues in the telecommunications sector will continue to focus on the physical transport link into both business and residential customers' premises .

the new network architectures may allow many applications to ride on a single physical transmission layer , but access to that layer and competition among the small number of physical network providers remain the primary competition issues .

the universal availability of basic telecommunications service at affordable rates has been a fundamental element of telecommunications policy in the united states since the enactment of the communications act in 1934 .

to achieve this , a universal service subsidy system has been employed to keep end user rates affordable for low - income households and for households and small businesses in high - cost areas ( and , since 1996 , to provide discounts to schools and libraries for telephone service , internet access , and internal network wiring , and to public and non - profit rural health care providers for telecommunications services and installations and for long distance internet connections ) .

this policy goal can be fully compatible with the development of a competitive market for telecommunications services , including the last mile into customers' premises , so long as the universal service funding mechanism is constructed in a competitively neutral and efficient fashion .

that cannot be accomplished if any of the universal service subsidy is hidden in above - cost rates for certain services that are intended to subsidize the below cost rates for other services .

in that situation , a competitor could successfully enter the market by undercutting the above - cost prices for those services whose rates are raised to include implicit subsidies , but could not compete in the provision of those services whose rates are set below cost .

the policy goal also cannot be achieved if the universal service subsidy is not available on the same basis to all competitors in the market .

this is especially important today , with competing wireline , cable , mobile wireless , and fixed wireless technologies all potentially able to offer service to rural customers .

in addition , if the universal service funding mechanism is not efficient — and therefore requires more resources than is necessary to provide universal availability — it will place an unnecessary burden on telecommunications markets ( or on the general public , if supported by general tax revenues ) .

the 1996 act took a major step in the direction of reconciling universal service with competitive markets by requiring that "[a]ny such support should be explicit and sufficient to achieve the purposes...." this requirement has not yet been achieved , however .

although competitive market forces have driven some above - cost rates down toward cost , especially for business services , and an explicit federal universal service fund ( "fusf" ) funding mechanism has been created that provides a significant portion of total universal service subsidies , many rates continue to be set above cost in order to include hidden universal service subsidies ( for example , the intrastate access charges of many rural telephone carriers discussed earlier in the section on intercarrier compensation ) .

today , the vast majority of americans still obtain voice services over traditional circuit - switched networks that are subject to the common carrier regulations in title ii of the communications act .

these regulations include specific network interconnection , access , intercarrier compensation , public safety , and law enforcement requirements , as well as assessments on all interstate and international telecommunications services to fund universal service .

at the same time , a small , but growing number of customers obtain voice services from voip service providers .

but depending on how these voip services are provided , the fcc has classified them as telecommunications services or as information services — or , in the case of interconnected voip services , has not yet classified them one way or the other — which has resulted in uncertainty about the regulatory requirements to which they are subject .

the fcc has ruled that a particular type of voip service — provided only to customers that already separately receive broadband internet access service , so that their voip provider does not , itself , offer transmission service or transmission capacity , and requiring the customer to have enhanced premise equipment or downloaded software — ( 1 ) is neither a "telecommunications service" nor "telecommunications," but rather is an "information service" that should be unregulated ; and ( 2 ) cannot be characterized as purely intrastate and therefore is subject only to federal jurisdiction .

as a result , that service is not subject to the interconnection , access , intercarrier compensation , public safety , law enforcement , and universal service requirements in title ii .

but the fcc also has ruled that voice services that are provided partly through ip technology , but that use ordinary customer premises equipment without enhanced functionality , originate and terminate on the public switched telephone network , undergo no net protocol conversion , and provide no enhanced functionality to end users due to the provider's use of ip technology , are telecommunications services and subject to title ii regulation .

more recently , the fcc found that , although it was not ready to classify "interconnected voip services" — services that are interconnected with the public switched network so that the subscriber is able to receive calls from other voip services users and from telephones connected to the public switched telephone network — as telecommunications services or information services , providers of those services are required to provide enhanced 911 service , to accommodate wiretaps under the communications assistance for law enforcement act ( "calea" ) , and to contribute to the federal universal service fund .

as a result , today competing voice services are subject to different regulatory regimes depending on whether they are classified by the fcc as telecommunications services or information services , or whether the fcc has made an ad hoc finding that services that have certain specific characteristics are subject to particular regulations .

the commission is continuing in its attempt to at classifying ip - enabled services in an on - going rule making proceeding .

but it is constrained by current statute in its ability to provide regulatory parity to competing voice services when one subset of those services clearly meets the current statutory definition of telecommunications service , a second subset clearly meets the current statutory definition of information service , and a third subset is ambiguous as to its classification .

while the fcc can choose to forbear from regulating those competitive interstate services that are classified as telecommunications services , it may not have the authority to require state jurisdictions to forbear on regulation of intrastate telecommunications services .

this suggests that it may be timely to review the title ii telecommunications requirements .

that review might address which requirements may be applicable to all voice services , regardless of the technology and network architecture used to provide those services , which may only be relevant for dominant firms , and which may not be relevant at all with the advent of competition .

competition in the provision of applications ( services ) is developing today between integrated network providers that have ubiquitous networks and independent applications providers that have more limited networks and capabilities .

in some situations , it would be inefficient , if not impossible , for a new entrant to replicate the facilities of a network provider .

for example , for public safety reasons , the fcc has determined that all interconnected voip providers must be able to provide their customers access to 911 and e911 service , and that for this to happen there is need for cooperation between voip providers and ilecs .

the fcc thus has required all interconnected voip providers to: deliver all 911 calls to the customer's local emergency operator ( as a standard , not optional , feature ) ; provide emergency operators with the call back number and location information of their customers ( i.e. , e911 ) where the emergency operator is capable of receiving it .

although the customer must provide the location information , the voip provider must provide the customer a means of updating this information , whether he or she is at home or away from home ; and inform their customers , both new and existing , of the e911 capabilities and limitations of their service .

at the same time , the fcc has required ilecs to provide access to their e911 networks to any requesting telecommunications carrier .

they must continue to provide access to trunks , selective routes , and e911 databases to competing carriers .

although some proponents of minimal government intervention have argued that customers should be allowed to choose low - cost options that do not include public safety features such as access to 911 and e911 service , the fcc had determined that in this case government intervention was justified by the public safety concern .

at the same time , without rules in place to ensure all voice providers access to the e911 network , new entrants could be denied entry into the market .

some observers have argued that the voip providers currently are enjoying a "free ride" and an artificial marketplace advantage because their services are not subject to state taxes imposed on telecommunications services to support the e911 call centers ( sometimes referred to as public safety answering points or "psaps" ) run by municipalities or states .

these psaps are the physical locations where emergency calls are received and then routed to the proper emergency services .

in 1994 , congress enacted the communications assistance for law enforcement act ( "calea" ) , to preserve the ability of law enforcement officials to conduct electronic surveillance effectively and efficiently despite the deployment of new digital and wireless technologies that have altered the character of such surveillance .

calea requires telecommunications carriers to modify their equipment , facilities , and services , wherever achievable , to ensure that they are able to comply with authorized electronic surveillance actions .

in implementing calea , the fcc adopted an order on august 5 , 2005 concluding that calea applies to facilities - based providers of any type of broadband internet access service — including wireline , cable modem , satellite , wireless , and power line — and to voip providers that offer services permitting users to receive calls from , and place calls to , the public switched public network ( these providers are sometimes referred to as "interconnected voip providers" ) because these providers offer services that are a replacement for a substantial portion of the local telephone exchange service. .

at that time the fcc also adopted a further notice of proposed rulemaking seeking more information about whether certain classes or categories of facilities - based broadband internet access providers , notably small and rural providers and providers of broadband networks for educational and research institutions , should be exempt from calea .

on may 3 , 2006 , the fcc adopted a second order that affirmed that the calea compliance deadline for facilities - based broadband internet access and interconnected voip services will be may 14 , 2007 ; clarified that the date would apply to all such providers ; explained that the fcc does not plan to intervene in the standards - setting process in this matter ; permitted telecommunications carriers the option of using trusted third parties to assist in meeting their calea obligations ; restricted the availability of compliance extensions to equipment , facilities , and services deployed prior to october 25 , 1998 ; found that it had the authority under section 229 ( a ) of the communications act to take enforcement action against carriers that fail to comply with calea ; concluded that carriers are responsible for calea development and implementation costs for post - january 1 , 1995 equipment and facilities ; and declined to adopt a national surcharge to recover calea costs .

the important law enforcement objectives of calea potentially can conflict with the goals of competition and innovation .

some technologies and network architectures may be able to accommodate the calea requirements more readily — more quickly , less expensively , or with less impact on efficiency — than others .

also , calea requirements might impose substantial up - front costs on new technologies , architectures , or services that could be an impediment to their successful entry into the market , thus slowing innovation .

there may be some tension in the future if network technologies and architectures migrate away from centralized networks to peer - to - peer networks , which have potential benefits to consumers both in terms of security and of allowing service providers and end users to interact more directly , but which may not be very accommodating to law enforcement concerns .

localism , competition , and diversity of voices have long been the fundamental goals of u.s. media policy .

with the convergence of media , telecommunications , and information service markets , these goals may now have to be considered when developing telecommunications policy as well .

as discussed earlier , section 601 of title vi of the communication act explicitly identifies a local purpose for regulation of cable television: "[to] establish franchise procedures and standards which ... assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the local community. .

key sections in title vi related to localism and diversity of voices allow franchise authorities to ( 1 ) require cable systems to set aside channels for public , educational , or governmental ( "peg" ) use and to provide facilities and / or financial support for peg access ; ( 2 ) set aside channels for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the cable system ; and ( 3 ) place safety and convenience restrictions on the construction of cable systems over public rights - of - way and easements .

if new entrants begin to offer subscription multi - channel video services in a fashion that does not meet the definition of cable service — for example , as an ip application that might meet the definition of an information service that is not subject to title vi regulation — policy makers might want to consider whether the new service offering should be subject to the requirements in these provisions in order to foster the policy goal of localism , or whether the localism concerns are being fully met by the incumbent .

in addition , as discussed earlier , policy makers might want to consider the implications , from the perspective of diversity of voices , of a broadband network provider that offers its own subscription multi - channel video service refusing to allow its customers access to the ip video services provided by an independent applications provider .

as part of the transition to digital television , television broadcast licensees have been given 6 mhz of spectrum on which to operate digitally and on february 17 , 2009 will have to return the spectrum on which they currently operate in analog mode .

with digital technology , one option available to licensees is to use their 6 mhz of spectrum for multicasting — that is , to broadcast multiple programming streams .

in support of the goal of localism , cable operators have been required to carry the "primary" signals of the local broadcast stations in their service areas .

the fcc has ruled that a television broadcaster that is multicasting video signals must identify one signal as its primary signal that cable systems must carry , but that cable systems have no obligation to carry additional multicast signals .

this decision was based in part on the concern that multicast "must carry" might infringe on the first amendment rights of cable operators and in part on the concern that the multicast signals might tend to be duplicative and might not meet the desires of viewers as well as cable channels .

some observers have suggested that limiting must carriage to a single , primary signal might result in missing an opportunity to foster localism .

for example , in considering what public interest obligations might be consistent with allowing broadcasters to air multiple signals , the fcc might consider modifying the current rule that requires cable operators to carry only the primary programming stream of each local television broadcaster by requiring cable operators to carry each programming stream that offers distinct programming aimed at a different , previously unserved geographic portion of the broadcaster's serving area .

this could explicitly address those situations in which a broadcaster's serving area crosses state borders , awarding the broadcaster must carry rights for a second signal if the programming on that signal specifically addresses the needs and interests of the viewing households in the second state .

if the fcc were to consider this approach , it would want to take into account the impact on cable systems of requiring them to carry additional broadcast channels .

it also would want to determine how best to construct a rule that did not artificially encourage or discourage broadcasters from choosing multicasting over other potential applications of digital technology to their 6 mhz of spectrum , such as high definition television .

congress might choose to direct the fcc to study and construct recommendations for rules ( and , if necessary , statutory changes ) to address the potentially related issues of mandatory carriage of multiple broadcast signals and better serving the needs and interests of viewers in different governmental jurisdictions .

