for years , many observers have characterized the annual pay packages awarded to the executives and chief executive officers ( ceos ) of the nation's largest firms as excessive .

according to one estimate , the total median ceo pay at the nation's 350 largest publicly owned firms grew from $2.7 million in 1995 to $6.8 million in 2005 .

the overall increase in ceo pay has outstripped inflation and the growth in non - managerial pay over the same period , fueling criticism of executive compensation packages .

among the quite vociferous critics of executive pay are public officials , academics , shareholders , and some members of congress .

for example , william j. mcdonough , chairman of the public company accounting oversight board , has said that there is "... nothing in economic theory to justify the levels of executive compensation that are widely prevalent today. .

warren buffett has observed that "...it's difficult to overpay the truly extraordinary ceo of a giant enterprise .

but this species is rare. .

former securities and exchange commission ( sec ) chairman arthur levitt , jr. has written that "these huge paydays , i believe , undermine corporate governance and send a signal that boards are willing to spend shareholders' money lavishly..." in addition , a 2006 survey found that 90% of institutional investors , who are the largest owners of outstanding domestic corporate shares , said that executives at most companies are overpaid .

there are also a number of current examples of congressional concerns over executive pay .

for example , the version of h.r .

2 ( the minimum wage bill ) passed by the senate on february 1 , 2007 , included several tax provisions , one of which applies to executive pay .

current tax rules permit individuals to defer taxes on income that is held in non - qualified deferred compensation plans .

under the senate version of h.r .

2 , an individual could defer no more than $1,000,000 annually from taxable income by contributing to such a plan .

the version passed by the house had no similar provision .

arguing for the cap , chairman max baucus of the senate finance committee , which unanimously passed the tax provisions that became part of the senate version of h.r .

2 , observed: rank - and - file workers generally have to pay taxes on their compensation when they earn it .

the exception is deferred compensation provided through qualified retirement plans with statutory limits on contributions and benefits .

a 401 ( k ) is the best example .

management , on the other hand , has no limit on the amount that can be deferred to nonqualified arrangements — no limit... with respect to ceo pay , chairman barney frank of the house financial services committee said that: i do not think the boards of directors work as effective independent checks .

they are not the fox guarding the hen house .

they are the hens guarding the rooster .

and i think the time has come to say we need the shareholders to do this... .

in the 110 th congress , representative frank has introduced the shareholder vote on executive compensation act ( h.r .

1257 ) , which was approved by the house on april 19 , 2007 .

soon afterwards , senator obama introduced an identically named companion bill , s. 1181 .

the bills would require publicly held companies to hold annual non - binding shareholder votes on their executive compensation plans and any new "golden parachute" compensation offered to executives during mergers and acquisitions .

critics argue that excessive executive pay can be significantly traced to the fact that the members of corporate boards are not sufficiently independent of managerial influence .

in this view , boards formulate executive pay packages that often allow executives to extract hefty compensation deals that bear little relationship to their contribution to the firms .

in addition , if corporate executives are overpaid , other potentially significant concerns include the following: issues over pay inequality and worker productivity .

according to one estimate , between 1994 and 2005 , the ratio of annual median ceo pay to median production worker pay nearly doubled , growing from 90 to 1 to 179 to 1 .

indeed , for many workers , the perceived excessiveness of executive pay has become the most visible embodiment of growing pay inequality , contributing to a feeling that workers have not shared in the gains from economic growth .

for example , adjusted for inflation , average worker pay rose 8% from 1995 to 2005 ; median ceo pay at the 350 largest firms rose about 150% over the same period .

and while it is very difficult to quantify the impact of executive pay packages on worker morale and productivity , there are concerns that both could be affected detrimentally .

for example , there have been several high profile stories of executives who have laid off employees at the same time their own compensation was rising .

a potentially negative direct impact on shareholder returns .

if executive compensation has been receiving a share of corporate resources that far exceeds the executives' contribution to the firm's value , shareholder returns may be compromised .

although not directly addressing the issue of whether increases in executive pay have been accompanied by commensurate increases in their value to the firms , one study compared the total pay given to the top five executives relative to corporate earnings at s&p 1500 firms between 1993-1995 and 2001-2003 .

it found that the ratio of executive pay to aggregate corporate earnings doubled between the two periods .

a potential proxy for sub - par board performance in monitoring executives .

when a corporate board is unable to get a handle on excessive ceo pay , it may be a sign of the board's failings in its central role of corporate governance .

a purported link between excessive executive pay and the corporate scandals of recent years .

critics argue that a misalignment of incentives from executive pay helps explain the occurrence of scandals involving stock options backdating , accounting fraud , and earnings manipulation .

but this "managerial power" perspective of how flawed corporate governance serves to inflate ceo pay is at odds with an alternative notion that the increase has largely been a function of natural market - driven changes in the demand and supply for ceos .

for example , during a 2006 interview with the wall street journal , then treasury secretary john snow observed that "in an aggregate sense... [ceo pay] reflects the marginal productivity of ceos.... until we can find a better way to compensate ceos , i'm going to trust the marketplace. .

like secretary snow , others argue that market forces are more likely than government to solve any problems that do exist with excessive pay .

in his state of the economy address on january 31 , 2007 , president bush said: government should not decide the compensation for america's corporate executives , but the salaries and bonuses of ceos should be based on their success at improving their companies and bringing value to their shareholders .

america's corporate boardrooms must step up to their responsibilities .

you need to pay attention to the executive compensation packages that you approve .

you need to show the world that american businesses are a model of transparency and good corporate governance .

whether or not policy intervention is merited to tackle the issue of executive pay will depend on whether the managerial power or the market - based view of executive pay is the accurate one .

given congressional concerns with the potentially serious implications of excessive executive pay , this report examines critical and supportive evidence surrounding the premise that the executives are generally overpaid from an economic perspective .

the report also provides a brief history of executive pay regulation and analyzes policy options .

but first , the report looks more closely at the available data .

median ceo pay began its rapid rise in 1993 .

as seen in figure 1 , which goes to 2005 , it rose 35% in 2001 alone , which would later prove to be the high point .

the current economic expansion has not been as favorable to ceos .

contrary to popular belief , executive pay does not always rise — following the large decline in stock prices , median pay fell 13% from 2001 to 2002 .

since then it has made up lost ground , and median pay in 2005 was nearly equal to its 2001 peak .

the 1990s were not the first time that ceo pay had risen rapidly ; it also rose by about one half from 1982 to 1987 .

as important as the trend in the level of ceo pay is the trend in the composition of ceo pay .

since 1995 , median annual cash salary has risen relatively slowly , from $0.7 million in 1995 to about $1 million in 2006 .

but over the same period , median performance - based pay , which includes stock and stock option grants , grew 13% a year , from $1.3 million to $4.1 million .

as will be discussed later , the role of stock and stock options in executive pay helps explain why it rose so quickly in the 1990s , and why it fell in 2002 .

the disparity between the pay given to u.s. executives relative to the compensation awarded to ceos in other nations is often mentioned as evidence that american executives are overpaid .

for example , controlling for various firm characteristics such as size , one study examined pay for ceos in the united states and the united kingdom ( uk ) in 2003 .

it found that ceo pay in the united states to be about 1.3 times that of ceos in the uk and argued that a significant portion of the greater u.s. ceo pay could be attributed to the higher proportion of equity - based pay , such as stock options , in the united states , and the higher risk premiums associated with such pay .

research on japanese executives found that after controlling for firm size , their pay constituted about a third of the pay of their u.s. counterparts in 2004 .

however , in japan , the uk , and many other nations of the developed world , there are reports that ceo pay levels abroad have been slowly converging with the united states over time .

high and rising executive pay could be a cause for policy concern on efficiency grounds or on equity grounds .

current pay levels would be economically inefficient if they resulted from a market failure that prevented pay levels from reflecting an equilibrium between supply and demand in the labor market for executives .

if so , a policy response might be justified on the grounds that resources could be allocated in the economy more efficiently .

however , even if pay levels were the result of perfect competition , policymakers could still be concerned that high executive pay resulted in an inequitable distribution of wealth that had negative social ramifications .

the grounds for concern about executive pay matters greatly in determining the appropriate policy response .

if current pay levels are economically efficient , then policy responses that disrupted the market outcome would lead to a misallocation of resources and deadweight loss by distorting people's career choices .

rather than targeting executive pay specifically , a more economically efficient response to address equity concerns would be through the normal channels of government redistribution , such as the progressivity of the tax system and social welfare spending ( although it should be noted that these channels create efficiency tradeoffs of their own ) .

equity concerns are , at heart , matters of competing societal values for which economic theory cannot offer definitive answers .

the non - economic gains of policies to improve equity would need to be balanced against their economic costs .

some economists argue that the trend in executive pay is not just an equity issue , it is the result of market imperfections that allow executives to manipulate the market outcome .

if this is the case , then executive pay is causing resources to be misallocated to an extent that is , arguably , non - negligible .

for example , one study estimated that the compensation of the top five executives averaged 6.6% of total corporate earnings from 1993 to 2003 .

other economists argue that , despite its flaws , the market for executive pay delivers results that are close enough to efficiency that potential policy changes run the risk of doing more harm than good .

this section first describes how the market would determine executive pay under perfect competition ( the so - called "neo - classical approach" ) , and then considers real - world deviations from that model .

readers who would first like a brief description of the mechanics of setting executive pay should read " how executive compensation is set ," in the box below .

a corporation's bylaws lay out the general rules regarding a company's corporate governance protocol , including procedures for the determination of executive pay .

in turn , the general parameters of a firm's corporate governance are principally dictated by the state corporate law that prevails in the state in which a company is incorporated .

by some estimates , about half of publicly traded companies are incorporated in the state of delaware , giving its corporate laws a disproportionately large influence in this area .

delaware's influence also extends to the delaware chancery court , which is widely viewed as the preeminent national legal forum for corporate disputes .

in spite of the primacy of state law in this area , the federal government and regulatory entities , like the sec and the nation's securities exchanges , have also promulgated policies in this area .

the existing rules governing ceo pay have developed through a variety of legislation , executive branch regulation , and regulation by independent , self - governing bodies .

most regulation involves disclosure of pay , and does not set compensation levels .

the following legislative and regulatory developments have affected ceo pay , although that was not always their primary focus .

starting with the earliest developments , they are listed in chronological order .

in the theoretical neo - classical world , executive pay would be determined by marginal product .

since the outcome would already be economically efficient , any policy response that created a wedge between executive pay and executives' marginal product would reduce economic efficiency .

those who believe that market forces are the best curb on excessive pay argue that government should be doing less , not more , in this area because government cannot determine appropriate levels or forms of executive pay more accurately than shareholders or boards .

the managerial power critique makes the case that executive pay is not determined by arm's length contracting .

it suggests a number of reforms to bring executive pay closer to an arm's length contracting ideal .

these reforms could be promoted by shareholders , board members , or in some cases , mandated by the government , through legislation or regulation .

they fall under three broad categories: improving the transparency of executive pay , strengthening board independence to reduce the potential for board capture , and strengthening shareholder control over the board and management .

proponents often argue that they are not trying to interfere with market forces , but to level the playing field for shareholders in their interactions with management .

some of the reforms they promote do not affect executive pay directly ( eg , not allowing the ceo to be chairman of the board ) ; rather , their stated intent is that reforms that strengthen shareholders' rights or board independence should lead to lower pay ( or pay that is more sensitive to performance ) .

but a few proposals do affect executive pay directly , and are analyzed below .

some observers favor the status quo , arguing that congress should continue to defer to more specialized regulatory bodies , such as the sec , with an expertise in corporate governance .

the regulatory bodies have focused on making occasional minor policy modifications to enhance transparency and align boards' incentives more closely with shareholders' interests .

in this view , hasty policy changes in reaction to rising pay levels would risk undermining the current system that , on the whole , is effective at rewarding good executive performance .

in 1993 , obra added section 162 ( m ) to the internal revenue code , which limited a company's tax deduction for what it pays each of its top executives to $1 million , but exempted "performance - based" pay like stock options .

supporters of the neo - classical model argue that the million dollar deduction limit is a good example of how government intervention in markets can have unintended consequences that cause a policy to backfire .

despite the deduction limit , overall executive compensation continued to rise rapidly , and the limit may have contributed to the rapid growth of executive stock options , which critics argue are at the heart of the corporate scandals .

critics see this as an example of a policy with unintended consequences , in which government regulation encourages behavior that circumvents the regulation's original intent .

tax policy may be too blunt a tool to effectively encourage these goals .

since the deduction limit failed to curb the growth in executive pay , some would argue that it should be eliminated or scaled back .

alternatively , if the purpose of the deduction limit is to curb overall executive pay levels , others would argue the limit would be more effective if expanded to cover all forms of pay ( perhaps at a different deduction level ) .

some research found that the deduction limit appears to have been a factor in the growth in executive stock options and overall executive pay .

but other research concluded that the statute had little to do with subsequent increases in the sensitivity of overall executive pay to performance - based components like stock options .

factors that may have played a larger role in the growth of stock options include the bull market of the 1990s , not having to treat stock options as a corporate expense , and pressure on firms to provide executive pay that better aligned their interests with those of shareholders .

alternative research concluded that while the million dollar cap may have initially helped to compress executive salaries around the $1 million level , it did not appear to have had a significant impact on total compensation and other components of pay , such as bonuses and stock option awards .

some critics of executive pay have advocated changing section 162 ( m ) of the internal revenue code to prohibit businesses from taking tax deductions for compensation provided to executives when the ratio of executive pay to that of its employees exceeds a certain level .

the ratio could be set relative to , say , the average employee's pay or the lowest - paid employee's pay .

a very few firms have voluntarily implemented such a policy .

for example , the ceo of whole foods markets limits his pay to no more than 14 times the pay of the firm's average employee .

using the tax code to mandate such a policy might arguably help address some concerns with the erosion of pay equity and growing income inequality .

supporters of this policy argue that discouraging excessive pay through tax disincentives is preferable to — and less disruptive than — prohibiting excessive pay directly .

critics could argue that the growing ratio between worker and ceo pay owes itself in part to an unrelated development — the moribund growth in worker pay .

critics could also argue that the reform could undermine the core investor concern of whether a ceo receives compensation commensurate with his or her performance .

furthermore , wage levels vary by company primarily because different companies hire different types of workers .

for example , the average pay at a software company is likely to exceed average pay at a chain of fast food restaurants .

under this proposal , the fast food company would face higher taxes if it wanted to pay its executives a comparable wage to the software company .

as with complaints about the obra cap , such a cap could result more in maneuvering by businesses to avoid the cap than fulfillment of its intended goal — for example , any such cap would have to delve into the complexities of what forms of employee and executive compensation should or should not fall under the cap , creating incentives for stealth pay .

detractors could also cite research that concluded that the tax deductibility of executive compensation tends to have a minimal impact on firm's ultimate profitability , raising additional questions about the ability of such a policy to help constrain executive pay .

outside compensation consultants are generally hired to help boards craft the firm's executive compensation packages .

in a number of cases , the consultants are part of larger companies that furnish additional consultation services to the firms .

it could be argued that when firms provide multiple consultancies to individual firms , there is a conflict of interest that makes it difficult for their compensation consultant subsidiaries to resist pressure to recommend favorable executive pay packages .

two possible options to address such concerns would be ( 1 ) an sec requirement that a firm's proxy statements disclose all of the services it receives from companies that offer it compensation consulting services ; or ( 2 ) a law to ban outfits that furnish executive compensation consulting services to a firm from offering other consultant services to them , similar to the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002's proscription on auditors providing certain ancillary services to the firms they audit .

if the latter alternative were pursued , some companies might stop offering compensation consulting services .

these reforms might not lead to any change in behavior , however , because the basic incentive to recommend high pay remains even if compensation consulting is the firm's sole business , for reasons discussed earlier .

while directors must be approved by shareholders , the nominees are typically chosen by the board or management .

at present , shareholders can nominate directors , but the process is arduous , expensive ( estimates range up to $1 million ) , and thus rarely pursued .

to ease the process , the sec proposed a rule in july 2003 that would have allowed shareholders with more than 5% of a company's voting securities to under certain conditions have their board nominees included in a company's proxy materials , which carry the management's slate of board nominees .

a response to widespread concerns over the accountability of corporate directors after a number of corporate scandals , the proposal received the support of various observers , including some institutional investors .

they argued that the integrity of corporate boards would be enhanced because the reform would result in boards being populated with a greater number of outside directors who are less beholden to management and better able to provide independent oversight and scrutiny of executive compensation practices and excesses , such as backdating .

although publicly listed firms are required to have outside directors , some critics have questioned the independence of outside directors recommended by management .

for example , one study found that large numbers of outside directors inexplicably appear to have been the beneficiaries of options manipulation .

opponents of shareholder access reform argue that it could potentially result in antagonistic directors , and thus dysfunctional boards .

shareholders may also be less able to identify the most qualified candidates for the position .

in the end , the sec did not adopt the proposed 2003 shareholder proxy reform rule , a decision that many ascribe to vehement business opposition .

but the issue re - emerged in august 2006 , when the united states court of appeals for the second circuit reached a decision in american federation of state , county and municipal employees pension plan v. american international group , inc .

this ruling was the appeal's courts response to an earlier petition by the american federation of state , county and municipal employees ( afscme ) to reverse the american international group's ( aig ) rejection of its effort to place a binding shareholder proposal in the company's proxy materials that would have changed its bylaws to facilitate shareholder nomination of directors .

historically , the sec has generally allowed firms to exclude shareholder proposals relating to an election from their proxies , as it did in this case .

however , the second circuit found the sec's policy in this area to be historically inconsistent and asked the agency to clarify it .

after the decision , the sec basically chose not to rule on proxy access petitions , which chairman cox said injected a note of uncertainty into the proxy process for 2007 .

in july 2007 , the sec proposed two quite divergent policy proposals .

one proposal , the short proposal , would essentially codify longstanding sec practices of denying shareholder - proposed candidates for board director positions to be included in company proxy statements ( called proxy access ) .

the proposal , which the agency eventually adopted in late november of the year , appears to have been a response to the uncertainty that prevailed after the aig decision .

the second proposal , the so - called long proposal was not adopted .

it would have allowed shareholders or shareholder coalitions with greater than 5% of outstanding shares to propose binding bylaw provisions that could permit specified shareholders to nominate directors and require the company to include the nominees in the company's proxy statement .

generally , business interests applauded the agency's decision to adopt the short proposal , while shareholder interests derided it .

chairman christopher cox claimed that the agency's vote would create legal certainty for the upcoming annual proxy season in spring of 2008 , but conceded that investor advocacy groups and others would be disappointed .

he has , however , indicated that the agency will probably revisit the subject of shareholder proxy access in 2008 when the commission has its full complement of democratic members .

after the sec's vote , senate banking chairman dodd said that he might try to offer legislation to reverse the decision , saying that he did not think it was a fair decision .

and barney frank , chairman of the house financial services committee , expressed disappointment that the sec would deny shareholders the right to offer proxy - access proposals .

chairman frank also stressed that the sec should have deferred action until it was at full strength .

while shareholders are required to vote on a company's overall equity - based compensation programs , they do not vote on pay packages for individual executives .

the managerial power critique has fueled growing interest in giving shareholders a non - binding vote on individual executive pay packages .

along these lines , there is representative frank's shareholder vote on executive compensation act ( h.r .

1257 ) , which was approved by the house on april 19 , 2007 , and obama's companion and identically named bill ( s. 1181 ) .

furthermore , in anticipation of the 2007 annual corporate meetings , activist investors have submitted shareholder proposals at about 60 companies seeking the right to have a non - binding vote on executive pay .

proponents believe that votes against individual pay packages , or merely the threat , could raise outrage costs , thus prompting directors to exercise greater restraint in pay setting and to be more conscientious in linking pay to performance .

they argue that the vote would not overly burden or restrict the board since the vote would be non - binding .

several countries , including the united kingdom , australia , and sweden , have given their shareholders the right to such a non - binding vote .

domestically , at least one firm , the insurer aflac , has reportedly agreed to provide its shareholders with such a vote .

many other firms , however , are publicly opposed to the idea .

two main arguments are made in opposition to a mandatory non - binding shareholder vote on pay .

first , to the extent that current levels of executive pay are largely explained by legitimate market forces , as some have argued , giving shareholders a non - binding vote on pay might inject undesirable distortions into the pay setting process and the demand and supply of ceos .

second , the minutiae of ceo compensation packages can be difficult enough for corporate directors to master .

thus , it has been argued that expecting shareholders with relatively limited resources available for comprehending such things to be a knowledgeable presence in the pay setting process would be unrealistic .

if the underlying concern with executive pay is equity , not efficiency , then the policy goal may be to reduce inequality in the least economically costly way .

a more progressive tax system is widely considered to be the least costly way to redistribute income , in terms of lost economic efficiency .

of course , the tax code cannot target executives specifically without also affecting other high income individuals .

thus , while progressive taxation can be viewed as an effective way to promote equity goals , it is not well targeted toward reducing potential efficiency losses that result from the principal - agent problem that affects executive compensation .

given the importance of stocks and stock options in executive pay , policymakers attempting to increase the tax code's progressivity could consider reducing the tax preference currently given to capital income compared to labor income .

for example , capital gains and dividends are taxed at a lower marginal rate than labor income and a sizeable portion of capital income tax can be deferred through tax - preferred savings vehicles .

stock options are taxed at regular income rates but receive favorable treatment because tax liability is deferred until gains are realized .

economists are divided over whether taxing labor and capital at the same rate would be economically efficient , but given the unequal distribution of financial assets in the united states , it would undoubtedly increase the tax code's progressivity .

a stock option allows the holder the right to buy a company's stock at a predetermined fixed price , called the strike price , regardless of the stock's price at the date of purchase .

the holder exercises the option when he subsequently buys the stock .

after the option is granted , the company's stock could either rise above or fall below the strike price .

if the market price fell below the strike price , the option would have no value and would not be exercised ( because the holder could buy the stock for less on the open market ) .

an option with a strike price above the market price is said to be under water .

if the market price rose above the strike price , the value of the option would be equal to the difference between the strike price and the actual price ( because the holder can buy the stock at the strike price and then sell it at the market price ) .

for example , if a person was granted an option to purchase company x's stock in one year at $100 , and the stock turns out to be worth $125 in one year , then he would earn $25 by exercising the option in a year .

alternatively , if the stock turns out to be worth $75 in one year , he would not exercise the option and would neither gain nor lose any money .

thus , the option's value can never fall below zero .

because the future is uncertain , economists and accountants must use complex formulas to place a value on an option when it is granted that takes into account how much value , if any , the option is expected to have when it is ultimately exercised .

there is a consensus among economists that the expected value at issuance is the amount that should be included in measures of executive pay .

the value of the option when it is ultimately exercised is unlikely to be the same as its expected value when it is issued , however .

generally , stock options can be bought and sold on the open market by anyone .

there are a subset of stock options called employee stock options in which firms issue their own stock to their workers and executives .

employee stock options cannot be sold to others , and often the holder must wait until a vesting period is over before being able to exercise them in order to encourage employees to stay with the firm .

usually , the strike price for employee stock options is set at the firm's current price .

the firm does not have to outlay any cash when it grants employees stock options .

for this reason , employee stock options are particularly popular with start - up firms with limited cash flow and high growth prospects .

however , when the options are exercised , new stock is created , which dilutes the ownership of the existing stockholders .

the firm can offset this dilution by buying back an equivalent amount of outstanding stock from the open market , which would require a cash outlay at that point .

the prevalence of employee stock options is somewhat puzzling to economists because if employees , firms , and shareholders acted rationally , they would each have reasons not to prefer them .

employees should prefer cash wages to options since the options expose them to risk , and people are generally risk averse .

 ( options do have tax advantages for the executives , however , which are particularly valuable for executives facing high marginal tax rates ) .

for firms , options can be thought of as a loan from employees ( in the form of forgone wages ) that must be paid back when the option is exercised .

if capital markets are efficient , it should be cheaper for the firm to borrow on the open market than through their employees .

for shareholders , options are undesirable since they dilute their ownership position .

in light of these drawbacks , bf see the popularity of options as evidence of their "managerial power" theory .

alternatively , some economists have argued that the popularity of employee stock options is the result of the perceived cost of options being lower than their actual cost , because they require no cash outlay and because until recently they did not have to be expensed ( were not counted as a cost ) on the firm's balance sheet .

