the remainder of this report uses different socio - economic characteristics to compare personsborn in mexico and living in the united states with persons born in the current totalization countriesand living in the united states .

individuals born in mexico and living in the united states includeboth naturalized u.s. citizens and noncitizens .

the analysis begins with an overview of selectedpopulation and social characteristics and then focuses on various characteristics of persons in thelabor force .

in addition to being much larger than the population of persons from the totalizationcountries in the united states , the mexican population - - both noncitizens and naturalized citizens - - in the united states has a different socio - economic profile than u.s. citizens and persons in theunited states from totalization countries .

individuals from totalization countries tend to have moreeducation and higher earnings than persons from mexico and the united states .

the populationfrom mexico tends to be younger and more heavily male .

a smaller proportion of the mexicannoncitizen population is not in the labor force because of disability and their labor force participationrates are higher .

mexican persons in the u.s. labor force tend to have more dependents in their u.s.households .

because mexican workers may have lower lifetime earnings , they may receive a higherreplacement rate in social security benefits than workers with higher lifetime earnings .

the fact thatmexican noncitizens tend to spend more years in the labor force does not mean that they contributemore to the social security system than noncitizens from totalization countries who have , onaverage , higher incomes .

the analysis in this report is based on data from the march 2004 currentpopulation survey ( cps ) .

the current population survey ( cps ) is a householdsurvey conducted by the u.s. bureau of the census for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) of the u.s. department of labor .

the monthly cps is the main source oflabor force data for the nation , including estimates of the monthly unemploymentrate .

the cps collects a wide range of demographic , social , and labor marketinformation .

currently , approximately 57,000 households are interviewed eachmonth .

the monthly cps sample is representative of the civilian noninstitutionalpopulation ; it does not include persons on active military duty .

 ( 48 ) eachmarch , the cps asks additional questions about earnings for the previous year .

 ( 49 ) the bls defines the labor force as the sum of employed and unemployedpersons .

unemployed persons are individuals who are not working but who areavailable and looking for work .

employed persons are individuals who are workingfor a private or public employer , are self - employed , or who work 15 hours or morea week as unpaid workers on a family farm or business .

also counted as employedare persons who are temporarily absent from work because of illness , bad weather,vacation , job training , labor - management disputes , childcare problems , maternity orpaternity leave , or other family or personal reasons .

 ( 50 ) .

the cps uses five categories to define citizenship: ( 1 ) born in the unitedstates ; ( 2 ) born in puerto rico or another outlying area of the united states ; ( 3 ) bornabroad of u.s. citizen parents ; ( 4 ) naturalized citizens ; and ( 5 ) noncitizens .

for theanalysis in this report , the first three categories were combined and defined as"citizens. .

the group of u.s. citizens excludes naturalized citizens from mexico andthe current totalization countries .

naturalized u.s. citizens from mexico and thetotalization countries were analyzed separately because it more likely that individualsin those groups would have credits to combine under a totalization agreement ( i.e.,compared to naturalized u.s. citizens from other countries and natural - born u.s.citizens ) .

information on place of birth is collected for every household member in thecps sample , and for the parents of every household member .

individuals born in theunited states or its outlying areas , or whose parents were born in the united statesor its outlying areas , are not asked questions about citizenship .

individuals bornoutside the united states or its outlying areas , and whose parents were born outsidethe united states or its outlying areas , are asked , "are you a citizen of the unitedstates ? .

respondents who answer "yes" are coded as naturalized citizens , whilerespondents who answer "no" are categorized as noncitizens .

in the cps,individuals for whom no birthplace is provided are assigned a citizenship statusduring the editing process .

for example , the citizenship status of a child may beassigned based on the citizenship status of the child's mother .

 ( 51 ) the cpsdoes not attempt to verify the accuracy of responses to the questions aboutcitizenship .

it is not possible using cps data to differentiate between different categoriesof noncitizens ( eg , legal permanent residents , temporary workers , students , refugees,and asylees ) .

nor is it possible to differentiate between aliens who are in the unitedstates legally and those who are unauthorized .

thus , some of the respondents in thenoncitizens category who have never had authorization to work in the united stateswould be ineligible for social security benefits , barring future changes toimmigration or social security policy .

the comparisons discussed in this report are statistically significant at the95% confidence level , unless stated otherwise .

estimates based on survey responsesfrom a sample of households have two kinds of error: nonsampling error andsampling error .

examples of nonsampling error include information that ismisreported and errors made in processing collected information .

sampling erroroccurs because a sample , and not the entire population , of households is surveyed .

the difference between an estimate based on a sample of households and the actualpopulation value is known as sampling error .

 ( 52 ) whenusing sample data , researchers typically construct confidence intervals aroundpopulation estimates .

confidence intervals provide information about the accuracyof estimated values .

with a 95% confidence interval and repeated samples from apopulation , 95% of intervals will generally include the actual value of a populationcharacteristic .

for this report , confidence intervals were calculated using amethodology suggested by the census bureau .

 ( 53 ) .

