in the event of a biological attack or the introduction of a highly contagious disease affecting the public , the u.s. health system may take measures to prevent those people infected with or exposed to a disease or a disease - causing biological agent from infecting others .

the terms used to describe these measures , quarantine and isolation , generally apply to distinct groups of persons but are often used interchangeably .

quarantine typically refers to the " ( s ) eparation of individuals who have been exposed to an infection but are not yet ill from others who have not been exposed to the transmissible infection. .

in contrast , isolation refers to the " ( s ) eparation of infected individuals from those who are not infected. .

varying degrees of quarantine exist , and the authority to order quarantine or isolation is generally very broad .

primary quarantine authority typically resides with state health departments and health officials ; however , the federal government has jurisdiction over interstate and foreign quarantine .

in addition , the federal government may assist with or take over the management of an intrastate incident if requested by a state or if the federal government determines local efforts are inadequate .

the variety of potential responses — from federal , state , and local authorities — implicates a number of legal issues .

namely , who is responsible for preventing an outbreak of the disease ; and precisely what may be done ? .

this report will examine federal and state authority to impose quarantine and isolation measures in order to prevent the spread of infectious disease .

while the federal government has authority to authorize quarantine and isolation under certain circumstances , the primary authority for quarantine and isolation exists at the state level as an exercise of the state's police power .

cdc acknowledges this deference to state authority as follows: in general , cdc defers to the state and local health authorities in their primary use of their own separate quarantine powers .

based upon long experience and collaborative working relationships with our state and local partners , cdc continues to anticipate the need to use this federal authority to quarantine an exposed person only in rare situations , such as events at ports of entry or in similar time - sensitive settings .

although every state has the authority to pass and enforce quarantine laws as an exercise of its police powers , these laws vary widely by state .

generally , state and local quarantines are authorized through public health orders , though some states may require a court order before an individual is detained .

for example , in louisiana , the state health officer is not authorized to "confine [a person] in any institution unless directed or authorized to do so by the judge of the parish in which the person is located. .

diseases subject to quarantine may be defined by statute , with some statutes addressing only a single disease , or the state health department may be granted the authority to decide which diseases are communicable and therefore subject to quarantine .

states also employ different methods for determining the duration of the quarantine or isolation period .

generally , "release is accomplished when a determination is made that the person is no longer a threat to the public health , or no longer infectious. .

one common characteristic of many state quarantine laws is their "overall antiquity," with many statutes being between 40 and 100 years old .

the more antiquated laws "often do not reflect contemporary scientific understandings of disease , [or] current treatments of choice. .

in the past , state laws were often enacted with a focus on a particular disease , such as tuberculosis or typhoid fever , leading to inconsistent approaches in addressing other diseases .

until recently , despite the inconsistencies and perceived problems with such laws , state legislatures have not been forced to reevaluate their quarantine and isolation laws due to a decline in infectious diseases and advances in public health and medicine .

however , in light of recent threats and security concerns , many states have begun to reconsider their emergency response systems , including the state's authority to quarantine .

a review of quarantine authority was listed as a priority for state governments in the president's 2002 national strategy for homeland security .

federal authority over interstate and foreign travel is clearly delineated under constitutional and statutory provisions .

less clear , however , is whether the state police powers may be used to restrict interstate travel to prevent the spread of disease .

in a public health emergency , federal , state , and local authorities may overlap .

for example , both federal and state agencies may have quarantine authority over an aircraft arriving in a large city from a foreign country .

thus , coordination between the various levels of government would be essential during a widespread public health emergency .

public health measures in emergency situations , including quarantine , involve balancing the rights of individuals with the state's police power to protect the needs of the public health , safety , and general welfare .

historically , this balance can be seen in public health crises over the past century or so .

the u.s. constitution and federal civil rights laws provide for individual due process and equal protection rights as well as a right to privacy , but these rights are balanced against the needs of the community .

however , classic public health measures such as quarantine , isolation , and contact tracing are , nevertheless , available in appropriate situations , and , as new or resurgent diseases have become less treatable , some of these classic public health measures have been increasingly used .

therefore , the issue of how to balance these various interests in a modern culture that is sensitive to issues of individual rights has become critical .

some courts have recognized an individual's right to challenge his or her quarantine or isolation by petitioning for a writ of habeas corpus .

although the primary function of a writ of habeas corpus is to test the legality of the detention , petitioners often seek a declaration that the statute under which they were quarantined is unconstitutional .

in 1824 , the supreme court in gibbons v. ogden alluded to a state's authority to quarantine under the police powers .

in 1902 , the court directly addressed a state's power to quarantine an entire geographic area in compagnie francaise de navigation a vapeur v. louisiana state board of health , where both the law and its implementation were upheld as valid exercises of the state's police power .

a shipping company in this case challenged an interpretation of a state statute that conferred upon the state board of health the authority to exclude healthy persons , whether they came from without or within the state , from a geographic area infested with a disease .

the shipping company alleged that the statute as interpreted interfered with interstate commerce , and thus was an unconstitutional violation of the commerce clause .

the court rejected this argument , holding that although the statute may have had an effect on commerce , it was not unconstitutional .

in a subsequent case , the court made clear that at least where congress has not taken action , it is "well settled" that states may impose quarantines to prevent the spread of disease even though quarantines "affect interstate commerce. .

in general , courts appear to have declined to interfere with a state's exercise of police powers with regard to public health matters "except where the regulations adopted for the protection of the public health are arbitrary , oppressive and unreasonable. .

for example , in miller v. campbell city , an order to evacuate an area was issued due to leaking methane and hydrogen gases .

after some residents from a subdivision in the area became ill , the county commissioners declared the subdivision uninhabitable .

the plaintiff was arrested when he crossed the roadblock enforcing the quarantine in an attempt to return home .

the tenth circuit court of appeals upheld a finding that the evacuation order was substantially related to the public health and safety , and found no evidence that the quarantine action was taken in bad faith or maliciously .

the court noted that the county needed to act quickly because of the potential danger , and did so "with appropriate concern for the situation and the interests of all involved. .

the court therefore found that the plaintiffs were not denied substantive due process .

the court also held that because the plaintiffs were given the opportunity to present their objections orally to the local authorities , and could have entered written materials as well , the protections of procedural due process were satisfied .

similarly , a federal district court in united states v. shinnick upheld the phs's medical isolation of an arriving passenger because she had been in stockholm , sweden , a city declared by the world health organization to be a smallpox - infected area , and she could not show proof of vaccination .

likewise , a state court in people ex rel .

barmore v. robertson refused to grant a habeas corpus petition for a woman who ran a boarding house where a person infected with typhoid fever had boarded .

the woman was not herself infected with the disease , but she was a carrier and had been quarantined in her home .

she argued that her quarantine was unwarranted because she was not "actually sick," though the court noted that "[i]t is not necessary that one be actually sick , as that term is usually applied , in order that the health authorities have the right to restrain his liberties by quarantine regulations. .

in justifying quarantine under these circumstances , the court explained that because disease germs are carried by human beings , and as the purpose of an effective quarantine is to prevent the spread of the disease to those who are not infected , anyone who carries the germs must be quarantined .

the court found that in the case of a person infected with typhoid fever , anyone who had come into contact with that person must be quarantined to prevent the spread of the disease .

more recently , a federal district court in new york dismissed a claim alleging violation of substantive and procedural due process by a plaintiff who was diagnosed with tuberculosis and confined to a hospital for a few days against his will .

the court cited to justice burger's concurrence in o'connor v. donaldson , which noted that , pursuant to its police powers , a "[s]tate may confine individuals solely to protect society from the dangers of significant antisocial acts or communicable disease. .

however , at least one state court has ruled that when a state confines an individual in order to prevent the spread of disease , the state must provide the individual with procedural due process protections such as , inter alia , notice explaining the grounds for confinement , the right to counsel , and the right to engage in cross - examination .

however , some courts have refused to uphold the quarantine of an individual in cases where the state is unable to meet its burden of proof concerning that individual's potential danger to others , or if a restriction is viewed as unreasonable or oppressive .

in wong wai v. williamson , the san francisco board of health ordered all chinese residents to be inoculated against bubonic plague and restricted their right to leave the city , citing nine deaths allegedly from plague .

the inoculations were tainted , causing severe consequences .

a court inferred that the regulations were properly authorized , but nevertheless struck them down as "not based on any established distinction in the conditions that are supposed to attend the plague , or the persons exposed to its contagions. .

shortly after , in jew ho v. williamson , the same court noted that the quarantine requirements applied only to chinese residents and questioned whether bubonic plague actually caused the reported deaths .

it invalidated the quarantine because it was "unreasonable , unjust and oppressive" and constituted discrimination in violation of the fourteenth amendment .

additional legal issues might be raised if quarantine , isolation , and other public health measures were used to deal with a widespread domestic public health emergency .

if government agencies requisition private facilities for quarantine purposes , such as in the case of overburdened medical facilities , the legal questions regarding eminent domain power may arise .

a new development in the law relating to quarantine is the possible use of self - imposed or home quarantines .

states may need to consider whether their ability to impose quarantine also includes the authorities necessary to support a population asked to voluntarily stay at home for a period of time .

such authority may include the ability to offer legal immunity to businesses asked to provide facilities for quarantine .

