on december 19 , 2006 , president george w. bush signed s. 3678 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) , which authorizes appropriations through fy2011 to improve bioterrorism and other public health emergency preparedness and response activities , and establishes the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) for the advanced research and development of medical countermeasures .

the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act effected the second comprehensive reauthorization of federal programs designed to improve the nation's readiness for public health threats such as bioterrorism or pandemic influenza .

many of these authorities , found principally in the public health service act and implemented by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , were first explicitly authorized in 2000 ( p.l .

106-505 ) , amid growing concerns about global terrorist activity and emerging infectious diseases .

congress reviewed , extended and expanded many of these authorities following the terrorist attacks of 2001 ( p.l .

107-188 ) .

the anthrax attacks , in particular , had put a harsh spotlight on a public health system that was poorly coordinated and otherwise unfit for 21 st century challenges .

as the 109 th congress began its consideration of the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act in 2005 , hurricane katrina slammed into the gulf coast , while a new strain of avian flu , on a steady march across europe and asia , threatened a global pandemic .

in this context , members of congress considered the challenges of bolstering a public health system that is based largely in state authority , and a healthcare system that is largely in private hands .

congress grappled , on the federal level , with integrating the new department of homeland security ( dhs ) into the nation's preparedness and response activities .

the challenges of building effective , coordinated systems across federal agencies , with state and local governments , with private industry , with citizens , and with foreign nations , were formidable as well .

the 110 th congress will likely be interested in the implementation of provisions in p.l .

109-417 , and in the continued evolution of relationships between hhs , dhs , the states , and others among whom coordination is essential in a time of heightened concern about national security .

members of the 110 th congress may wish to consider legislation to address additional expiring public health authorities , such as the select agent program to control access to pathogens that could be used for bioterrorism , which expires at the end of fy2007 .

congress may also wish to examine certain permanent emergency response and funding authorities of the secretary of hhs .

this report discusses some key provisions in the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) , and provides a history of prior public health and medical preparedness and response legislation .

a comparison of provisions in p.l .

109-417 with preexisting law is provided in table 1 later in this report .

for more information regarding provisions in p.l .

107-188 , see crs report rl31263 , public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act ( p.l .

107-188 ) : provisions and changes to preexisting law , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

for more information regarding project bioshield , see crs report rs21507 , project bioshield: purposes and authorities , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33907 , project bioshield: appropriations , acquisitions , and policy implementation issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

for more information regarding public health preparedness and response authorities and programs in general , and in the context of specific threats , see: crs report rs22602 , public health and medical preparedness and response: issues in the 110th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33579 , the public health and medical response to disasters: federal authority and funding , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergency preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33096 , 2005 gulf coast hurricanes: the public health and medical response , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33738 , gulf coast hurricanes: addressing survivors' mental health and substance abuse treatment needs , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

for more information regarding the stafford act and related preparedness and response planning activities in dhs , see: crs report rl33729 , federal emergency management policy changes after hurricane katrina: a summary of statutory provisions , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl33053 , federal stafford act disaster assistance: presidential declarations , eligible activities , and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

