the terrorist attacks of september 11 prompted a limiting of public access to government information developed , obtained , or compiled for homeland security purposes .

the accumulation of confidential business information from owners and operators of the nation's critical infrastructures , 85% of which is reportedly owned by the private sector , continues to be a critical component of homeland security efforts .

concerns that competitors , terrorists , and other "bad actors" might gain access to security - related information under the freedom of information act ( foia ) prompted new confidentiality protections to promote information sharing between the private sector and the federal government and to prevent disclosure of certain types of security - related information under foia .

the aviation and transportation security act of 2001 ( atsa ) ; the critical infrastructure information act of 2002 in section 214 of the homeland security act of 2002 ; the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( mtsa ) ; and the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , as amended by the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 , exempt certain types of security - related information from disclosure under the freedom of information act .

these statutes are examples of what are referred to as foia exemption 3 statutes ; separate federal statutes prohibiting the disclosure of a certain type of information and authorizing its withholding under foia subsection ( b ) ( 3 ) .

this report describes the current state of the law with regard to the protection of security - related information .

the protection of security - related information has developed from a series of laws , regulations , and executive orders .

this report does not apply to the maintenance , safeguarding , or disclosure of classified national security information .

the freedom of information act ( foia ) applies to records held by agencies of the executive branch of the federal government and regulates the disclosure of government information .

the foia requires agencies to publish in the federal register certain records , and to make other records available for public inspection and copying .

with the exception of three special categories of law enforcement - related records that are entirely excluded from the coverage of the foia and records already made available for publication or inspection , all other federal agency records may be requested under the foia .

that records are potentially subject to foia requests does not mean they necessarily will be disclosed .

nine categories of information may be exempted from mandatory disclosure .

the exemptions permit , rather than require , the withholding of the requested information .

records that are not exempt under one or more of the act's nine exemptions must be disclosed .

if a record contains some exempt material , any reasonably segregable portion of the record must be provided to any person requesting such record after deletion of the portions which are exempt .

disputes over access to requested records may be reviewed in federal court to enjoin the agency from withholding agency records and to order the production of any agency records improperly withheld .

the court shall determine the matter de novo , and may examine the contents of such agency records in camera .

the burden is on the agency to sustain its action .

on december 14 , 2005 , the president issued executive order 13392 , entitled "improving agency disclosure of information," and which contains several statements of foia policy and specific planning and reporting requirements for federal agencies .

executive order 13392 directs federal agencies to improve their foia operations and designates a chief foia officer for each agency's administration of the foia .

the "critical infrastructure information act of 2002," ( "ciia" ) is found in subtitle b of title ii of the homeland security act of 2002 .

ciia consists of a group of provisions that address the circumstances under which the department of homeland security may obtain , use , and disclose critical infrastructure information as part of a critical infrastructure protection program .

the ciia was enacted , in part , to respond to the need for the federal government and owners and operators of the nation's critical infrastructures to share information on vulnerabilities and threats , and to promote information sharing between the private and public sectors in order to protect critical assets .

ciia establishes several limitations on the disclosure of critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to dhs .

the law governing ssi originated with the air transportation security act of 1974 ( 1974 act ) , which delegated authority for transportation security to various agencies within the department of transportation ( dot ) .

the 1974 act specifically authorized the federal aviation administration ( faa ) to: prohibit disclosure of any information obtained or developed in the conduct of research and development activities ... if in the opinion of the administrator the disclosure of such information— ( a ) would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy... ; ( b ) would reveal trade secrets or privileged or confidential commercial or financial information obtained from any person ; or ( c ) would be detrimental to the safety of persons traveling in air transportation .

the faa implemented this authority by promulgating regulations , which , inter alia , established a category of information known as ssi .

as late as 1997 , the dot's definition of ssi included "records and information ... obtained or developed during security activities or research and development activities. .

encompassed within this definition were airport and air carrier security programs , as well as specific details concerning aviation security measures .

consistent with this grant of authority , the faa limited the applicability of the ssi regulation to airport operators , air carriers , and other air transportation related entities and personnel .

after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress enacted the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) , which , in addition to creating new security mandates , established the transportation security administration ( tsa ) within dot , and transferred the responsibility for aviation security to the newly created under secretary of transportation for security .

among the legal authorities transferred to the under secretary was the protection of certain information vital to transportation security , or ssi .

in addition to transferring ssi classification authority to tsa , the atsa eliminated the statute's specific reference to air transportation , thereby expanding the categories of information that can be classified as ssi .

this statutory change appears to permit tsa to protect ssi with respect to virtually all forms of interstate travel , including airplanes , buses , trains , and boats .

initially , tsa and dot issued regulations that in large part simply transferred the aviation security regulations , including ssi classification authority , from the faa to tsa .

with respect to ssi , the regulations first noted the expansion of authority to all modes of transportation .

given this expansion , the agency determined that while the under secretary was given the ultimate responsibility for carrying out the statute , it was most efficient for the other dot operating administrators ( i.e. , railway , highway , transit , and pipeline ) to have day - to - day responsibility over ssi in their own modes of transportation .

in 2002 , congress enacted two statutes , the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) and the homeland security act of 2002 , both of which have had a significant impact on the scope and applicability of ssi .

the first statute , mtsa , requires , inter alia , the secretary of homeland security to prepare a national maritime transportation security plan .

as a part of the national plan , the secretary is required to identify specific vulnerable areas around the country for which area security plans will be developed .

in addition , the mtsa requires owners and operators of vessels and facilities to develop and submit to the secretary security plans that will be implemented to deter security incidents to the maximum extent practicable .

finally , the mtsa provides that the information developed under this statute is not to be disclosed to the general public .

the non - disclosure provision encompasses all "facility security plans , vessel security plans , and port vulnerability assessments ; and ... other information related to security plans , procedures , or programs for vessels or facilities authorized under this chapter. .

the non - disclosure language , however , makes no reference to the information being classified as ssi , nor does it specifically refer in any way to the tsa and its statutory authority to regulate transportation security information .

in addition to mtsa , congress also passed the homeland security act of 2002 , which , inter alia , transferred tsa , along with its ssi classification authority , to the newly created department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the transfer of authority , however , required that tsa "shall be maintained as a distinct entity within the department under the under secretary for border transportation. .

this distinct entity requirement was effective for the first two years of dhs's existence and expired on november 25 , 2004 .

it should be noted that tsa was not the only agency that was transferred to dhs as a distinct entity .

other such agencies include the coast guard and the united states secret service , whose status as distinct entities , however , unlike tsa's , do not contain sunset provisions .

the homeland security act of 2002 also re - codified and further amended tsa's authority to: prescribe regulations prohibiting the disclosure of information obtained or developed in carrying out security under authority of the aviation and transportation security act ( public law 107-71 ) or under chapter 449 of this title if the under secretary decides that disclosing the information would— ( a ) be an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy ; ( b ) reveal a trade secret or privileged or confidential commercial or financial information ; or ( c ) be detrimental to the security of transportation .

in addition to the amendment to the definition of ssi , the homeland security act of 2002 specifically prohibits the under secretary from transferring its ssi classification authority to "another department , agency , or instrumentality of the united states," unless otherwise authorized by law .

moreover , the homeland security act of 2002 amended the existing dot authority with respect to ssi such that it would be virtually identical to the tsa authority .

the only difference between the two statutes is contained in subpart ( c ) , which provides dot with authority to prohibit disclosure of information that would be "detrimental to transportation safety. .

by removing any reference to persons or passengers , congress again significantly broadened the scope of the ssi authority .

as a result , it appears that the authority to designate information as ssi now encompasses all transportation related activities including air and maritime cargo , trucking and freight transport , as well as pipelines .

on may 18 , 2004 , tsa , functioning as distinct entity within dhs , and dot jointly promulgated revised ssi regulations in response to their newly expanded statutory authority .

these revised regulations adopt the homeland security act language as the definition of ssi .

in addition , the new regulations incorporate former ssi provisions , including the sixteen categories of information and records that constitute ssi .

included among these categories are: security programs and contingency plans ; security directives ; security measures ; security screening information ; and a general category consisting of "other information. .

with respect to the regulation's application to information governed by the language in the mtsa , tsa indicated that "[w]hile the mtsa provides broad limitations on public disclosure of the information related to maritime security requirements ( see 46 u.s.c .

70103 ) , it does not establish binding requirements for owners and operators of maritime transportation facilities and vessels to safeguard the information from disclosure. .

tsa concluded that , because the lack of a legal and regulatory framework was prohibiting dissemination to those that needed it , there was an "immediate need to expand the existing regulatory framework governing information related to aviation security to cover information related to security of maritime transportation. .

since 2001 , the implementation and use of the ssi regulations by tsa have created a number of legal controversies that have resulted in both criminal and civil litigation in federal court .

among these are the reported withdrawal of two federal criminal prosecutions involving tsa baggage screeners for fear that proceeding would require the public disclosure of ssi .

based on an electronic search of both published and unpublished federal court opinions , it appears that there have been more than a dozen reported decisions or orders involving the procedural requirements for the use and / or disclosure of ssi .

two of these reported cases have been criminal prosecutions .

in one case , the reviewing court determined that despite the liberal discovery permitted to criminal defendants under the federal rules of criminal procedure , the government was entitled to withhold information from defendants pursuant to the ssi statute .

in the other , the government argued that the information being sought by the defendant was designated ssi and , therefore , protected from the defendant's discovery request .

the court , however , decided the case on alternative grounds without addressing the ssi statute or the government claims to protection .

with respect to civil actions involving ssi , the courts appear to be using a variety of procedures to address issues raised by or related to information classified by the government as ssi .

the most common procedure appears to be the use of ex parte , in camera reviews of submitted material .

for example , in gordon v. f.b.i , a freedom of information act suit regarding the administration of tsa's "no fly" and other aviation watch lists , the government claimed numerous ssi exemptions and resisted disclosing information to the plaintiffs .

the district court for the northern district of california ordered that the government "produce copies of all withheld evidence for the court's review" as well as ordered that the government review all withheld information to ensure that it was exempted in good faith and provide a detailed affidavit explaining why the material was exempt from disclosure .

in response to the information and affidavits received , the plaintiffs argued that tsa had not provided enough detail about the withheld information and that they had not sufficiently segregated non - ssi material from that which received the designation .

the court disagreed , noting that it "has reviewed in camera all of the redacted ssi and has determined that all of it is properly withheld. .

in addition , the court also stated , with respect to the segregation issue , "the court has reviewed each of the ssi redactions in camera and had determined that each is properly asserted. .

similarly , in jifry v. faa , which involved a challenge to an faa order revoking the airmen certificates of several alien pilots on the grounds that they posed security risks , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit held that , although ssi had been relied upon by the government in deciding to revoke the certificates , there was no due process violation because , among other procedural protections , the pilots were afforded an " ex parte , in camera judicial review" of the entire administrative record .

in addition to the use of ex parte , in camera review , several courts have examined claimed ssi exemptions using a more traditional analysis under the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

the statutes authorizing the classification of information as ssi have been held to be an "exemption 3 statute" thereby , authorizing the withholding of information sought under the foia .

generally speaking , in responding to foia requests , the government is required to submit a " vaughn index," which is a document that describes withheld or redacted documents and explains why each withheld record is exempt from disclosure .

courts that have been faced with vaughn indexes claiming protections under the ssi statute have reviewed the sufficiency of the government's explanations and descriptions with mixed results .

in electronic privacy information center v. d.h.s .

 , the district court for the district of columbia held that with respect to one document the court "does not have enough information to gauge wither tsa document e falls under exemption 3. .

the court noted that the government merely asserted that the documents contained ssi without any additional details .

according to the court , while the government is not required to describe the ssi in such detail as to reveal the information , "they must provide a more adequate description in order to justify the application of the exemption to the withheld material. .

as a result , the court ordered the government to submit a supplemental vaughn index with a more detailed description .

conversely , in judicial watch , inc. v. d.o.t .

the plaintiffs argued that the government's vaughn index was too vague to establish that the withheld documents were covered by exemption 3 .

the court , noting that the government had submitted a revised vaughn index along with supporting documents , cited a government provided affidavit indicating that tsa determined the information to be ssi because its release "may reveal a systematic vulnerability of the aviation system or a vulnerability of aviation facilities vulnerable to attack. .

based on the information contained in the revised vaughn index and supporting documents , the court concluded that "dot has satisfied its burden of establishing that the challenged documents were properly withheld under [foia] exemption 3. .

based on these two reported cases , it appears that the government's ability to withhold information pursuant to ssi depends largely on the adequacy of the explanations that it provides to the court through its vaughn index and supporting documentation .

finally , there have been several reported cases that have utilized alternative procedures for dealing with information deemed by the government to be ssi .

these procedures have included ordering the parties to provide the court with recommended security procedures before proceeding ; ordering tsa to file a redacted motion for summary judgment with the court under seal ; declining to review a tsa final order classifying information as ssi and advising plaintiffs of their ability to appeal to the court of appeals ; and finally , ordering that tsa attorneys be present at depositions in order to protect ssi from being disclosed during the questioning of witnesses .

