each year when the social security trustees release their annual report , attention is focused on the projection of the year that the social security trust funds will become depleted , that is , the year in which the trust funds' investment holdings in u.s. treasury securities fall to zero .

in their 2018 report , the trustees project that , under their intermediate assumptions and under current law , the federal disability insurance ( di ) trust fund will become depleted in 2032 and the federal old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) trust fund will do so in 2034 .

although the two funds are legally separate , they are often described in combination .

the trustees project that the combined old - age , survivors , disability insurance ( oasdi ) trust funds will become depleted in 2034 .

some americans may believe that if the trust funds were depleted , social security would be unable to pay benefits at all .

in fact , in 2034 , the first year of projected depletion of the combined social security trust funds , the program is projected to have enough tax revenues to pay about 79% of scheduled benefits ; that percentage would decline to 74% by the end of the 75-year projection period in 2092 .

thus , although the trust funds would be insolvent upon depletion , because they would be unable to cover 100% of expenditures with incoming tax revenues , they would not be "completely broke" and unable to pay any benefits .

although benefits would be paid in some form , it is unclear how the necessary reductions would be implemented , because the social security act does not specify what would happen to benefits if a trust fund became insolvent .

one option would be to pay full benefits on a delayed schedule ; another would be to make timely but reduced payments .

this report explains what the social security trust funds are and how they work .

it describes the historical operations of the trust funds and the social security trustees' projections of future operations .

it explains what could happen if congress allowed the trust funds to run out .

it also analyzes two scenarios that assume congress waits until the moment of insolvency to act , showing the magnitude of benefit cuts or tax increases needed and how such changes would affect beneficiaries .

old - age , survivors , and disability insurance , commonly known as social security , is a work - related social insurance program authorized under title ii of the social security act that provides monthly cash benefits to retired or disabled workers and their eligible dependents and to eligible survivors of deceased insured workers .

workers obtain insurance protection by working for a sufficient number of years in jobs covered by social security .

a worker's job is considered covered if the earnings derived from that job are subject to social security taxes and thus are creditable for program purposes .

in 2018 , an estimated 174 million people ( or about 94% of all workers ) will work in paid employment or self - employment covered by social security .

social security benefits are based on a worker's career - average earnings in jobs covered by social security and designed to replace a portion of the income lost to a family due to the worker's retirement , disability , or death .

in may 2018 , the social security administration ( ssa ) authorized benefit payments for 62.5 million beneficiaries , including 43.0 million retired workers , 8.6 million disabled workers , 4.8 million dependents of retired or disabled workers , and 6.0 million survivors of deceased insured workers .

the average benefit payment issued that month was $1,412 for retired workers , $1,198 for disabled workers , $596 for dependents of retired or disabled workers , and $1,153 for survivors for deceased insured workers .

there are many options to restore social security solvency , which could be combined or targeted in a variety of ways .

for example , congress could decrease social security benefits .

benefit cuts could be applied proportionately to all beneficiaries or structured to protect certain people , such as disabled or low - income beneficiaries .

congress could also increase social security's income by raising payroll or other taxes or by transferring funds from the treasury's general fund .

payroll tax increases could be applied proportionately to all workers or targeted to certain workers , such as those who earn more than the taxable maximum ( $128,400 in 2018 ) .

the next section presents two policy options that could be implemented after the trust funds' combined balance fell to zero to ensure a balanced system in later years: the benefit cut scenario , under which benefits would be cut across the board ; and the tax increase scenario , under which the payroll tax rate would increase .

both scenarios assume that current law would remain in place until the combined trust funds became insolvent .

if changes were made sooner , they could be smaller , since the burden of lower benefits or higher taxes would be shared by more beneficiaries or workers over a longer period .

either scenario would essentially convert social security to a pure pay - as - you - go system , in which income and outgo are equal on an annual basis and there are no trust fund assets .

these scenarios are only two of a wide range of possibilities .

when congress last addressed social security's solvency in 1983 , lawmakers employed a combination of tax increases and benefit reductions to improve the financial condition of the combined trust funds .

under current law , the social security trust funds will almost certainly become insolvent .

the sooner changes are made to the program , the smaller and less abrupt the changes would need to be to maintain solvency .

prompt action would also allow congress to gradually phase in changes , rather than abruptly cutting benefits or raising taxes , thus allowing workers to plan in advance for their retirements .

appendix a .

2017 trust fund operations appendix b .

key dates projected for the social security trust fund .

