since assuming the throne from his late father on february 7 , 1999 , jordan's 57-year - old monarch king abdullah ii bin al hussein ( hereinafter king abdullah ii ) has maintained jordan's stability and strong ties to the united states .

although commentators frequently caution that jordan's stability is fragile , the monarchy has remained resilient owing to a number of factors .

these include a strong sense of social cohesion , strong support for the government from both western powers and the gulf arab monarchies , and an internal security apparatus that is highly capable and , according to human rights groups , uses vague and broad criminal provisions in the legal system to dissuade dissent .

despite this resilience , jordanians are becoming increasingly restless over economic conditions , corruption , and lack of political reform .

in 2018 , real gdp growth was 2.8% , while unemployment stood at 18.5% , and was likely much higher among young workers .

publicized allegations of high - level corruption include cases against several private - and public - sector elites for conspiring to illegally manufacture cigarettes .

weekly protests have been recurring in amman , though they have not been as large as summer 2018 protests over tax hikes .

additionally , many jordanians have turned to social media to express their dissatisfaction with the status quo ; the kingdom has one of the highest worldwide rates of social media usage among emerging economies .

according to one former high - ranking jordanian official , "loyalty is overwhelming in jordan but that doesn't mean there are no pockets here and there that are against even the monarchy .

and they are negligible , yes , but through social media they will have a ... big voice. .

king abdullah ii and his government have developed a multifaceted approach for responding to public discontent .

in recent months , the king has made several public appearances without a security detail , probably in an effort to increase his visibility and interaction with the population .

after prominent people criticized the response to corruption concerns , jordan decided to televise the trial of those accused in the cigarette scandal mentioned above — a rarity in jordan's justice system .

the government also has withdrawn controversial amendments to the 2015 cybercrime law .

according to jordanian activists and international nongovernmental organizations , the amendments would have seriously curtailed freedom of expression online .

jordan may be addressing public discontent and bolstering nationalist sentiment at home by stoking tensions with israel in support of the palestinian cause .

in late 2018 , the king announced ( via twitter ) that his government would not renew a provision in its 1994 peace treaty with israel that allowed israel access to the jordanian territories of baqoura and al ghumar , which are agricultural areas in northern and southern jordan , respectively .

according to one jordanian commentator , "domestically , the king's decision is a much - needed shot in the arm for the government at a time when it is facing public pressure over its unpopular economic policies. .

several months later , jordan expanded the membership of the islamic waqf council ( islamic custodial trust ) , which jordan appoints to oversee the administration of jerusalem's temple mount ( known by muslims as the haram al sharif or noble sanctuary ) and its holy sites .

the islamic waqf council , which had been made up of 11 individuals with close ties to the monarchy , was expanded to 18 , including several officials from the palestinian authority .

the newly expanded council immediately defied a 16-year israeli ban on muslim worship at the bab al rahma building on the temple mount .

israel responded by arresting worshippers and activists while also temporarily banning several leaders of the council from accessing the temple mount .

in march 2019 , king abdullah ii spoke in the industrial city of zarqa , where he stated , "to me , jerusalem is a red line , and all my people are with me.... no one can pressure jordan on this matter , and the answer will be no .

all jordanians stand with me on jerusalem. .

these types of steps for appeasing an increasingly restive public arguably are vital for the government of jordan , which has limited financial options for addressing discontent .

although the government has continued to work with the international monetary fund ( imf ) on fiscal reforms , public debt has ballooned to 95% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , and most of the government's budget is dedicated to salaries , pensions , and debt servicing , leaving few additional options to fund public sector job programs .

king abdullah ii recently traveled to the united kingdom , where uk officials pledged to partially guarantee a $1.9 billion world bank loan to jordan .

in summer 2018 , gulf countries pledged $2.5 billion to jordan in combined grants and loans .

although the united states and jordan have never been linked by a formal treaty , they have cooperated on a number of regional and international issues for decades .

jordan's small size and lack of major economic resources have made it dependent on aid from western and various arab sources .

u.s. support , in particular , has helped jordan deal with serious vulnerabilities , both internal and external .

jordan's geographic position , wedged between israel , syria , iraq , and saudi arabia , has made it vulnerable to the strategic designs of its powerful neighbors , but has also given jordan an important role as a buffer between these countries in their largely adversarial relations with one another .

jordan , created by colonial powers after world war i , initially consisted of desert or semidesert territory east of the jordan river , inhabited largely by people of bedouin tribal background .

the establishment of the state of israel in 1948 brought large numbers of palestinian refugees to jordan , which subsequently unilaterally annexed a palestinian enclave west of the jordan river known as the west bank .

the original "east bank" jordanians , though probably no longer a majority in jordan , remain predominant in the country's political and military establishments and form the bedrock of support for the jordanian monarchy .

jordanians of palestinian origin comprise an estimated 55% to 70% of the population and generally tend to gravitate toward the private sector due to their alleged general exclusion from certain public - sector and military positions .

with few natural resources and a small industrial base , jordan has an economy that depends heavily on external aid , tourism , expatriate worker remittances , and the service sector .

among the long - standing problems jordan faces are poverty , corruption , slow economic growth , and high levels of unemployment .

the government is by far the largest employer , with between one - third and two - thirds of all workers on the state's payroll .

these public sector jobs , along with government - subsidized food and fuel , have long been part of the jordanian government's "social contract" with its citizens .

in the past decade , this arrangement between state and citizen has become more strained .

when oil prices skyrocketed between 2007 and 2008 , the government had to increase its borrowing in order to continue fuel subsidies .

the 2008 global financial crisis was another shock to jordan's economic system , as it depressed worker remittances from expatriates .

the unrest that spread across the region in 2011 further exacerbated jordan's economic woes , as the influx of hundreds of thousands of syrian refugees increased demand for state services and resources .

moreover , tourist activity , trade , and foreign investment decreased in jordan after 2011 due to regional instability .

finally , jordan , like many other countries , has experienced uneven economic growth , with higher growth in the urban core of the capital amman and stagnation in the historically poorer and more rural areas of southern jordan .

according to the economist intelligence unit , amman is the most expensive arab city and the 25 th - most expensive city to live in globally .

popular economic grievances have spurred the most vociferous protests in jordan .

youth unemployment is high , as it is elsewhere in the middle east , and providing better economic opportunities for young jordanians outside of amman is a major challenge .

large - scale agriculture is not sustainable because of water shortages , so government officials are generally left providing young workers with low - wage , relatively unproductive civil service jobs .

how the jordanian education system and economy can respond to the needs of its youth has been and will continue to be one of the defining domestic challenges for the kingdom in the years ahead .

since 2011 , the influx of syrian refugees has placed tremendous strain on jordan's government and local economies , especially in the northern governorates of mafraq , irbid , ar ramtha , and zarqa .

due to jordan's low population , it has one of the highest per capita refugee rates in the world .

as of march 2019 , the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) estimates that there are 670,238 registered syrian refugees in jordan ; 83% of all syrian refugees live in urban areas , while the remaining 17% live in three camps — azraq , zaatari , and the emirati jordanian camp ( mrajeeb al fhood ) .

another 41,000 refugees are stranded in the desert along the northeastern jordanian area bordering syria and iraq , known as rukban .

though most of the refugees stranded at rukban are women and children , a june 2016 is terrorist attack near the border led jordanian authorities to close the area , and access to rukban is sporadic .

in 2018 , syrian government forces reestablished control of southern syria and often have prevented u.n. food shipments from reaching rukban .

rukban is located within a 35-mile , u.s. - established "de - confliction zone" surrounding u.s. forces based at the at tanf garrison near the syrian - iraqi - jordanian triborder area .

in recent months , syrian and russian reports have accused the united states of using refugees stranded at rukban as "human shields" to protect the u.s. garrison at at tanf from being attacked .

in response , the u.s. department of defense issued a statement in march 2019 , saying "despite syrian and russian propaganda to the contrary , the united states is not restricting the movement of idps into or out of the camp at rukban .

the united states fully supports a process to allow idps freedom of movement that is free from coercion and allows for safe , voluntary , and dignified departures for those wishing to leave rukban. .

according to the united nations: discussions are ongoing with the main parties involved , including the government of syria , the russian federation , the united states and the government of jordan to further clarify the process and to address the concerns that have been raised by people in rukban .

the united nations continues to reiterate the importance of a carefully planned , principled approach that ensures respect for core protection standards and does not expose vulnerable , and in many cases traumatized , displaced people to additional harm .

all movements must be voluntary , safe , well - informed and dignified , with humanitarian access assured throughout .

in parallel , the united nations also continues to strongly advocate for additional humanitarian assistance for those who remain in rukban .

u.s. officials frequently express their support for jordan .

president trump has acknowledged jordan's role as a key u.s. partner in countering the islamic state , as many u.s. policymakers advocate for continued robust u.s. assistance to the kingdom .

annual aid to jordan has nearly quadrupled in historical terms over the last 15 years .

jordan also hosts u.s. troops .

according to president trump's december 2018 war powers resolution report to congress , "at the request of the government of jordan , approximately 2,795 united states military personnel are deployed to jordan to support defeat - isis operations , enhance jordan's security , and promote regional stability. .

the trump administration has enacted changes to long - standing u.s. policies on israel and the palestinians , which palestinians have criticized as unfairly punitive and biased toward israel , and jordan has found itself in a difficult political position .

while king abdullah ii seeks to maintain strong relations with the united states , the issue of palestinian rights resonates with much of the jordanian population ; more than half of all jordanian citizens originate from either the west bank or the area now comprising the state of israel .

in trying to balance u.s. - jordanian relations with concern for palestinian rights , king abdullah ii has refrained from directly criticizing the trump administration , while urging the international community to return to the goal of a two - state solution that would ultimately lead to an independent palestinian state with east jerusalem as its capital .

the united states has provided economic and military aid to jordan since 1951 and 1957 , respectively .

total bilateral u.s. aid ( overseen by the departments of state and defense ) to jordan through fy2017 amounted to approximately $20.4 billion .

jordan also has received hundreds of millions in additional military aid since fy2014 channeled through the defense department's various security assistance accounts .

currently , jordan is the third - largest recipient of annual u.s. foreign aid globally , after afghanistan and israel .

on february 14 , 2018 , the united states and jordan signed a new memorandum of understanding ( or mou ) on u.s. foreign assistance to jordan .

the mou , the third such agreement between the united and jordan , commits the united states to provide $1.275 billion per year in bilateral foreign assistance over a five - year period for a total of $6.375 billion ( fy2018-fy2022 ) .

this latest mou represents a 27% increase in the u.s. commitment to jordan above the previous iteration and is the first five - year mou with the kingdom .

the previous two mou agreements had been in effect for three years .

the united states provides economic aid to jordan for ( 1 ) budgetary support ( cash transfer ) , ( 2 ) usaid programs in jordan , and ( 3 ) loan guarantees .

the cash transfer portion of u.s. economic assistance to jordan is the largest amount of budget support given to any u.s. foreign aid recipient worldwide .

in november 2018 , usaid notified congress that it intended to obligate a record $745 million in fy2018 esf ( base and oco ) for a cash transfer to jordan .

u.s. cash assistance is provided in order to help the kingdom with foreign debt payments , syrian refugee support , and fuel import costs ( jordan is almost entirely reliant on imports for its domestic energy needs ) .

according to usaid , esf cash transfer funds are deposited in a single tranche into a u.s. - domiciled interest - bearing account and are not commingled with other funds .

usaid programs in jordan focus on a variety of sectors including democracy assistance , water conservation , and education ( particularly building and renovating public schools ) .

in the democracy sector , u.s. assistance has supported capacity - building programs for the parliament's support offices , the jordanian judicial council , the judicial institute , and the ministry of justice .

the international republican institute and the national democratic institute also have received u.s. grants to train , among other groups , the jordanian independent election commission ( iec ) , jordanian political parties , and members of parliament .

in the water sector , the bulk of u.s. economic assistance is devoted to optimizing the management of scarce water resources .

as mentioned above , jordan is one of the most water - deprived countries in the world .

usaid subsidizes several waste treatment and water distribution projects in the jordanian cities of amman , mafraq , aqaba , and irbid .

u.s. sovereign loan guarantees ( or lgs ) allow recipient governments ( in this case jordan ) to issue debt securities that are fully guaranteed by the united states government in capital markets , effectively subsidizing the cost for governments of accessing financing .

since 2013 , congress has authorized lgs for jordan and appropriated $413 million in esf ( the "subsidy cost" ) to support three separate tranches , enabling jordan to borrow a total of $3.75 billion at concessional lending rates .

the u.s. state department estimates that , since large - scale u.s. aid to syrian refugees began in fy2012 , it has allocated more than $1.3 billion in humanitarian assistance from global accounts for programs in jordan to meet the needs of syrian refugees and , indirectly , to ease the burden on jordan .

according to the state department , u.s. humanitarian assistance is provided both as cash assistance to refugees and through programs to meet their basic needs , such as child health care , education , water , and sanitation .

according to usaid , u.s. humanitarian assistance funds are enabling unicef to provide health assistance for around 40,000 syrians sheltering at the informal rukban and hadalat settlements along the syria - jordan border berm , including water trucking , the rehabilitation of a water borehole , and installation of a water treatment unit in hadalat .

u.s. - jordanian military cooperation is a key component in bilateral relations .

u.s. military assistance is primarily directed toward enabling the jordanian military to procure and maintain u.s. - origin conventional weapons systems .

according to the state department , jordan receives one of the largest allocations of international military education and training ( imet ) funding worldwide , and imet graduates in jordan include "king abdullah ii , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the vice chairman , the air force commander , the special forces commander , and numerous other commanders. .

fmf overseen by the state department is designed to support the jordanian armed forces' multiyear ( usually five - year ) procurement plans , while dod - administered security assistance supports ad hoc defense systems to respond to immediate threats and other contingencies .

fmf may be used to purchase new equipment ( eg , precision - guided munitions , night vision ) or to sustain previous acquisitions ( eg , blackhawk helicopters , at - 802 fixed - wing aircraft ) .

fmf grants have enabled the royal jordanian air force to procure munitions for its f - 16 fighter aircraft and a fleet of 28 uh - 60 blackhawk helicopters .

as a result of the syrian civil war and u.s. operation inherent resolve against the islamic state , the united states has increased military aid to jordan and channeled these increases through dod - managed accounts .

although jordan still receives the bulk of u.s. military aid through the fmf account , congress has authorized defense appropriations to strengthen jordan's border security .

since fy2015 , total dod security cooperation funding for jordan has amounted to $887.7 million .

in 1996 , the united states granted jordan major non - nato ally ( mnna ) status , a designation that , among other things , makes jordan eligible to receive excess u.s. defense articles , training , and loans of equipment for cooperative research and development .

in the last five years , excess u.s. defense articles provided to jordan include two c - 130 aircraft , hawk mei - 23e missiles , and cargo trucks .

