recent years have been times of significant changes in the income tax treatment of the family .

for lower - income families , the most important of these have been the expansion of the earned income credit ( eic ) in 1990 , 1993 , and 2009 .

for middle - income families , the introduction of the child credit in 1997 and its expansion in 2001 , along with the expansion of rate brackets and standard deductions to address the marriage penalty , have been important features .

for higher - income families , the lowering of tax rates in 2001 are important changes .

in december 2010 , the 2001-2003 tax cuts , which were set to expire after 2010 , were extended for an additional two years ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 , p.l .

112-240 , made these provisions permanent for all except a tiny fraction of taxpayers .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) contained temporary provisions that are aimed at middle - class and lower - income families .

these provisions included a refundable payroll tax credit based on earnings limited to $800 for joint returns ( $400 for singles ) and phased out as income rises .

it also includes an increase in the earned income tax credit , with a higher rate of 45% for families with three or more children and an increase in the phase - out level for joint returns , aimed at reducing the marriage penalty .

it also included a provision increasing the refundability of the child credit by allowing some refundability for incomes over $3,000 .

a jobs bill passed in the house in december ( h.r .

2847 ) temporarily eliminated the $3,000 floor for 2010 .

these provisions expired after two years , although p.l .

111-312 extended the $3,000 child credit floor and earned income credit provisions for two additional years .

these provisions were extended through 2017 by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-1240 ) and made permanent at the end of 2015 by the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the child credit and the earned income credit have their largest relative impact on low - income taxpayers .

although an array of issues might be considered in discussing tax rules and their effects , this paper considers two questions in detail: ( 1 ) to what extent does the tax code provide an equitable treatment of families of different sizes , and ( 2 ) what are the effects of the tax code on marriage penalties and bonuses ? .

the first section summarizes the major features of the tax law affecting families and family choices , and how they developed over time , including the relatively recent introduction of large benefits for children at low and moderate income levels , a reversal of a trend in the past that tended to reduce these benefits through the erosion of the real value of the personal exemptions .

it also summarizes the origin of the marriage penalty and marriage bonus .

the following two sections first discuss general equity issues , and then apply the ability - to - pay standard to examine how tax burdens vary by family size , across the income spectrum .

the final section examines the marriage penalties and bonuses .

current federal income tax law differentiates among families by type and structure in several ways .

this differentiation has changed considerably over the years and includes personal exemptions , standard deductions , rate schedules , and various other features such as child care credits , age exemptions , and earned income credits .

a number of rules are differentiated by the type of tax return .

joint returns are filed by married couples , head - of - household returns by single heads with dependents , and single returns by singles without dependents .

tax proposals can be evaluated on many grounds , but one issue is that of fairness .

this issue of fairness can involve two elements: vertical equity , or the equity of changes in tax burdens as income rises for an otherwise identical family ; and horizontal equity , or how taxes should be fairly differentiated between families of different sizes and structures .

this analysis focuses primarily on the issue of horizontal equity , because this is an issue that can be addressed in a more analytical framework .

first , however , the issue of vertical equity is briefly discussed .

the ability - to - pay approach seems the most consistent and , to many , appealing of the three approaches to dealing with tax differentiation based on family size .

this method considers the welfare of all in society rather than focusing exclusively on adults or children .

one study used this approach to estimate effective tax rates in 2005 , and how various provisions of the tax law affected these rates , using an equivalency scale similar to the variations in poverty lines across family types .

because the tax system has been indexed , the findings of this study , published in 2006 , remain largely applicable , although income levels refer to 2005 values ( excluding temporary provisions but including the alternative minimum income tax patch ) .

this 2006 analysis , however , does not include the temporary benefits from the earned income credit and child credit that were adopted in 2009 and are now permanent .

the remainder of this section updates the effective tax rate calculations to reflect 2016 income and tax law ( including the changes in the earned income credit and child credit ) .

in defining families that have the same ability to pay , an adjustment based on a research study used in the 2006 study and similar to that of adjusting for official poverty levels for different family sizes was used , which has a smaller adjustment for children than for adults .

under this standard , a single person requires about 62% of the income of a married couple ; a couple with four kids requires about three times the income .

thus , for a married couple with no children with $20,000 of income , an equivalent single person would need slightly over $12,000 , and a married couple with four children would need $60,000 .

provisions included in the calculations are the rate structure , the most beneficial of standard deductions or itemized deductions ( the latter are assumed to be 15% of income , with 5% of income reflecting state and local taxes included in the alternative minimum tax base ) , personal exemptions , the earned income credit , the child credit , and the alternative minimum tax .

table 1 reports the 2016 effective tax rates for low - and middle - income taxpayers at different levels of income , for family sizes of up to seven individuals , and for the three basic types of returns — single , joint , and head of household .

table 2 reports the tax rates for higher - income families .

the column heading indicates the income level for married couples .

families in each column have the same estimated ability to pay , so that larger families have more income and singles and a head of household with one child have less .

the rates across families should be compared by looking down the columns .

for example , in table 1 , a married couple with $25,000 in income pays 1.7% of income in taxes , but a married couple with one child with the same ability to pay receives a subsidy of 8.5% , whereas a single with an equivalent before - tax standard of living pays 3.3% .

these numbers assume that dependents are children eligible for the child credit and that the families are eligible for the earned income tax credit ( a provision not allowed for those over the age of 65 or for those without children under the age of 25 ) .

these are illustrative calculations that do not account for any other tax preferences and are designed to show how the basic structural , family - related features of the tax law affect burdens .

tax rates for returns paying the amt are bolded .

these tables suggest that the pattern of tax burden by family size varies across the income scale , as it reflects the complications of the earned income credit , the child credit , and graduated rates , including phase - out effects .

moreover , the variation across families that have the same ability to pay is substantial .

at low incomes , families with children , whether headed by a married couple or a single parent , are favored because of the earned income tax credit and the child credit .

the largest negative tax rates tend to accrue to returns with around three children , because the largest eics are available for three or more children and the child credits increase with the number of children .

the rate declines because larger families need more income , which may phase them out of the eic .

as incomes rise , families with children are still favored , but it is the largest families that have the largest subsidies or the smallest tax rates , because the combination of the personal exemptions and the child credit lowers taxes so much for these families .

eventually , large families began to be penalized because the value of the child credit and personal exemptions relative to income declines and larger families that require more income are pushed up through the rate brackets .

that effect is increased because more families with children are subjected to the amt since the personal exemptions are not allowed under the amt rules .

at higher - income levels , credits and exemptions begin to be phased out .

as incomes reach very high levels , however , the rates converge as the tax becomes a flat tax .

note that itemized deductions are assumed to be a constant fraction of income , and so is a proportional exclusion .

the amt does not apply at the highest income levels because eventually ordinary tax rates are higher than the amt rates .

also , the amt is more likely to raise taxes for head - of - household families because the exemptions are smaller and are not differentiated by family size .

overall , these calculations suggest , first , that singles are taxed more heavily than childless couples in the middle - income ranges but less heavily at very high and some low income levels , but these differences are small .

the higher tax rates for joint returns at high income levels occur because the brackets above 15% are not relatively as wide , and the smaller amount of income needed by a single person places them in overall lower rate brackets .

at lower - income levels — for example , at $15,000 — joint returns are phased out of the earned income credit more quickly .

second , when the child credit and eic are available , families with children tend to be favored over families without children at low and moderate income levels .

third , the number of children in a family sometimes causes more beneficial treatment and sometimes less depending on how the eic and child credit are being phased out .

finally , the graduated rate structure causes large families at higher - income levels to be taxed at higher effective tax rates , an effect exacerbated by the amt .

these effects result from the fundamental structural effects of phase - out provisions and rate brackets .

phase - out points and rate brackets should be based on family size if the ability to pay criterion is being used to determine the tax structure .

the flat amount of the child credit and personal exemption also causes them to have little effect on relative tax liabilities at high income levels ; phasing them out increases the over - taxation of large families relative to small ones at higher - income levels .

at low income levels , however , the family comparisons are affected by the earned income tax credit , and differences in tax burdens by family size can be striking .

if there were no earned income credit or refundable child credit , effective tax rates would be relatively uniform at the lower - income levels , at zero or a small positive percentage amount .

the eic introduces disparities .

first , the eic rate is much lower for single taxpayers or two - member joint returns where there are no qualifying children than it is for families with children .

second , if one accepts the ability - to - pay standard , the eic has an inappropriate adjustment for family size .

there is no reason to vary the rate of the eic by family size , but the base ( or maximum creditable wage ) and the phase - out levels should be varied according to the ability - to - pay standard .

that is , both dollar amounts — the amount on which the eic applies and the income at which the phaseout begins — should be tied to family size according to the ability - to - pay standard , whereas the eic rate should be the same for all families .

to make the eic neutral across families , using the ability - to - pay standard , would require , in addition to allowing it at a common rate for all families , changing the base levels and the phase - out levels for family size .

changing the rate , as was done in 1990 and retained when the eic was expanded in 1993 , does not accomplish equal treatment across families of different sizes , providing too much adjustment for some families and not enough for others .

the child credit also contributes to the favorable treatment of families with children , including in the middle and upper middle income levels where it is not phased out .

the increased refundability of the credit enacted into recent law increases the relatively beneficial treatment of larger families at lower - income levels .

the 2005 study previously cited also considered the effects of other aspects of the tax system .

one is the availability of the child care credit .

the analysis in that paper indicated that including the child care credit ( at the maximum ) does not have very important effects .

the dependent care credit is not effectively available to low - income families who do not have sufficient tax liability to use the credit , and is capped and unimportant in a relative sense for high - income taxpayers .

in the middle - income levels , it lowers the tax rate for families with children .

another issue has to do with the treatment of married couples where only one individual works outside the home .

these families are better off because the spouse not employed outside the home can perform services at home that result in cost savings , perform household tasks that increase leisure time for the rest of the family , or enjoy leisure .

the value of this time , which is not counted in the measured transactions of the economy , is referred to as "imputed income. .

this imputed income is not taxed , and it would probably be impractical to tax it .

nevertheless , the tax burden as a percentage of cash plus imputed income is lower for such a family .

imputed income is not easily valued , and this issue is explored in the 2005 study by limiting the imputed income to the value of child care using the cap for the expenses eligible for a child care credit and excluding this amount from income .

for low - income families , this change actually increased taxes by reducing earned income credits .

at moderate and middle incomes , it benefited married couples with children , who already tend to be favored .

the authors also considered some of the potential changes and whether those changes would increase horizontal equity or exacerbate it .

in the interest of increased horizontal equity , the analysis would support an increase in the earned income credit for those without children ; a reduction of the amt ; and an elimination of phaseouts for child credits , personal exemptions , and itemized deductions .

making the child credit fully refundable would increase disparities in tax rates at the lower - income levels .

these calculations should be considered with caution , as they depend on the precision of the family equivalency scales , which do not take into account the heterogeneity of the cost of rearing children , and are aimed at measuring cash needs to attain a given standard of living .

lower - income families with younger children who need child care may find their standard of living in material matters lower than other types of families , because of the higher cost of that care relative to their income .

in that case , the lower rates due to child care credits or exclusion of imputed income may be appropriate .

at higher - income levels , child care costs are probably much smaller relative to income , even if more is spent on care .

the child care credit , however , has little effect on effective tax rates at these income levels .

concerns about the marriage penalty reflect a reluctance to penalize marriage in a society that upholds such traditions .

as the tax law shifts to reduce the marriage penalty , as it did in 2001 , it also expands marriage bonuses .

these choices have consequences not only for incentives but for equitable treatment of singles and married couples .

as shown above in table 1 and table 2 , in the middle - income brackets , where the marriage penalty was largely eliminated , singles with the same ability to pay are subject to higher taxes than married couples .

singles benefit at lower - income levels because their lower required incomes do not phase them out of the earned income credit .

and at very high incomes married couples may pay a larger share of their income because of marriage penalties that remain in the amt and the upper brackets of the rate structure .

this section explores the treatment of married couples and singles in an additional dimension by assuming that singles live together and share the same economies of scale that married couples do .

these individuals could be roommates , but they could also be partners who differ from married couples only in that they are not legally married .

single individuals who live together in the same fashion as married couples have the same ability to pay with the same income .

however , remaining single can alter their tax liability .

remaining single can cause tax liability either to rise or fall , depending on the split of income between the two spouses .

if one individual earns most of the income , tax burdens will be higher for two individuals who are not married than for a married couple with the same total income , because the standard deductions are smaller and the rate brackets narrower .

if income is evenly split between the two individuals , there can be a benefit from remaining single .

married individuals have to combine their income , and the rate brackets for joint returns at the higher - income brackets , whereas wider than those for single individuals , are not twice as wide .

at all levels they are not wider than those for heads of household .

in addition , the earned income credit contains marriage penalties and bonuses .

the marriage penalty or bonus might , in the context of the measures of household ability to pay , also be described as a singles bonus or penalty .

in any case , in considering both the incentive and equity dimension to this issue , the tax rates of these families should be compared with the tax rates of other households .

table 3 and table 4 show the effective tax rates for married couples and for unmarried couples with the same combined income , both where income is evenly split and where all income is received by one person .

in one case there is no child and in the other a single child .

these income splits represent the extremes of the marriage penalty and the marriage bonus .

the same reference income classes and equivalency scales in table 1 and table 2 are used .

note that uneven income splits in the case of a family with a child can yield different results depending on whether the individual with the income can claim the child and therefore receive the benefits of the head - of - household rate structure , the higher earned income credit , the dependency exemption , and the child credit .

if not , that individual files as a single .

the tables indicate that both marriage penalties and bonuses persist .

in the case of families without children , however , penalties do not exist in the middle - income ranges , only bonuses .

in this case , singles who live together and who have uneven incomes would see their tax rates fall if they got married .

both bonuses and penalties exist at the lower - income levels because of the earned income tax credit .

if income is evenly split , the phase - out ranges are not reached as quickly for singles because each of the partners has only half the income .

if all of the income is earned by one of the singles in the single partnership , phase out of the credit still occurs and the individual also has a smaller standard deduction , and thus pays a higher tax .

the smaller deductions and narrower rate brackets also cause the higher tax rates through the middle - income brackets .

at very high - income levels , marriage penalties can also occur .

some of the penalty is due to not doubling the rate brackets after the 15% bracket , but some is due to the marriage penalties in the amt .

the provisions that increase the phase - out level for the earned income credit reduce tax burdens for low - income joint returns and further reduce marriage penalties and increase marriage bonuses .

matters are more complex for families with one child .

at the lowest income level , and a 50 / 50 split , one of the singles files a single return with a very small negative rate because of the small earned income credit for those without children , while the other claims a child and has a much higher negative tax rate than a married couple because there is no phaseout of benefits .

the combination also involves a smaller child credit because it is not completely refundable .

the combined result is a lower benefit than that of a married couple , and thus there is a marriage bonus .

this eventually becomes a marriage penalty because of the favorable head - of - household standard deduction and rate structure .

the amt contributes to this penalty at some point .

with one of the pair earning all of the income , the results depend on whether the partner with the income can claim the child .

if that person cannot , the tax burden is higher throughout the income scale , reflecting the loss of benefits from the child and the rate structure .

if the person with the income can claim the child , joint returns are still favored ( except at the lowest income levels ) , but not by nearly as much .

which of these last two assumptions seems more likely depends on the circumstances .

when couples divorce , they typically move to different residences , and the most usual outcome is that the mother , who typically has lower earnings , would have the child .

according to the census bureau , 83% of children who live with one parent live with their mother .

in that case there would likely be a marriage bonus .

if the couple divorce but live together , presumably the higher - income spouse would claim the child .

however , if a couple never married and the child is only related to one parent , that person , more likely the mother and more likely to have low income , would claim the child .

if such a couple married and had low incomes , they could obtain the earned income credit , and a study of low - income families indicates that this latter effect , the bonus , is the most common effect of the eic .

which circumstances are more characteristic of the economy ? .

note first that , although people refer to the marriage penalty for a particular family situation or the aggregate size of the marriage penalty , it is really not possible , in many cases , to determine the size of the penalty or bonus .

the effect of assignment of a child is demonstrated in table 3 and table 4 , but other features matter .

only when a married couple has only earned income , no dependent children , and no itemized deductions or other special characteristics , and only if it is assumed that their behavior would not have been different if their marital status had been different , can one actually measure the size of the marriage penalty or bonus .

there is no way to know who would have custody of the children and therefore which of the partners might be eligible for head - of - household status and for the accompanying personal exemptions and child credits .

there is reason to expect that unmarried individuals are penalized in the aggregate .

prior to the 2001 tax cut , which increased bonuses and reduced penalties , using an allocation that reflects typical behavior of married couples with respect to child custody , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that 37% of married couples had penalties ( $24 billion ) , 3% were unaffected , and 60% had bonuses ( $73 billion ) .

 ( itemized deductions and earned income were assigned in proportion to earnings. ) .

the net bonus was $49 billion .

however , in most of its analysis , the cbo study relied on a measure of marriage penalties and bonuses that assumed child custody would be based on a tax - minimizing strategy .

for example , if parents of two children had similar individual earnings , each would be assumed to have custody of one of the children so that both would be eligible for head - of - household status .

even using that standard , net bonuses occurred: 43% of married couples had penalties amounting to $32 billion , and 52% had bonuses of $43 billion , for a net bonus of $11 billion .

nevertheless , a significant proportion of married taxpayers — between 37% and 43% — paid marriage penalties .

a study using treasury data and other assumptions produced different measures of the marriage bonus or penalty .

using an assumption that divorced parents occupied the same residence , and thus only one could qualify for head - of - household status , the authors found that 48% had a penalty ( $28.3 billion ) and 41% had a bonus ( $26.7 billion ) , for a net penalty of $1.6 billion .

this study also provided several other ways of measuring penalties and bonuses , including estimating $30.2 billion in singles penalties because these individuals could not use joint return rate schedules .

some of the penalty applied to families with children because of the benefits of head - of - household status .

without head - of - household status , the treasury found that 46% of couples had bonuses ( $36.6 billion ) while 43% had penalties ( $20.8 billion ) , and the net effect was a bonus of $15.8 billion .

treasury researchers did a subsequent study using the standard assumption for the effects of the 2001 tax cut and for 2004 income levels .

as before , they essentially found a penalty ( of $3.7 billion ) without the 2001 tax cut , but found a $30 billion bonus with 2004 tax law ( which included explicit marriage relief provisions and other provisions such as rate reductions ) .

about 60% of couples have bonuses , and 23% have penalties ( while some have no effect ) .

the study also warned that penalties will grow substantially if the amt continues to grow as projected ; however , the amt has been continually patched so that these general results should still be largely correct .

given the shift away from penalties and toward bonuses in 2001 , it seems clear that the current situation is characterized by bonuses rather than penalties .

an alternative measurement is the bonuses and penalties of single individuals who are cohabitating , a much smaller group of people .

in 2005 , according to the census bureau , there were 58 million married households , but only 5 million unmarried couple households ( with partners of the opposite sex ) .

 ( there were 77 million households altogether. ) .

thus , assuming that these households were similar to married households , the "single penalties and bonuses" measured by looking at unmarried cohabitating households would be about 9% of the size of "marriage bonuses and penalties" measured by looking at married households .

a study has been made of penalties and bonuses for existing cohabiting couples with children , which assign the children to the biological parent , or , if both partners are biological parents , to the higher earner .

this study found that under 2003 law , 42% of these couples would experience a bonus averaging $1,893 , whereas 50.7% would experience a penalty of $1,497 .

under 2003 law , 48.5% receive an average bonus of $2,236 , and 44.1% receive a penalty of $1,513 .

bonuses are more prevalent in low - income households because marriage often increases the earned income credit .

these bonuses should increase with the increase in the additional phase - out amounts for married couples enacted in 2009 .

however , a study using data on low - income families in urban areas with young children found that penalties were more common .

that study also examined the effect of increasing the earned income credit for childless workers , as has been proposed by the president and some members of congress , and found small effects on marriage penalties .

the study also contains references to mixed evidence of the effect of marriage penalties on marriage .

the marriage penalty cannot be easily addressed because the tax rules cannot simultaneously achieve three apparently desired income tax objectives: a progressive tax , a marriage neutral tax , and equal treatment of couples with the same total incomes , but with different income shares .

moreover , even if horizontal equity were chosen , the achievement of that system would require information on living arrangements of unmarried individuals that is not available to the tax authorities .

the current system , however , appears to lean toward benefiting marriage overall .

the analysis of equity across families suggests that , based on an ability - to - pay standard , families with children are paying lower rates of tax ( or receiving larger negative tax rates ) than single individuals and married couples at lower and middle incomes , while families with children are being taxed more heavily at higher - income levels .

at the lowest income levels , the eic plus child credits provide the largest tax subsidies to families with two to four children .

the smallest subsidies go to childless couples or individuals .

at middle - income levels , families with many children will have the most favorable treatment because of the effect of the child credit , which has a very large effect relative to tax liability .

at higher - income levels , large families are penalized because the adjustments for children such as personal exemptions and child credits are too small or are phased out , while graduated rates cause larger families that need more income to maintain a given living standard to pay higher taxes .

tax rates are more variable at lower - income levels .

at all but the lowest and highest income levels , singles pay higher taxes than married couples without children .

after the 2001 tax cut , the vast majority of taxpayers without children receive a marriage bonus rather than a penalty , with penalties occurring only at the bottom and at the top — the latter due partly to the amt .

the comparison of families with children is less easily defined .

overall , marriage appears to be rewarded , but there is some conflict in the evidence for lower - income families .

there has been continuing interest in increasing the earned income credit for singles and childless couples , which would increase the equity of the current tax system measured by ability to pay , and apparently have small effects on marriage penalties .

