the fluoridation of drinking water often generates both strong support and opposition within communities .

the practice is recommended by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) to prevent tooth decay .

the decision to fluoridate a public water supply is made by the state or local municipality and is not mandated by any federal agency .

opponents have expressed concern regarding potential adverse health effects of exposure to fluoride , and some view the practice as an undemocratic infringement on individual freedom .

the medical and public health communities generally have supported water fluoridation , citing it as a safe , effective , and equitable way to provide dental health protection community - wide .

with the increased use of products containing fluoride , such as toothpaste and rinses , questions have emerged as to whether current fluoridation practices and levels are necessary and offer the most appropriate way to provide the beneficial effects of fluoride while avoiding adverse effects ( such as tooth mottling or dental fluorosis ) that can result from exposure to too much fluoride .

moreover , research gaps regarding the potential health effects of exposure to increased amounts of fluoride and among different age groups continue to add controversy to decisions regarding water fluoridation .

although many communities add fluoride to drinking water to strengthen teeth , others must treat their water to remove excess amounts of fluoride , which often is present naturally in water .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) regulates the maximum amount of fluoride that may be present in public drinking water supplies to protect against certain adverse health effects .

in 1986 , epa issued a drinking water regulation for fluoride that includes an enforceable standard ( a maximum contaminant level , or mcl ) and a non - enforceable health - based maximum contaminant level goal ( mclg ) of 4 milligrams per liter ( mg / l ) to protect against adverse effects on bone structure .

epa acknowledged that the standard did not protect infants and young children against dental fluorosis , which epa considered a cosmetic effect rather than a health effect .

to address concerns , epa included in the regulation a secondary ( advisory ) standard of 2 mg / l to protect children against dental fluorosis and adverse health effects .

as part of its ongoing review of the fluoride regulation , epa asked the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academy of sciences to review the health risk data for fluoride and to assess the adequacy of epa's standards .

on march 22 , 2006 , nrc released its study and concluded that epa's 4 mg / l mclg should be lowered .

this report discusses the potential benefits and adverse effects associated with the fluoridation of drinking water supplies .

it also discusses the regulation of fluoride in drinking water to protect against adverse health effects from exposure to higher levels of fluoride , and it reviews the status of federal efforts to update the health risk assessment for fluoride and the primary drinking water standard for fluoride .

the following review of issues related to fluoride in drinking water presents information from research published in peer - reviewed scientific journals , reports , and statements of federal agencies — including epa and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the u.s. public health service ( phs ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) — and the world health organization , studies by the national research council , and other sources .

fluoride is a naturally occurring substance and is present in virtually all water , usually at very low levels .

higher concentrations of naturally occurring fluoride often are associated with well water , where fluoride has dissolved from the rock formations into the groundwater .

community water fluoridation began in 1945 , after scientists discovered that higher natural levels of fluoride in a community water supply were associated with fewer dental caries ( cavities ) among the residents .

in 2010 , cdc reported that more than 204.2 million ( 73.9% ) of the people in the united states who received their water from public water systems received fluoridated water .

of the total u.s. population , 66.2% received fluoridated water .

in 2004 , more than 170 million ( 67% ) people served by public water systems received fluoridated water .

many public health agencies and professional health organizations have advocated the addition of a small amount of fluoride to drinking water to help strengthen teeth and prevent dental caries .

although this practice has been controversial in various communities , cdc , the american medical association , the american dental association ( ada ) , the american academy of pediatric dentistry , and others have recommended fluoridation of public water supplies as an effective way to protect dental health .

this approach has been advocated for its ability to provide community - wide benefits , particularly in poorer communities where children may be less likely to receive adequate dental care .

cdc considers the reduction in tooth decay from fluoridation one of the top public health achievements of the 20 th century .

in 2002 , cdc reported that "during the second half of the 20 th century , a major decline in the prevalence and severity of dental caries resulted from the identification of fluoride as an effective method of preventing caries .

fluoridation of the public water supply is the most equitable , cost - effective , and cost - saving method of delivering fluoride to the community. .

one of cdc's national health goals is to increase the proportion of the u.s. population served by community water systems with "optimally" fluoridated drinking water to 79.6% by 2020 .

the optimal fluoridation level that has long been recommended by phs for decay prevention is in the range of 0.7 to 1.2 milligrams per liter ( mg / l ) .

the world health organization ( who ) has identified dental caries ( cavities ) as a worldwide epidemic and recommends adding fluoride to drinking water where naturally occurring levels of fluoride are below optimal levels .

the who states that the goal of community - based public health programs "should be to implement the most appropriate means of maintaining a constant low level of fluoride in as many mouths as possible. .

according to the who , [w]ater fluoridation in low fluoride - containing water supplies helps to maintain optimal dental tissue development and dental enamel resistance against caries attack during the entire life span.... people of all ages , including the elderly , benefit from community water fluoridation .

for example , the prevalence of caries on root surfaces of teeth is inversely related to fluoride levels in the drinking water: in other words , within the non - toxic range for fluoride , the higher the level of fluoride in water , the lower the level of dental decay .

this finding is important because with increasing tooth retention and an aging population , the prevalence of dental root caries would be expected to be higher in the absence of fluoridation .

the recommended beneficial amount of fluoride can be obtained from a variety of sources other than water ( eg , fluoride toothpastes , rinses , and supplements ) .

however , health officials historically have recommended fluoridation of community water supplies , citing socioeconomic reasons that may vary among countries and communities .

the who explains this preference as follows: the consensus among dental experts is that fluoridation is the single most important intervention to reduce dental caries , not least because water is an essential part of the diet for everyone in the community , regardless of their motivation to maintain oral hygiene or their willingness to attend or pay for dental treatment .

in some developed countries , the health and economic benefits of fluoridation may be small , but particularly important in deprived areas , where water fluoridation may be a key factor in reducing inequalities in dental health .

despite such recommendations , fluoridation remains far from universally practiced .

worldwide , an estimated 370 million people receive artificially fluoridated water , and another 50 million drink water that is naturally fluoridated at or near the optimal level .

overall , some 30 countries practice water fluoridation , and the percentage of populations receiving artificially fluoridated water varies greatly .

countries where fluoridation is practiced ( and the percentage of their populations receiving fluoridated water ) include argentina ( 21% ) , australia ( 61% ) , brazil ( 41% ) , canada ( 43% ) , chile ( 40% ) , colombia ( 80% ) , israel ( 75% ) , malaysia ( 70% ) , new zealand ( 61% ) , and singapore ( 100% ) .

of the western european countries , the republic of ireland ( 73% ) , spain ( 10% ) , and the united kingdom ( 10% ) fluoridate drinking water .

most other western european countries have ceased , or never practiced , water fluoridation for various reasons , including the availability of other sources of fluoride ( especially toothpaste ) , the availability of free school - based dental care programs in some countries , broader public skepticism about the safety and efficacy of fluoridation , and greater political opposition .

in several latin american countries , where centralized water supplies are often lacking , fluoridated salt is the chosen method of providing dental protection across disparate communities .

fluoridated salt also is available in some european countries , including austria , france , germany , hungary , and switzerland .

water fluoridation has generated less opposition in the united states than in europe .

however , notwithstanding recommendations from many governmental and professional health organizations , this practice continues to generate controversy in some u.s. communities .

research gaps regarding the effects of long - term exposure to increased levels of fluoride fuel this debate , and decades into this practice , the safety and efficacy of water fluoridation continues to be questioned , debated , and studied .

fluoride poses challenges to regulators because many communities intentionally add it to their water supplies for a beneficial effect at low levels , whereas it has toxic effects and is regulated as a drinking water contaminant when it occurs in public water supplies at higher concentrations .

moreover , the range between the amounts that are considered beneficial and excessive is narrower for fluoride than for many trace minerals .

this section discusses the federal regulation of fluoride in drinking water to protect against the potential adverse health effects associated with exposure to higher , typically naturally occurring fluoride levels ( compared with levels recommended for artificial fluoridation to protect dental health ) .

it reviews the current federal standards for fluoride in drinking water , epa's steps to review and potentially revise the standards , and is followed by a review of nrc's updated assessment of the scientific basis and adequacy of epa's standards , and the subsequent actions taken by the agency in response to the nrc findings and recommendations .

in response to epa's request for a new data review , the national research council convened the committee on fluoride in drinking water to evaluate toxicologic , epidemiologic , and clinical data on fluoride , with emphasis on data that had become available since nrc's 1993 report .

epa also asked the committee to evaluate the scientific basis and adequacy of epa's maximum contaminant level goal ( mclg ) and secondary standard for fluoride .

in march 2006 , the nrc committee issued fluoride in drinking water: a scientific review of epa's standards .

the study concluded that epa's mclg of 4 mg / l should be lowered , and that information gaps regarding fluoride "prevented the committee from making some judgments about the safety or the risks of fluoride at concentrations of 2 to 4 mg / l. .

 ( because nrc's charge was to evaluate the scientific basis and adequacy of epa's drinking water standards for fluoride , the committee did not address questions concerning the risks or benefits of artificial fluoridation . ) .

the nrc committee's major findings are reviewed below .

as noted , the safe drinking water act requires that , every six years , epa must review and , if appropriate , revise each drinking water regulation .

 ( see discussion under " current fluoride standards ." ) .

in march 2010 , epa announced the results of its review of drinking water regulations for 71 contaminants , including fluoride .

the agency concluded that because of ongoing assessments recommended by nrc , a revision to the fluoride regulation was not appropriate at that time .

specifically , the agency's office of water was in the process of conducting a dose - response assessment of the noncancer impacts of fluoride on severe dental fluorosis and skeletal systems .

the agency was also updating its evaluation of the relative contribution of drinking water to total fluoride exposure , considering contributions from dental products , foods , pesticide residues , and other potential sources .

in december 2010 , epa published an analysis of exposure and relative source contribution for fluoride .

responding to the nrc recommendation , epa collected data to estimate the total fluoride exposure for children during the most sensitive period for severe dental fluorosis ( ages six months to 14 years ) .

epa also collected data to develop exposure estimates for adults .

to develop estimates , epa looked at concentrations of fluoride in foods and beverages , and estimated dietary exposures , concentrations in drinking water , and estimated fluoride intakes from toothpaste and pesticides , including sulfuryl fluoride .

 ( when setting the current standard for fluoride , epa assumed that 100% of the exposure to fluoride came from drinking water. ) .

based on the exposure and relative source analysis , epa reported the following conclusions: - some young children are being exposed to fluoride up to about age 7 at levels that increase the risk for severe dental fluorosis .

 - the contribution of residential tap water to total ingested fluoride is lower than it was in the past .

 - use of fluoridated water for commercial beverage production has likely resulted in increased dietary fluoride in purchased beverages , adding to the risk for over - exposure .

 - the increase of fluoride in solid foods because of fluoridated commercial process water is more variable than that for beverages .

 - incidental tooth paste ingestion is an important source of fluoride exposure in children up to about 4 years of age .

however , use of fluoridated toothpaste is not recommended for children under age 2 according to fda [food and drug administration] guidance and package labeling ... - ambient air , soils , and sulfuryl fluoride residues in foods are minor contributions to total fluoride exposure .

epa further concluded that "it is likely that most children , even those that live in fluoridated communities , can be over - exposed to fluoride at least occasionally. .

also in december 2010 , the agency completed a dose - response assessment for severe dental fluorosis .

this assessment provides a reference dose ( rfd ) based on the critical health effect of concern: pitting of the enamel in severe dental fluorosis .

the estimated rfd for fluoride , 0.08 mg fluoride per kilogram per day ( f / kg / day ) , is intended to protect children from enamel pitting during the critical period of enamel formation ( between six months and 14 years of age ) .

by protecting this sensitive subpopulation , epa notes that the rfd would be protective for other potential risks as well .

the dose - response assessment and resulting reference dose are needed to support the development of a maximum contaminant level goal , and ultimately a drinking water standard ( the maximum contaminant level ) .

epa is reviewing the new fluoride risk assessment and relative source assessment documents to determine whether revisions to the mclg , mcl , and / or smcl would be appropriate .

to make a determination to revise the standard , epa must not only review scientific information , but also must evaluate analytical methods for testing for fluoride at lower levels , treatment feasibility ( including cost ) , occurrence , and exposure .

such analyses supporting regulatory efforts under the safe drinking water act can take epa several years to complete .

although nrc's new review of fluoride in drinking water did not address questions of artificial fluoridation , nrc did determine that epa's maximum contaminant level goal for fluoride should be lowered .

assuming that a lower mclg would lead to a lower enforceable mcl , nrc concluded that this would prevent children from developing severe enamel fluorosis and reduce the lifetime accumulation of fluoride in bone , which most committee members agreed "is likely to put individuals at greater risk of bone fracture and possibly skeletal fluorosis. .

even if nrc had confirmed epa's previous assessment of fluoride's health effects , the agency still might revise the health - based primary standard and the esthetics - based secondary standard .

one reason for potential revisions is that when epa developed the current standards , the agency considered drinking water to be the only source of exposure for fluoride .

since then , sources of potential fluoride exposure have increased , and now , when reviewing its standards , epa would consider fluoride intake from sources other than drinking water .

this consideration alone may lead to a lowering of the primary and secondary standards for fluoride .

a second reason that epa might revise the standard is that the 1996 sdwa amendments ( p.l .

104-182 ) directed epa to evaluate the effects of contaminants on groups within the general population , such as children , that might be at greater risk than the general population of adverse health effects due to exposure to contaminants in drinking water .

another possible revision to the fluoride regulation involves the public notification requirements for the secondary standard .

dental fluorosis occurs while tooth enamel is developing , and epa has acknowledged that "waiting 12 months to provide public notification may result in young children being exposed to high levels of fluoride during the time at which they are most vulnerable. .

epa has considered revising the public notification requirements , but has not yet done so .

the nrc committee conducted an extensive review of the available science , and epa has used this significant foundation to support an update of its risk assessment for fluoride .

epa has also updated its exposure and relative source contribution analysis .

these analyses potentially could become the basis for a new , more protective fluoride standard .

however , in addition to health effects , epa is required to consider compliance cost , risk reduction benefits , contaminant occurrence , technical feasibility , and other factors when setting standards .

consequently , it remains to be seen exactly how these factors , when taken together , might influence a new fluoride standard .

although the purpose of the nrc study and subsequent analyses is to advise epa on the adequacy of the fluoride drinking water standards , the evaluation of the available science and exposure led hhs to propose to change recommended levels for community water fluoridation .

in 2011 , hhs proposed that community water systems use a fluoridation level of 0.7 milligrams per liter , which is the lower end of the current recommended range of 0.7 mg / l to 1.2 mg / l .

the new analyses may also be useful to states and communities that are assessing whether or not to fluoridate their public water supplies .

opposition to water fluoridation often has been driven by concerns about the potential health risks of exposure to fluoride in drinking water ; however , social and political concerns also influence decisions about water fluoridation .

a central issue for some fluoridation opponents is lack of choice , and they oppose the addition of any chemicals to the water supply other than those needed to make water safe ( eg , chlorine ) .

in contrast , many public health professionals and government officials have held the view that water fluoridation offers the most equitable and cost - effective way to protect dental health across socially and economically diverse communities .

the conflict between individual liberty and social policy is one that is unlikely to be fully resolved by more research .

additional scientific evidence can help inform the decision to fluoridate a community's water , but such choices often are not made purely on the basis of science .

because artificial fluoridation decisions have been made at the state and local levels , congress has not been at the forefront of the water fluoridation debate .

nonetheless , congress has expressed interest in water fluoridation issues in the past , particularly as questions have arisen regarding the benefits and risks of this practice .

since first enacted in 1974 , the safe drinking water act ( p.l .

93-523 ) has stated that "[n]o national primary drinking water regulation may require the addition of any substance for preventive health care purposes unrelated to contamination of drinking water. .

nrc's finding that epa's drinking water standard for fluoride should be lowered to protect against adverse health effects ( primarily dental fluorosis ) may generate congressional oversight and legislative attention .

issues that might attract particular interest might include the health effects research gaps identified by nrc , subsequent research , and the status of epa's review and potential revision of the fluoride regulation under the safe drinking water act .

