the victims of federal crimes enjoy certain rights to notice , attendance , and participation in the federal criminal justice process by virtue of 18 u.s.c .

3771 .

more specifically , the section assures victims that they have: ( 1 ) the right to be reasonably protected from the accused .

 ( 2 ) the right to reasonable , accurate , and timely notice of any public court proceeding , or any parole proceeding , involving the crime or of any release or escape of the accused .

 ( 3 ) the right not to be excluded from any such public court proceeding , unless the court , after receiving clear and convincing evidence , determines that testimony by the victim would be materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that proceeding .

 ( 4 ) the right to be reasonably heard at any public proceeding in the district court involving release , plea , sentencing , or any parole proceeding .

 ( 5 ) the reasonable right to confer with the attorney for the government in the case .

 ( 6 ) the right to full and timely restitution as provided in law .

 ( 7 ) the right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay .

 ( 8 ) the right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim's dignity and privacy .

 ( 9 ) the right to be informed in a timely manner of any plea bargain or deferred prosecution agreement .

 ( 10 ) the right to be informed of the rights under this section and the services described in section 503 ( c ) of the victims' rights and restitution act of 1990 ( 42 u.s.c .

10607 ( c ) ) and provided contact information for the office of the victims' rights ombudsman of the department of justice .

section 3771 is the product of a long effort to afford greater deference to victims in the criminal justice process .

it is akin to the victims' bill of rights provisions found in the laws of the various states and augments a fairly wide variety of preexisting federal victims' rights legislation .

its enactment followed closely on the heels of discontinued efforts to pass a victims' rights amendment to the u.s. constitution .

section 3371 borrows extensively from the language in the federal restitution statutes , which seems appropriate since , in the case of restitution , it simply serves as a reminder of the rights they supply , that is , "the right to full and timely restitution as provided in law. .

the statute has remained but with few changes since its enactment in 2004 .

soon thereafter , the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 clarified its application in habeas corpus proceedings .

more recently , the justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 added the two new rights which appear in italics above .

it also resolved a split among the lower federal appellate courts over the mandamus standard of review to be applied when victims seek to vindicate on appeal a denial of their rights .

legal reform in the name of the victims of crime began to appear in state and federal law in the 1960s .

it can be seen in victim restitution and compensation laws ; in the reform of rape laws , drunk driving statutes , and bail laws ; and in provisions for victim impact statements at sentencing , to name a few .

over time in many jurisdictions , these specific victim provisions were joined by a more general , more comprehensive victims' bills of rights .

thus , by the close of the 20 th century , 33 states had added a victims' rights amendment to their state constitutions , and each of the states had a general statutory declaration of victims' rights .

in the meantime , congress had enacted a series of individual victims' rights provisions as well as a general aspirational federal statute directed to the performance of federal officials .

section 10606 was accompanied by a statement of the sense of congress encouraging similar action by the states and by specific directions to the heads of the various federal law enforcement departments and agencies for implementation , both of which remain in effect .

in addition , beginning in the 104 th congress , both houses regularly considered victims' rights amendments to the u.s. constitution .

unable to reach the consensus necessary for passage , sponsors opted for a statutory substitute , which unlike the "best - efforts" preexisting statute , included enforcement mechanisms .

the legislation , s. 2329 — the scott campbell , stephanie roper , wendy preston , louarna gillis , and nila lynn crime victims' right act — was introduced in the senate on april 21 , 2004 , and passed the following day .

the house merged an amended version of s. 2329 with dna proposals in h.r .

5107 , the justice for all act , which it passed on october 6 , 2004 .

the senate passed h.r .

5107 unamended three days later , and the president signed it on october 30 , 2004 .

the implementing amendments to the federal rules of criminal procedure , including rule 60 ( victims' rights ) , became effective on december 1 , 2008 .

for the purposes of this chapter , the term "crime victim" means a person directly and proximately harmed as a result of the commission of a federal offense or an offense in the district of columbia .

in the case of a crime victim who is under 18 years of age , incompetent , incapacitated , or deceased , the legal guardians of the crime victim or the representatives of the crime victim's estate , family members , or any other persons appointed as suitable by the court , may assume the crime victim's rights under this chapter , but in no event shall the defendant be named as such guardian or representative .

the definition of "victim," the question of deciding who should be afforded rights and who should not be , was one of the issues that over the years fired debate during consideration of proposals to amend the u.s. constitution .

the amendment proposals in the 108 th congress ( s.j.res .

1 / h.j.res .

48 ) opted not to include a specific definition of victim , but referred to the rights as those of the "victims of violent crimes. .

in doing so , they excluded the victims of fraud , regardless of how extensive or devastating the crime , a result some members considered unsatisfactory .

section 3771 suffers no such limitation .

instead , it borrowed language from the federal restitution statutes , 18 u.s.c .

3663 and 18 u.s.c .

3663a , which , then as now , define a victim as "a person directly and proximately harmed as a result of the commission of an offense for which restitution may be ordered. .

section 3771 adopted the restitution provisions' representational language as well .

however , it has nothing comparable to the explicit provision for schemes or conspiracies found in the restitution statutes .

section 3771 is otherwise explicitly more expansive .

it encompasses all federal crimes and those of the district of columbia .

the restitution statutes , on the other hand , are more limited .

these differences notwithstanding , the courts have consulted their experience under the restitution statutes when construing the definition of victim for purposes of the victims' rights statute .

the right to be reasonably protected from the accused .

section 3771 lists the right to be reasonably protected from the accused first among its victims' rights .

section 3771's components can be traced to a comparable provision in the 108 th congress - proposed constitutional amendments in most instances .

this one is a little different .

the constitutional amendment proposals spoke of a right to have judicial decisions made with an eye to victim safety .

the previous language focused on "adjudicative decisions" ; the new language has no such limitation .

the earlier language seemed to impose an obligation to guard against threats to victim safety , from whatever source ; the new language establishes a right to the victim to be protected against the accused .

use of the term "accused" and portions of the scant legislative history might be read to imply that the right expires with the conviction of the accused , at which point he would ordinarily be referred to as the offender .

nevertheless , the colloquy on the floor between two of the principal senate sponsors ended with the comment that they considered the term "accused" to mean "convicted" as well .

but earlier in their discussion , they summarized the right simply using a trial protection example .

the clause appears to have been the subject of little judicial construction .

one court understood the term "accused" to mean that the right does not attach until a person has been "accused by criminal complaint , information or indictment. .

a second court observed that "[r]egardless of what this right might entail outside the bail context , it appears to add no new substance to the protection of crime victims afforded by the bail reform act , which already allows a court to order reasonable conditions of release or the detention of an accused defendant to 'assure ... the safety of any other person.' .

 ( 18 u.s.c .

3142 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) .

as will be noted below , victims elsewhere in section 3771 are entitled to notice and to be heard with respect to the release of an accused .

moreover , the protection clause provided the stimulus for an amendment to rules 12.1 and 17 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure relating to the disclosure of the addresses and telephone numbers of government witnesses and to subpoenas for personal or confidential information about victims , respectively .

the right to reasonable , accurate , and timely notice of any public court proceeding , or any parole proceeding , involving the crime or of any release or escape of the accused .

18 u.s.c .

3771 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

officers and employees of the department of justice and other departments and agencies of the united states engaged in the detection , investigation , or prosecution of crime shall make their best efforts to see that crime victims are notified of , and accorded , the rights described in subsection ( a ) ... notice of release otherwise required pursuant to this chapter shall not be given if such notice may endanger the safety of any person .

in a case where the court finds that the number of crime victims makes it impracticable to accord all of the crime victims the rights described in subsection ( a ) , the court shall fashion a reasonable procedure to give effect to this chapter that does not unduly complicate or prolong the proceedings .

notice allows victims to assert their rights , facilitates their participation , assures them that justice is being done , and affords them the opportunity to take protective measures when the accused is at large .

section 3771's notification rights are subject to several limitations , some explicit , some implicit .

the section explicitly excuses a failure to notify victims of the release of an accused when to do so might be dangerous , and it permits the courts to seek reasonable accommodations when the number of victims in a given case precludes strict compliance with the section's demands .

the implicit limitation is constitutional .

under some circumstances , the manner in which notice is provided may intrude upon the rights of the accused to an impartial jury trial or other constitutional rights of the accused .

under such circumstances , the statutory rights of the victim must yield .

there is also an omission .

section 3771 does not give victims the right to notification of their rights ; it merely imposes an obligation upon government officials to "make their best efforts to see that crime victims are notified" of them .

this notification of the rights was a component of the early constitutional amendment proposals , which followed the lead of several state constitutions and statutes .

it was originally seen as a victim's counterpart to the miranda warnings enjoyed by an accused and as a prerequisite if the proposed amendments were to function effectively .

there were objections , however , that the warnings were out of character with the other rights conveyed by the constitution and might pose implementation problems — objections that apparently ultimately prevailed , since the provision was not included in later proposals .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 2 ) 's notice clause , in this respect and others , is essentially the same as its forerunner in the 108 th congress resolutions to amend the constitution .

it differs slightly in that it makes special provisions for parole proceedings and insists that notice be "accurate" as well as "reasonable and timely. .

moreover , unlike its predecessors , the clause is accompanied by language that imposes an obligation on the government to advise victims of their rights under the section and to inform them that they may consult an attorney concerning those rights .

the notice clause has several distinctive features: the notice rights apply only with respect to public court proceedings and parole proceedings ; the rights attach to those proceedings involving the crime but not necessarily to all those related to the crime ; victims are entitled to reasonable , accurate and timely notice ; and victims are entitled to notice of the release or escape only of the accused .

the right not to be excluded from any such public court proceeding , unless the court , after receiving clear and convincing evidence , determines that testimony by the victim would be materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that proceeding .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 3 ) promises victims a limited attendance right , that is , a right not to be excluded from public court proceedings unless attendance would color their subsequent testimony .

the constitution promises the accused a public trial by an impartial jury and affords him the right to be present at all critical stages of the proceedings against him .

it offers victims no such prerogatives .

their status is at best that of any other member of the general public and , in fact , the constitution screens the accused's right to an impartial jury trial from the over exuberance of the public .

moreover , victims are even more likely to be barred from the courtroom during trial than members of the general public .

ironically , the victim's status as a witness , the avenue of most likely access to pretrial proceedings , is the very attribute most likely to result in exclusion from the trial .

sequestration , or the practice of separating witnesses and holding outside the courtroom all but the witness on the stand , is of ancient origins and "consists merely in preventing one prospective witness from being taught by hearing another's testimony. .

the principle has been embodied in rule 615 of the federal rules of evidence and in state rules that adopt the federal practice .

section 3771 assures victims of the right not to be excluded from any public proceedings involving the crime except when to attend would color their subsequent testimony .

it is one area where balancing the interests of victim , defendant , and government may be the most challenging .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 3 ) 's attendance right language is comparable to that found in the earlier "best efforts" statute which recognizes the right of victims "to be present at all public court proceedings related to the offense , unless the court determines that testimony by the victim would be materially affected if the victim heard other testimony at trial. .

section 3771 also operates in conjunction with 18 u.s.c .

3510 , which declares that in federal capital cases , victims who attend a trial are not disqualified from appearing as witnesses at subsequent sentencing hearings absent a danger of unfair prejudice , jury confusion , of the jury being misled , or as constitutionally required .

in other federal criminal cases , victims may be excluded from trial only as constitutionally required .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 3 ) is more limited than the constitutional amendment proposals , which with early exceptions afforded a general right not to be excluded .

it was suggested that the phrase "not to be excluded" in the amendment proposals was used to avoid the claims that the proposal would entitle victims to transportation to relevant proceedings or to have proceedings scheduled for their convenience or to free them from imprisonment to attend proceedings .

in this it would be unlike a defendant's right to attend .

yet like a defendant's right to attend , the use of the phrase has been thought to permit exclusion of the victim for disruptive behavior , excessive displays of emotion , and other forms of impropriety for which a defendant might be excluded .

as in the case of notification , the legislative history of constitutional amendment proposals indicates that the section plays no role in what public proceedings can be closed even though that action denies victims notice , attendance , and allocution rights .

it suggests that a victim has little ground to object if a decision is made to close a traditionally public proceeding .

on the other hand , the section conveying the right is reinforced by a later section in which the courts are instructed to make every effort to ensure the fullest possible victim attendance .

together they require the trial attendance of victims unless the court "finds by clear and convincing evidence that it is highly likely , not merely possible , that the victim - witness will alter his or her testimony" if allowed to attend prior to testifying .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 3 ) has apparently yet to serve as a source for successful defendant objections to the attendance of victim / witnesses in judicial proceedings .

the right to be reasonably heard at any public proceeding in the district court involving release , plea , sentencing , or any parole proceeding .

unlike the rights to notice and not to be excluded , the right to be heard is a right to participate .

the section describes the proceedings at which it may be invoked with greater particularity , and here too limits application to reasonable participation in public court and parole proceedings .

it does not on its face give victims the right to be heard in closed proceedings or to be heard on other pretrial motions , at trial , perhaps on appeal , or with respect to related forfeiture proceedings .

nor does it explicitly give the victim the right to be heard in any particular form .

it is in these respects and others very much like the amendment proposals in the 108 th congress .

the reasonable right to confer with the attorney for the government in the case .

this is a right not found in the constitutional amendment proposals .

the statute might be read to afford a right to confer beginning with the commission of the offense , including with regard to the manner in which the investigation is conducted and the decision as to what charges to bring and against whom .

the senate sponsors of the section , however , described an extensive but more limited right: section 2 , ( a ) ( 5 ) provides a right to confer with the attorney for the government in the case .

this right is intended to be expansive .

for example .

the victim has the right to confer with the government concerning any critical stage or disposition of the case .

the right , however , is not limited to these examples .

i ask the senator if he concurs in this intent .

mr. kyl .

yes .

the intent of this section is just as the senator says .

this right to confer does not give the crime victim any right to direct the prosecution .

prosecutors should consider it part of their profession to be available to consult with crime victims about the concerns the victims may have which are pertinent to the case , case proceedings or dispositions .

under this provision , victims are able to confer with the government's attorney about proceedings after charging .

initially , at least some courts appear to believe that the exercise of the right must be self - initiated .

the obligation , however , rests with the government , and the courts are bound to ensure that it is honored .

even before congress made application more explicit , case law suggested that the right to confer attached before formal charges had been filed and that the failure to confer might provide a victim with the right to have an unconferred plea agreement set aside , as noted earlier .

the right to confer , however , does not extend to a right to access to the prosecution's investigative files , nor to the probation services' pre - sentencing report .

the right to full and timely restitution as provided in law .

section 3771's restitution language , like that of many of its other elements , is reminiscent of the constitutional amendment proposals in the 108 th and 107 th congresses which spoke of a right "to full and timely restitution. .

those proposals were very different from earlier proposals .

they did not establish a right to restitution in so many words .

they did not explicitly convey a right to have proceedings reopened for failure to accommodate a victim's right to restitution .

instead , for the first time they spoke of just and timely claims to restitution , two concepts which could be subject to several interpretations .

the first victims' rights proposals promised either a right "to an order of restitution from the convicted offender," or a right "to full restitution from the convicted offender. .

subsequent proposals opted for the right to a restitution order .

the proposals appeared to make restitution orders mandatory as a matter of right .

the scope of the right was unstated .

although the proposals applied to juvenile proceedings , the use of the term "convicted offender" might have been construed to limit their restitution command to criminal convictions and therefore not reach findings of delinquency .

restitution orders in a nominal amount or subject to priorities for criminal fines or forfeiture or other claims against the defendant's assets might have seemed inconsistent with the decision to elevate mandatory victim restitution to a constitutional right .

their legislative history indicated that these early proposals did "not confer on victims any rights to a specific amount of restitution , leaving the court free to order nominal restitution... .

the right conferred on victims [was] one to an 'order' of restitution .

with the order in hand , questions of enforcement of the order and its priority as against other judgments [were] left to the applicable federal and state law. .

the committee reports , however , continuously suggested that the right might include the right to a pretrial restraining order to prevent an accused from dissipating assets that might be used to satisfy a restitution order .

the right also might have extended to prevent dissipation in the form of payment of attorneys' fees for the accused , since the accused has only a qualified right to the assistance of counsel of his choice .

what was a right to a restitution order prior to the 107 th congress became the right to consideration of just and timely victims' claims , appropriate to the circumstances , weighed against the interests of others , and perhaps only applicable during proceedings on other matters .

at first glance , it appeared that as long as the victim's interest in just restitution when asserted in a timely manner was recognized , the amendment proposals left the law of restitution unchanged .

not everyone read it that way .

one commentator offered an example to illustrate his more expansive understanding of its reach: jane doe was beaten and raped in a remote wooded area of vermont... .

her injuries were extensive... .

when her case was resolved by way of a plea bargain she was not given the right to speak before the court .

incredibly , the sentence imposed did not order the criminal to pay restitution .

today he earns $7.50 an hour making furniture inside the prison walls — and none of it goes to her for her damages and injuries because it was not part of the criminal sentence .

if this provision had been the law , jane would today be receiving restitution payments each month .

the implication was that in horrific cases , victims had a right to restitution without reference to any other factors .

yet insertion of the word "just" for the first time in the restitution component of the amendment proposal presumably called for consideration of such factors when appropriate .

moreover , it probably precluded restitution claims by the "ripped - off" drug dealer or others victimized in the course of their own illegal conduct at least in some circumstances .

historical proposals explicitly allowed victims to reopen final proceedings in vindication of their right to restitution .

that language disappeared and in its place was a reference to "timely" claims to restitution .

the implications were obvious , but the statement quoted above seems to suggest that "timeliness" may be judged by the date of the injury , the date of sentencing , or the date on which the offender had the resources to begin paying restitution .

section 3771 adds the phrase "as provided in law" to the right and substitutes "full and timely" restitution for "just and timely" restitution .

with the changes , the section seems to confirm rather than enlarge existing law in the area of restitution .

sponsors felt that elsewhere the section bolsters the victim's restitution interest by ensuring the victim's rights to notice , consultation and participation .

one appellate court has pointed out that the promise of "full" restitution extends only as far as the law provides , a fact that "makes it clear that congress recognized that there would be numerous situations when it would be impossible for multiple crime victims to the same set of crimes to be repaid every dollar they had lost. .

the right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay .

the u.s. constitution guarantees those accused of a federal crime a speedy trial ; the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment makes the right binding upon the states , whose constitutions often have a companion provision .

the constitutional right is reinforced by statute and rule in the form of speedy trial laws in both the federal and state realms .

"ironically , however , the defendant is often the only person involved in a criminal proceeding without an interest in a prompt trial .

delay often works to the defendant's advantage .

witnesses may become unavailable , their memories may fade , evidence may be lost , changes in the law may be beneficial , or the case may simply receive a lower priority with the passage of time. .

until recently , victims had no comparable rights , although their advocates contended they had a very real interest in prompt disposition .

some victims sought to put a traumatic episode behind them ; some wanted to see justice done quickly ; some hoped simply to end the trail of inconveniences and hardship that all too often fell to their lot as witnesses .

a few states have since enacted statutory or constitutional provisions establishing a victim's right to "prompt" or "timely" disposition of the case in one form or another .

the federal statutory victims' bill of rights , 42 u.s.c .

10606 ( 2000 ed .

 ) , did not include a speedy trial provision , but congress has encouraged the states to include a right to a reasonably expeditious trial among the rights they afford victims .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 7 ) seems to convey a more generous right than its predecessors in the proposed constitutional amendments .

yet in spite of what might appear to be an evolutionary development , the right has been described at each stage in much the same terms ; throughout the years it was suggested that perhaps the standards used to judge the defendant's constitutional speedy trial right govern here as well .

in the beginning , proposals sometimes actually spoke of a victims' speedy trial right , and in other instances preferred to describe it as the right to have " proceedings resolved in a prompt and timely manner. .

proposals in the 105 th congress continued the split , some focused on the beginning and completion of trial ; others on a finality of the proceedings .

in the following congress , the proposals all called for "consideration of the victim's interest in a trial free from unreasonable delay. .

in this form , the right was one relevant only in a trial and pretrial context .

the proposals seemed to carry the implication that the right could only be claimed in conjunction with other proceedings ( eg , "considered" in the context of a defense or government motion for a continuance but not a defendant's motion for a new trial ) , but not necessarily provide grounds for a free - standing victim's motion when the question of timing was not otherwise before the court .

in the 108 th congress the formulation referred to "the right to adjudicative decisions that duly consider the victim's ... interest in avoiding unreasonable delay. .

some of the words were new .

the phrase "adjudicative decisions" replaced "trials" and "proceedings" ; "duly consider" appeared instead of "consideration" ; and "avoiding unreasonable delay" stood where "free from unreasonable delay" once was .

yet at least some of the concepts seemed to remain constant .

reasonable delays were too countenanced ; unreasonable delays tolerated only if they are outweighed by other interests .

the supreme court's speedy trial jurisprudence was to be used as a guide for what was reasonable .

on the other hand , the new wording left other questions unanswered .

were victims to have the right to be heard prior to any decision that might either cause or reduce delay ? .

one hearing witness expressed concern that the right to consideration of the interest might include the right to voice the interest on questions other than scheduling: "does a crime victim have the right to object to the admission of evidence on the ground that it might lengthen the trial ? .

yet , the amendment's language did not necessarily create a right to assert the interest .

the delay avoidance interest triggered a right to consideration .

interests elsewhere in the amendment triggered a right to be heard .

and the right to be heard related to matters of "public release , plea , sentencing , reprieve , and pardon proceedings," not to the matters of scheduling , motions , and other pretrial and trial proceedings which were just as likely to produce delay .

courts might have concluded the differences were significant .

section 3771 ( a ) ( 7 ) continues to describe the right to delay avoidance in limiting terms , but apparently more expansively than its forebears: "the right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay. .

its sponsors suggested than the right was aimed at scheduling delays particularly: i would like to move on to section 2 , ( a ) ( 7 ) , which provides crime victims with a right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay .

this provision does not curtail the government's need for reasonable time to organize and prosecute its case .

nor is the provision intended to infringe on the defendant's due process right to prepare a defense .

too often , however , delays in criminal proceedings occur for the mere convenience of the parties and those delays reach beyond the time needed for defendant's due process or the government's need to prepare .

the result of such delays is that victims cannot begin to put the crime behind them and they continue to be victimized .

it is not right to hold crime victims under the stress and pressure of future court proceedings merely because it is convenient for the parties or the court .

this provision should be interpreted so that the any decision to continue a criminal case should include reasonable consideration of the rights under this section .

the case law indicates that the courts are sensitive to victims' interest in delay avoidance ; that in some instances delay may be in the interest of at least some victims ; and that the provision "appears to add little if anything substantive to existing law ... except that it does appear to confer ... the right to object to delay and ask the court to hold both government and defendant to what the speedy trial act already requires. .

the right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim's dignity and privacy .

this right rarely found explicit expression in the proposed constitutional amendments , although it clearly lies at the heart of all of them .

the same language appears in the earlier federal "best efforts" statute , and a similar right is featured in many of the state constitutional and statutory victims' rights provisions .

unlike other rights drafted to apply only with respect to public proceedings , the right to be treated fairly and with respect for a victim's dignity and privacy applies throughout the criminal justice process .

it does not , however , bar the government or a defendant from advancing legitimate arguments simply because they might offend the victim .

a trial court's sealing of the record — thereby preventing the victim from determining whether his rights had been honored and then failing to act upon his motion to open the record — is inconsistent with the victim's right to fair treatment and respect for his dignity .

on the other hand , the same considerations may warrant honoring requests that the victims' identifying information be redacted from their emails seeking an opportunity to be heard .

section 3771 ( b ) assigns federal courts responsibility in two areas .

one deals with the obligations that follow from the rights granted the victims of crimes under the laws of the united states and the district of columbia .

the other addresses obligations federal courts conducting federal habeas corpus proceedings owe the victims of state crimes .

section 3771 ( b ) ( 1 ) declares with regard to the first that: in any court proceeding involving an offense against a crime victim , the court shall ensure that the crime victim is afforded the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

before making a determination described in subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) , the court shall make every effort to permit the fullest attendance possible by the victim and shall consider reasonable alternatives to the exclusion of the victim from the criminal proceeding .

the reasons for any decision denying relief under this chapter shall be clearly stated on the record .

none of the proposed constitutional amendments featured an equivalent .

it has no counterpart in the earlier federal "best efforts" provision .

at least one court has expressed the view that "the provision requires at least some proactive procedure designed to ensure victims' rights," while noting the apparent primacy of the right to attend .

the trial court's obligation to "ensure" victims' rights seems to set its responsibilities a notch above the "best efforts" level of obligation imposed upon other officials .

in a federal habeas corpus proceeding arising out of a state conviction , the court shall ensure that a crime victim is afforded the rights described in paragraphs ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) , ( 7 ) , and ( 8 ) of subsection ( a ) .

the history of the proposed constitutional amendments sheds little light on the scope of the provision since habeas corpus language dropped out of the proposals early on .

section 3771 ( b ) ( 2 ) , moreover , was not part of the original legislation , but was inserted by the adam walsh act .

it passed through the legislative process virtually without comment .

section 3771 ( b ) ( 2 ) provides the victims of state offenses limited rights when the offender seeks federal habeas corpus relief .

it comes with its own , more tightly drawn definition of "victim": "'crime victim' means the person against whom the state offense is committed , or if that person is killed or incapacitated , that person's family member or other lawful representative. .

it affords these victims a limited range of rights which relate to matters within the control of the federal courts: attendance rights ; the right to be heard ; protection from unreasonable delays ; the right to fair and respectful treatment ; and the right to enforce those rights .

the right to be heard seems to consist of the right to brief and possibly argue points of law , since the usual form of a victim's right to be heard , an impact statement , has no real place in a habeas proceeding .

in this context , the victim is treated as an amicus rather than an intervener , at least at the district court level .

section 3771 ( b ) ( 2 ) vests enforcement authority in the victim or the victim's representative , but not in state or federal government officials .

section 3771 ( b ) ( 2 ) 's most interesting feature may be the absence of a right to notice .

it does not list a federal right to be notified of federal habeas proceedings among the rights it provides .

the section further absolves federal executive branch officials of any obligations under the habeas provision .

officers and employees of the department of justice and other departments and agencies of the united states engaged in the detection , investigation , or prosecution of crime shall make their best efforts to see that crime victims are notified of , and accorded , the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

the prosecutor shall advise the crime victim that the crime victim can seek the advice of an attorney with respect to the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

section 3771 ( c ) ( 1 ) replicates the language of 42 u.s.c .

10606 ( a ) ( 2000 ed. ) .

with the addition of the notification in italics above .

section 3771 ( c ) ( 2 ) is new and was added in recognition of the fact that the interests of the government and the interests of the victim may not always coincide .

the department of justice's implementing regulations create a complaint procedure and enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance .

none of the proposed constitutional amendments had a provision comparable to either of these provisions .

not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this chapter , the attorney general of the united states shall promulgate regulations to enforce the rights of crime victims and to ensure compliance by responsible officials with the obligations described in law respecting crime victims .

section 3371 ( f ) instructs the attorney general to promulgate regulations which designed an official to receive victim complaints concerning performance under the section , training for justice department employees , and disciplinary sanctions for willful and wanton violations .

the department of justice issued revised victim assistance guidelines in may 2005 and again in october 2011 .

the department issued the regulations called for in section 3771 ( f ) on november 17 , 2005 .

 ( a ) rights of crime victims .

 – a crime victim has the following rights: ( 1 ) the right to be reasonably protected from the accused .

 ( 2 ) the right to reasonable , accurate , and timely notice of any public court proceeding , or any parole proceeding , involving the crime or of any release or escape of the accused .

 ( 3 ) the right not to be excluded from any such public court proceeding , unless the court , after receiving clear and convincing evidence , determines that testimony by the victim would be materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that proceeding .

 ( 4 ) the right to be reasonably heard at any public proceeding in the district court involving release , plea , sentencing , or any parole proceeding .

 ( 5 ) the reasonable right to confer with the attorney for the government in the case .

 ( 6 ) the right to full and timely restitution as provided in law .

 ( 7 ) the right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay .

 ( 8 ) the right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim's dignity and privacy .

 ( 9 ) the right to be informed in a timely manner of any plea bargain or deferred prosecution agreement .

 ( 10 ) the right to be informed of the rights under this section and the services described in section 503 ( c ) of the victims' rights and restitution act of 1990 ( 42 u.s.c .

10607 ( c ) ) and provided contact information for the office of the victims' rights ombudsman of the department of justice .

 ( b ) rights afforded .

 – ( 1 ) in general. - in any court proceeding involving an offense against a crime victim , the court shall ensure that the crime victim is afforded the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

before making a determination described in subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) , the court shall make every effort to permit the fullest attendance possible by the victim and shall consider reasonable alternatives to the exclusion of the victim from the criminal proceeding .

the reasons for any decision denying relief under this chapter shall be clearly stated on the record .

 ( 2 ) habeas corpus proceedings. - ( a ) in general. - in a federal habeas corpus proceeding arising out of a state conviction , the court shall ensure that a crime victim is afforded the rights described in paragraphs ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) , ( 7 ) , and ( 8 ) of subsection ( a ) .

 ( b ) enforcement. - ( i ) in general. - these rights may be enforced by the crime victim or the crime victim's lawful representative in the manner described in paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) of subsection ( d ) .

 ( ii ) multiple victims. - in a case involving multiple victims , subsection ( d ) ( 2 ) shall also apply .

 ( c ) limitation. - this paragraph relates to the duties of a court in relation to the rights of a crime victim in federal habeas corpus proceedings arising out of a state conviction , and does not give rise to any obligation or requirement applicable to personnel of any agency of the executive branch of the federal government .

 ( d ) definition. - for purposes of this paragraph , the term "crime victim" means the person against whom the state offense is committed or , if that person is killed or incapacitated , that person's family member or other lawful representative .

 ( c ) best efforts to accord rights .

 – ( 1 ) government .

 – officers and employees of the department of justice and other departments and agencies of the united states engaged in the detection , investigation , or prosecution of crime shall make their best efforts to see that crime victims are notified of , and accorded , the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) advice of attorney .

 – the prosecutor shall advise the crime victim that the crime victim can seek the advice of an attorney with respect to the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

 ( 3 ) notice .

 – notice of release otherwise required pursuant to this chapter shall not be given if such notice may endanger the safety of any person .

 ( d ) enforcement and limitations .

 – ( 1 ) rights .

 – the crime victim or the crime victim's lawful representative , and the attorney for the government may assert the rights described in subsection ( a ) .

a person accused of the crime may not obtain any form of relief under this chapter .

 ( 2 ) multiple crime victims .

 – in a case where the court finds that the number of crime victims makes it impracticable to accord all of the crime victims the rights described in subsection ( a ) , the court shall fashion a reasonable procedure to give effect to this chapter that does not unduly complicate or prolong the proceedings .

 ( 3 ) motion for relief and writ of mandamus .

 – the rights described in subsection ( a ) shall be asserted in the district court in which a defendant is being prosecuted for the crime or , if no prosecution is underway , in the district court in the district in which the crime occurred .

the district court shall take up and decide any motion asserting a victim's right forthwith .

if the district court denies the relief sought , the movant may petition the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus .

the court of appeals may issue the writ on the order of a single judge pursuant to circuit rule or the federal rules of appellate procedure .

the court of appeals shall take up and decide such application forthwith within 72 hours after the petition has been filed , unless the litigants , with the approval of the court , have stipulated to a different time period for consideration .

in deciding such application , the court of appeals shall apply ordinary standards of appellate review .

in no event shall proceedings be stayed or subject to a continuance of more than five days for purposes of enforcing this chapter .

if the court of appeals denies the relief sought , the reasons for the denial shall be clearly stated on the record in a written opinion .

 ( 4 ) error .

 – in any appeal in a criminal case , the government may assert as error the district court's denial of any crime victim's right in the proceeding to which the appeal relates .

 ( 5 ) limitation on relief .

 – in no case shall a failure to afford a right under this chapter provide grounds for a new trial .

a victim may make a motion to re - open a plea or sentence only if – ( a ) the victim has asserted the right to be heard before or during the proceeding at issue and such right was denied ; ( b ) the victim petitions the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus within 14 days ; and ( c ) in the case of a plea , the accused has not pled to the highest offense charged .

this paragraph does not affect the victim's right to restitution as provided in title 18 , united states code .

 ( 6 ) no cause of action .

 – nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize a cause of action for damages or to create , to enlarge , or to imply any duty or obligation to any victim or other person for the breach of which the united states or any of its officers or employees could be held liable in damages .

nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair the prosecutorial discretion of the attorney general or any officer under his direction .

 ( e ) definitions .

 – for the purposes of this chapter: ( 1 ) court of appeals .

 – the term "court of appeals means – ( a ) the united states court of appeals for the judicial district in which a defendant is being prosecuted ; or ( b ) for a prosecution in the superior court of the district of columbia , the district of columbia court of appeals ( 2 ) crime victim – ( a ) in general .

 - the term "crime victim" means a person directly and proximately harmed as a result of the commission of a federal offense or an offense in the district of columbia .

 ( b ) minors and certain other victims .

in the case of a crime victim who is under 18 years of age , incompetent , incapacitated , or deceased , the legal guardians of the crime victim or the representatives of the crime victim's estate , family members , or any other persons appointed as suitable by the court , may assume the crime victim's rights under this chapter , but in no event shall the defendant be named as such guardian or representative .

 ( f ) procedures to promote compliance .

 – ( 1 ) regulations .

 – not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this chapter , the attorney general of the united states shall promulgate regulations to enforce the rights of crime victims and to ensure compliance by responsible officials with the obligations described in law respecting crime victims .

 ( 2 ) contents .

 – the regulations promulgated under paragraph ( 1 ) shall – ( a ) designate an administrative authority within the department of justice to receive and investigate complaints relating to the provision or violation of the rights of a crime victim ; ( b ) require a course of training for employees and offices of the department of justice that fail to comply with provisions of federal law pertaining to the treatment of crime victims , and otherwise assist such employees and offices in responding more effectively to the needs of crime victims ; ( c ) contain disciplinary sanctions , including suspension or termination from employment , for employees of the department of justice who willfully or wantonly fail to comply with provisions of federal law pertaining to the treatment of crime victims ; and ( d ) provide that the attorney general , or the designee of the attorney general , shall be the final arbiter of the complaint , and that there shall be no judicial review of the final decision of the attorney general by a complainant .

 ( a ) in general .

 ( 1 ) notice of a proceeding .

the government must use its best efforts to give the victim reasonable , accurate , and timely notice of any public court proceeding involving the crime .

 ( 2 ) attending the proceeding .

the court must not exclude a victim from a public court proceeding involving the crime , unless the court determines by clear and convincing evidence that the victim's testimony would be materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that proceeding .

in determining whether to exclude a victim , the court must make every effort to permit the fullest attendance possible by the victim and must consider reasonable alternatives to exclusion .

the reasons for any exclusion must be clearly stated on the record .

 ( 3 ) right to be heard on release , a plea , or sentencing .

the court must permit a victim to be reasonably heard at any public proceeding in the district court concerning release , plea , or sentencing involving the crime .

 ( b ) enforcement and limitations .

 ( 1 ) time for deciding a motion .

the court must promptly decide any motion asserting a victim's rights described in these rules .

 ( 2 ) who may assert the rights .

a victim's rights described in these rules may be asserted by the victim , the victim's lawful representative , the attorney for the government , or any other person as authorized by 18 u.s.c .

§3771 ( d ) and ( e ) .

 ( 3 ) multiple victims .

if the court finds that the number of victims makes it impracticable to accord all of them their rights described in these rules , the court must fashion a reasonable procedure that gives effect to these rights without unduly complicating or prolonging the proceedings .

 ( 4 ) where rights may be asserted .

a victim's rights described in these rules must be asserted in the district where a defendant is being prosecuted for the crime .

 ( 5 ) limitations on relief .

a victim may move to reopen a plea or sentence only if: ( a ) the victim asked to be heard before or during the proceeding at issue , and the request was denied ; ( b ) the victim petitions the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus within 10 days after the denial , and the writ is granted ; and ( c ) in the case of a plea , the accused has not pleaded to the highest offense charged .

 ( 6 ) no new trial .

a failure to afford a victim any right described in these rules is not grounds for a new trial .

