since 1984 , congress has designated 49 national heritage areas ( nhas ) to recognize and assist efforts to protect , commemorate , and promote natural , cultural , historic , and recreational resources that form distinctive landscapes .

congress has established heritage areas for lands that are regarded as distinctive because of their resources , their built environment , and the culture and history associated with these areas and their residents .

a principal distinction of these areas is an emphasis on the interaction of people and their environment .

heritage areas seek to tell the story of the people , over time , where the landscape helped shape the traditions of the residents .

in a majority of cases , nhas now have , or have had , a fundamental economic activity as their foundation , such as agriculture , water transportation , or industrial development .

the attributes of each nha are set out in its establishing law .

because they are based on distinctive cultural attributes , nhas vary in appearance and expression .

they are at different stages of developing and implementing plans to protect and promote their attributes .

table 1 identifies the nhas established by congress .

some believe that the benefits of heritage areas are considerable and thus congress should expand its assistance for creating and sustaining heritage areas .

supporters view nhas as important for protecting history , traditions , and cultural landscapes , especially where communities are losing their traditional economic base ( eg , industry or farming ) , facing a loss of population , or experiencing rapid growth from people unfamiliar with the region .

advocates see nhas as unifying forces that increase the pride of people in their traditions , foster a spirit of cooperation and unity , and promote a stewardship ethic among the general public .

advocates of nhas assert that they foster cultural tourism , community revitalization , and regional economic development .

heritage areas are advertised as entertaining and educational places for tourists , and may involve activities such as stories , music , food areas , walking tours , boat rides , and celebrations .

through increased tourism , communities benefit locally when services and products are purchased .

in some cases , increased heritage tourism , together with an emphasis on adaptive reuse of historic resources , has attracted broader business growth and development .

some supporters see nhas as generally more desirable than other types of land conservation .

they often prefer the designation of nhas , because the lands typically remain in nonfederal ownership , to be administered locally .

other nha backers view establishing and managing federal areas , such as units of the national park system , as too costly , and observe that small federal investments in heritage areas have been successful in attracting funds from other sources .

some proponents also see nhas as flexible enough to encompass a diverse array of initiatives and areas , because the heritage concept lacks systemic laws or regulations , while others favor a standardized program and process .

property rights advocates take the lead in opposing heritage areas .

they contend that some national heritage areas lack significant local support .

these opponents promote routine notification of private property owners when their lands fall within proposed heritage areas , on the grounds that the nps could exert a degree of federal control over nonfederal lands by influencing zoning and land - use planning .

some fear that any private property protections in legislation would not be routinely adhered to by the federal government .

they are concerned that localities have to obtain the approval of the secretary of the interior for heritage area management plans and believe that some plans are overly prescriptive in regulating details of private property use .

another concern of opponents is that nha lands may one day be targeted for purchase and direct management by the federal government .

the lack of a general statute providing a framework for heritage area establishment , management , and funding has prompted criticism that the process is inconsistent and fragmented .

some see a need to establish and define the criteria for creating nhas , specify what nhas are and do , and clarify the federal role in supporting these areas .

they are concerned that the enactment of additional heritage bills could substantially increase the administrative and financial obligations of the nps .

some detractors assert that federal funds would be more appropriately spent on nps park units and other existing protected areas rather than on creating new heritage areas .

still others cite a need for a mechanism to hold the management entities accountable for the federal funds they receive and the decisions they make .

some observers recommend caution in creating nhas , because in practice nhas may face an array of challenges to success .

for instance , heritage areas may have difficulty providing the infrastructure that increased tourism requires , such as additional parking , lodging , and restaurants .

other areas may need additional protective measures to ensure that increased tourism and development do not degrade the resources and landscapes .

still other nhas may require improvements in leadership and organization of the management entities , including explaining their message and accomplishments .

some nhas may experience difficulty attracting funds because the concept is not universally accepted as a sustainable approach to resource preservation or economic development .

some conservationists think the protective measures are not strong enough and some economic development professionals think the heritage idea does not fit the traditional framework for development .

also , achieving and maintaining appropriate levels of public commitment to implementation may be challenging .

each congress typically considers a number of bills to designate heritage areas or authorize the study of areas to determine the suitability and feasibility of designating the study area as a heritage area .

such proposals introduced in the 114 th congress as of february 9 , 2016 , are reflected in table 2 .

other legislation in the 114 th congress pertains to existing nhas .

one issue is the expiration of funding authorizations for some nhas .

the laws establishing heritage areas typically contain provisions explicitly authorizing the secretary of the interior to provide financial assistance to the areas for certain years .

were the authorization for federal funding to expire , the nha itself would not necessarily cease to exist .

for example , the area could continue to be managed with funding from other sources ( unless the authority for the managing entity also expired ) .

p.l .

114-113 extended the authorizations for three nhas — the south carolina national heritage corridor , the augusta canal nha , and the tennessee civil war heritage area — through september 30 , 2017 .

p.l .

114-113 also increased the maximum lifetime funding for three nhas — the rivers of steel nha , the essex nha , and the ohio & erie canal national heritage corridor — from $15 million to $17 million , and increased the maximum lifetime funding for the wheeling nha from $11 million to $13 million .

another 114 th congress bill , s. 936 , would repeal the limitation on the total amount of funding that may be appropriated for the ohio & erie canal national heritage canalway .

other 114 th congress measures would make various types of changes to existing nhas .

for instance , h.r .

2879 and s. 1662 would expand the boundary of the abraham lincoln national heritage area in illinois by adding one county and two cities to the nha .

h.r .

3004 would extend the authorization for the management entity of the gullah / geechee heritage corridor ( the gullah / geechee cultural heritage corridor commission ) through october 12 , 2021 .

h.r .

581 in the 114 th congress would establish a national heritage areas system governing the designation , management , and funding of nhas .

the system would be composed of existing nhas and future nhas designated by congress .

the bill sets out the relationship between the nha system and the national park system , stating explicitly that nhas are not to be considered units of the park system nor subject to the authorities applicable to that system .

the nha system would expire 10 years after enactment of h.r .

581 .

for areas under consideration for nha designation , the secretary of the interior would be required to conduct feasibility studies , when directed by congress , or to review and comment on such studies prepared by others .

the bill sets out criteria by which areas would be evaluated , including inclusion of resources associated with nationally significant themes and events ; selection of a local managing entity ; and demonstration of support by local governments , residents , businesses , and nonprofit organizations .

the bill provides a procedure for developing nha management plans and specifies components of such plans .

the planning process is to provide opportunities for stakeholders to be involved in developing , reviewing , and commenting on the draft plan .

a management plan is to include an inventory of the resources related to the nationally significant themes and events that should be "protected , enhanced , interpreted , managed , or developed" ; identify goals , strategies , policies , and recommendations ; outline a strategy for the local managing entity to achieve financial sustainability ; and contain an implementation plan , among other components .

designation of an nha by congress is to be contingent on the prior completion of a management plan , as well as a determination by the secretary of the interior that the area meets the criteria established under the act .

the bill outlines the responsibilities of the local managing entity , such as developing and submitting the management plan to the secretary of the interior for approval / disapproval , as well as submitting an annual report .

it also lists the purposes for which the entity can use federal funds , with the prior approval of the secretary of the interior , such as for making grants , entering into cooperative agreements , hiring staff , and supporting activities of partners .

the bill seeks to protect private property owners — for instance , by not requiring their participation in nha plans and activities .

it also seeks to protect existing regulatory authorities — for example , by not altering any "duly adopted" land use regulation , approved land use plan , or other regulatory authority .

for each nha , the bill authorizes appropriations for various purposes .

authorizations include $0.3 million per year for all nps feasibility studies , of which not more than $0.1 million could be used for any one study , and $0.7 million per year for the activities of each local managing entity .

the provision of federal funds is contingent on specified matching requirements .

the secretary of the interior would be required to evaluate and report to congress on nhas .

the evaluation would assess the progress in achieving the purposes in the establishing law and the goals and objectives in the management plan , determine the leverage and impact of investments in the area , and identify the components for sustaining the area .

the report is to include recommendations on the future role of the nps , including whether federal funding should be continued or eliminated .

the obama administration has expressed support for developing systemic nha program legislation that would establish criteria for evaluating areas for heritage designation and set out processes for designating and administering heritage areas .

for instance , in testimony on systemic nha legislation ( h.r .

445 ) in the 113 th congress , a national park service representative stated that the department of the interior has "long supported legislation to establish a national heritage area program within the national park service that standardizes timeframes and funding for designated national heritage areas and formally establishes criteria for establishing new heritage areas. .

obama administration representatives also have testified in favor of deferring action on certain bills to study or establish heritage areas until heritage program legislation is enacted .

the development of systemic heritage area legislation also has been advocated by an independent commission and the george w. bush administration , among others .

opposition to an nha system , as with opposition to individual nhas , has come primarily from advocates of private property rights .

these opponents have expressed concerns that , even with legislative provisions to safeguard property rights , nha system legislation would lead to restrictive regulations and loss of private land ownership .

for example , they have stated that heritage area management entities — though themselves lacking power to make regulatory changes — could influence local legislators to change zoning laws and other regulations .

a different concern is the expanded federal funding commitment that could accompany a system of nhas .

some of the testimony on h.r .

445 in the 113 th congress , which would have authorized appropriations for nhas for a period of 25 years , addressed such concerns .

as part of its annual budget justification , the administration submits to congress its desired funding level for the nps heritage partnership program .

appropriations for heritage areas typically have been provided in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws .

in general , the laws establishing nhas require a 1:1 match in funding by the managing entities .

nhas can use funds for varied purposes including staffing , planning , and implementing projects .

in recent years , congress has provided direction to the nps as to how the total appropriation should be allocated among nhas .

the nps has indicated that since fy2009 , funds have been allocated to heritage areas using formula - based criteria .

for fy2016 , the total appropriation for heritage areas was $19.8 million .

in its explanatory statement on fy2016 appropriations , congress allocated this funding to nhas under a three - tier system .

this included $150,000 for each authorized area that is developing its management plan , known as tier i areas ; $300,000 for tier ii areas , which are those with recently approved management plans ; and fy2015 funding levels for "longstanding areas. .

the total fy2016 appropriation for heritage areas was $0.5 million ( 2% ) less than the fy2015 appropriation of $20.3 million .

during the five - year period from fy2012 through fy2016 , funding for the nps for national heritage areas rose and fell but ended up $2.4 million ( 14% ) higher ( in current dollars ) .

during this period , no new nhas were created .

the administration had sought a reduction to $10.0 million for the nps for heritage areas for fy2016 .

the fy2016 budget request provided little explanation of the proposed cut , while noting that the nps continued to work with heritage areas on sustainability efforts such as development of fundraising and financial resource plans .

prior obama administration requests also often called for reduced nha funding .

in its explanatory statement on fy2016 interior appropriations , congress directed the nps to submit a plan that provides alternatives to implement proposed funding allocation changes in future fiscal years so as to minimize impacts on existing heritage areas .

