president trump proposes to resume development of the long - planned nuclear waste repository at yucca mountain , nevada , which had been suspended under the obama administration .

the trump administration's congressional budget request for fy2019 , submitted february 12 , 2018 , continued the administration's fy2018 funding request for the yucca mountain nuclear waste repository project .

as in the fy2018 request , which congress did not approve , the fy2019 request would provide the department of energy ( doe ) with $120 million for yucca mountain and interim nuclear waste storage .

an additional $47.7 million was requested for the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) in fy201 9 ( up from $30 million in fy2018 ) to resume its licensing process for yucca mountain .

the house passed an fy2019 appropriations bill for energy and water development , legislative branch , and military construction and veterans affairs ( h.r .

5895 ) on june 8 , 2018 , that includes $100 million more than the administration requested for yucca mountain .

but the senate version of the bill , which passed june 25 , 2018 , includes no yucca mountain funding .

under the nuclear waste policy act of 1982 ( nwpa , p.l .

97-425 ) , the yucca mountain site has been the only location under consideration by doe for construction of a national high - level radioactive waste repository .

doe had submitted a license application for the yucca mountain repository to the nrc on june 3 , 2008 , as required by nwpa .

however , the obama administration announced it would request no further funding for the project and moved to withdraw the application on march 3 , 2010 .

although congress approved the obama administration's halt in yucca mountain funding after fy2010 , it has not amended nwpa , which still names yucca mountain as the sole repository candidate site .

after deciding to terminate the yucca mountain repository project , the obama administration established the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future ( brc ) to develop a new nuclear waste policy .

the commission issued its final report on january 26 , 2012 , recommending that a new , "single - purpose organization" be given the authority and resources to promptly begin developing one or more nuclear waste repositories and consolidated storage facilities .

the recommendations called for a "consent based" process in which the roles of various levels of government in siting and regulating nuclear waste facilities would be established through negotiations .

the commission also recommended that long - term research , development , and demonstration be conducted on technologies that could provide waste disposal benefits .

in response to the brc report , and to provide an outline for a new nuclear waste program , doe issued a strategy for the management and disposal of used nuclear fuel and high - level waste in january 2013 .

the doe strategy called for a new nuclear waste management entity to develop consent - based storage and disposal sites , similar to the brc recommendation .

under the doe strategy , a pilot interim spent fuel storage facility was to open by 2021 and a larger - scale storage facility , which could be an expansion of the pilot facility , by 2025 .

a geologic disposal facility would open by 2048 — 50 years after the initially planned opening date for the yucca mountain repository .

after holding public meetings around the country during 2016 , doe issued a draft consent - based siting process on january 12 , 2017 , shortly before the start of the trump administration .

nuclear waste has sometimes been called the achilles' heel of the nuclear power industry .

much of the controversy over nuclear power centers on the lack of a disposal system for the highly radioactive spent fuel that must be regularly removed from operating reactors .

low - level radioactive waste generated by nuclear power plants , industry , hospitals , and other activities is also a long - standing issue .

nwpa section 302 authorized doe to enter into contracts with u.s. generators of spent nuclear fuel and other highly radioactive waste ; under the contracts , doe was to dispose of the waste in return for a fee on nuclear power generation .

the act prohibited nuclear reactors from being licensed to operate without a nuclear waste disposal contract with doe , and all reactor operators subsequently signed them .

as required by nwpa , the "standard contract" specified that doe would begin disposing of nuclear waste no later than january 31 , 1998 .

after doe missed the contractual deadline , nuclear utilities began filing lawsuits to recover their additional storage costs — costs they would not have incurred had doe begun accepting waste in 1998 as scheduled .

doe reached its first settlement with a nuclear utility , peco energy company ( now part of exelon ) , on july 19 , 2000 .

the agreement allowed peco to keep up to $80 million in nuclear waste fee revenues during the subsequent 10 years .

however , other utilities sued doe to block the settlement , contending that nuclear waste fees may be used only for the doe waste program and not as compensation for missing the disposal deadline .

the u.s. court of appeals for the 11 th circuit agreed , ruling september 24 , 2002 , that any compensation would have to come from general revenues or other sources than the waste fund .

subsequent nuclear waste compensation to utilities has come from the u.s. treasury's judgment fund , a permanent account that is used to cover damage claims against the u.s. government .

payments from the judgment fund do not require appropriations .

through fy2017 , nuclear waste payments from the judgment fund included $4.9 billion resulting from settlements and $2 billion from final court judgments , for a total of about $6.9 billion , according to doe .

by the end of fy2017 , 39 lawsuits had been settled , representing utilities that generate 84% of u.s. nuclear electricity .

forty - six cases had received final court judgments .

under the settlements , utilities submit annual reimbursement claims to doe for any delay - related nuclear waste storage costs they incurred during that year .

any disagreements over reimbursable claims between doe and a utility would go to arbitration .

utilities that have not settled with the department of justice have continued seeking damage compensation through the u.s. court of federal claims .

unlike the settlements , which cover all past and future damages resulting from doe's nuclear waste delays , awards by the court of claims can cover only damages that have already been incurred ; therefore , utilities must continue filing claims as they accrue additional delay - related costs .

doe estimates that its potential liabilities for waste program delays could total as much as $34.1 billion , including the $6.9 billion already paid in settlements and final judgments .

delays in the federal waste disposal program could also lead to future environmental enforcement action over doe's own high - level waste and spent fuel , mostly resulting from defense and research activities .

some of the doe - owned waste is currently being stored in noncompliance with state and federal environmental laws , making doe potentially subject to fines and penalties if the waste is not removed according to previously negotiated compliance schedules .

the termination of work on the yucca mountain repository by the obama administration generated extensive congressional controversy .

the house consistently voted to continue or restore yucca mountain funding , while the senate repeatedly zeroed it out , with president obama's support .

president trump's proposal to restart the yucca mountain licensing process has changed the dynamics of the congressional debate on nuclear waste , along with the retirement of senator reid of nevada , who had strongly opposed yucca mountain as the democratic leader .

however , the 115 th congress has so far not provided new funding for yucca mountain .

for fy2018 , as in recent years , the house approved funds for the project while the senate did not , and none were included in the enacted appropriations bill ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

in fy2019 appropriations legislation ( h.r .

5895 ) , the house included $100 million above the administration's yucca mountain funding request , while no funds were provided by the senate .

concerns about nuclear waste were raised multiple times during the confirmation hearing for former texas governor rick perry on january 19 , 2017 , before the senate committee on energy and natural resources , to be the secretary of energy .

after her vote in the committee to confirm perry on january 31 , 2017 , senator catherine cortez masto of nevada issued a statement that said , i pressed governor perry repeatedly in our private meeting and at his confirmation hearing on the issue of yucca mountain , reminding him that nevada's residents and elected officials have been clear that we will not accept our state becoming a dumping ground for the rest of the nation's nuclear waste .

while we do not see eye to eye on all issues , i believe governor perry understands the importance of this issue and is someone i can work with to ensure yucca mountain never sees the light of day .

radioactive waste is a term that encompasses a broad range of material with widely varying characteristics .

some waste has relatively slight radioactivity and is safe to handle in unshielded containers , while other types are intensely hot in both temperature and radioactivity .

some decays to safe levels of radioactivity in a matter of days or weeks , while other types will remain dangerous for thousands of years .

major types of radioactive waste are described below: spent nuclear fuel .

fuel rods that have been withdrawn from a nuclear reactor after irradiation , usually because they can no longer efficiently sustain a nuclear chain reaction .

 ( the term "spent nuclear fuel" is defined in nwpa .

the nuclear industry typically refers to spent fuel as "used nuclear fuel," because it contains uranium and plutonium that could be extracted through reprocessing to make new fuel. ) .

by far the most radioactive type of civilian nuclear waste , spent fuel contains extremely hot but relatively short - lived fission products ( fragments of the nuclei of uranium and other fissile elements ) as well as long - lived radionuclides ( radioactive atoms ) such as plutonium , which remains dangerously radioactive for tens of thousands of years or more .

high - level waste .

highly radioactive residue created by spent fuel reprocessing ( almost entirely for defense purposes in the united states ) .

high - level waste contains most of the radioactive fission products of spent fuel , but most of the uranium and plutonium usually has been removed for reuse .

enough long - lived radioactive elements typically remain , however , to require isolation for 10,000 years or more .

transuranic ( tru ) waste .

relatively low - activity waste that contains more than a certain level of long - lived elements heavier than uranium ( primarily plutonium ) .

radiation shielding may be required for the handling of some types of tru waste .

in the united states , transuranic waste is generated almost entirely by nuclear weapons production processes .

because of the plutonium , long - term isolation is required .

the nation's only permanent repository for tru waste , the waste isolation pilot plant ( wipp ) , near carlsbad , nm , resumed underground waste emplacement january 4 , 2017 , after being suspended for nearly three years after a radioactive release .

waste currently undergoing disposal had already been stored at the wipp site ; shipments of additional waste to the site resumed april 10 , 2017 .

low - level waste .

radioactive waste not classified as spent fuel , high - level waste , tru waste , or byproduct material such as uranium mill tailings ( below ) .

four classes of low - level waste have been established by nrc , ranging from least radioactive and shortest - lived to the longest - lived and most radioactive .

although some types of low - level waste can be more radioactive than some types of high - level waste , in general low - level waste contains relatively low concentrations of radioactivity that decays relatively quickly .

low - level waste disposal facilities cannot accept material that exceeds nrc concentration limits .

uranium mill tailings .

sand - like residues remaining from the processing of uranium ore .

such tailings have very low radioactivity but extremely large volumes that can pose a hazard , particularly from radon emissions or groundwater contamination .

mixed waste .

chemically hazardous waste that includes radioactive material .

high - level , low - level , and tru waste , and radioactive byproduct material , often falls under the designation of mixed waste .

such waste poses complicated institutional problems , because the radioactive portion is regulated by doe or nrc under the atomic energy act , while the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and states regulate the nonradioactive elements under the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) .

disposal of spent fuel and high - level waste is a federal responsibility , while states are authorized to develop disposal facilities for commercial low - level waste .

the obama administration halted development of the yucca mountain repository after fy2010 , although yucca mountain remains the sole candidate site for civilian highly radioactive waste disposal under current law .

the trump administration is proposing to revive the program in fy2019 , requesting $110 million for yucca mountain and $10 million for interim nuclear waste storage at doe , and an additional $47.7 million for nrc .

a similar request for fy2018 was not enacted .

under the obama administration , doe issued an alternative waste management strategy in january 2013 that called for a pilot facility for spent fuel storage to open at a voluntary site by 2021 and a new repository at a volunteer location by 2048 .

new legislation would have been required to carry out the obama strategy .

disposal of radioactive waste will be a key issue in the continuing nuclear power debate .

without a national waste management system , spent fuel from nuclear power plants must be stored on - site indefinitely .

this situation may raise public concern near proposed reactor sites , particularly at sites without existing reactors where spent nuclear fuel is already stored .

concern about spent fuel storage safety has been heightened by the march 2011 disaster at japan's fukushima daiichi nuclear plant .

under current law , the federal government's nuclear waste disposal policy is focused on the yucca mountain site .

however , president obama's actions to terminate the yucca mountain project and develop a new waste strategy through the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future brought most activities in the doe waste program to a halt .

congress is continuing to debate the project's future , particularly through the appropriations process .

the nrc staff's finding in october 2014 that the yucca mountain site would meet nrc standards after the repository was filled and sealed has been cited as evidence of the project's continued viability .

the trump administration's proposal to restart yucca mountain licensing and the retirement of senator reid , who as democratic leader had strongly opposed the yucca mountain project , may affect legislative action on nuclear waste in the 115 th congress .

in requesting $120 million in fy2018 for yucca mountain licensing and spent fuel storage , the trump administration said , "these investments would accelerate progress on fulfilling the federal government's obligations to address nuclear waste , enhance national security , and reduce future taxpayer burden. .

the yucca mountain funding was not approved for fy2018 , but the trump administration has repeated the request for fy2019 .

because of their waste - disposal contracts with doe , owners of existing reactors are likely to continue seeking damages from the federal government if disposal delays continue .

for example , doe's 2004 settlement with the nation's largest nuclear operator , exelon , could require payments of up to $600 million from the federal judgment fund .

doe estimates that its potential liabilities for waste program delays could total as much as $34.1 billion , including the $6.9 billion already paid to exelon and other utilities in settlements and final judgments .

the nuclear industry has predicted that future damages could rise by tens of billions of dollars more if the federal disposal program fails altogether .

lack of a nuclear waste disposal system could also affect the licensing of proposed new nuclear plants , both because of nrc licensing guidelines and various state laws .

in addition , further repository delays could force doe to miss compliance deadlines for defense waste disposal .

problems being created by nuclear waste disposal delays were addressed by the blue ribbon commission in its final report , issued in january 2012 .

major options include centralized interim storage , continued storage at existing nuclear sites , reprocessing and waste treatment technology , development of alternative repository sites , or a combination .

the commission recommended that a congressionally chartered corporation be established to undertake a negotiated process for siting new waste storage and disposal facilities .

however , given the delays resulting from the ongoing shutdown of the nuclear waste program , longer on - site storage is almost a certainty under any option .

the "consent based" nuclear waste siting process recommended by the blue ribbon commission , and which would be authorized by the senate appropriations committee's fy2018 energy and water development appropriations bill and other legislation , has attracted serious interest from localities in new mexico and texas .

however , previous voluntary siting efforts , such as those by the u.s. nuclear waste negotiator established by the 1987 nwpa amendments , also attracted serious local interest but were ultimately blocked by the governments of the potential host states .

therefore , the cooperation of states is likely to be crucial to the success of any renewed "consent based" siting effort .

blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future .

report to the secretary of energy , january 2012 , http: / / brc.gov / sites / default / files / documents / brc_finalreport_jan2012.pdf .

commissioned papers .

2010-2011 .

reports on current nuclear waste issues .

http: / / cybercemetery.unt.edu / archive / brc / 20120620214809 / http: / / brc.gov / index.php ? q=library / documents / commissioned - papers .

government accountability office , "disposal of high - level nuclear waste," https: / / www.gao.gov / key_issues / disposal_of_highlevel_nuclear_waste / issue_summary .

harvard university .

john f. kennedy school of government .

belfer center for science and international affairs .

the economics of reprocessing vs .

direct disposal of spent nuclear fuel .

de - fg26-99ft4028 .

december 2003 .

nuclear waste technical review board .

commercial spent nuclear fuel .

revision 1 .

november 2017. http: / / www.nwtrb.gov / docs / default - source / facts - sheets / commercial_snf.pdf ? sfvrsn=12 .

evaluation of technical issues associated with the development of a separate repository for u.s. department of energy - managed high - level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel .

june 2015. http: / / www.nwtrb.gov / reports / disposal_options.pdf .

experience gained from programs to manage high - level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel in the united states and other countries .

april 2011. http: / / www.nwtrb.gov / reports / reports.html .

survey of national programs for managing high - level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel .

october 2009. http: / / www.nwtrb.gov / reports / reports.html .

rand corporation .

managing spent nuclear fuel: strategy alternatives and policy implications .

2010 .

71 p p .

http: / / www.rand.org / content / dam / rand / pubs / monographs / 2010 / rand_mg970.pdf .

university of illinois .

program in arms control , disarmament , and international security .

'plan d' for spent nuclear fuel .

2009. http: / / acdis.illinois.edu / publications / 207 / publication - plandforspentnuclearfuel.html .

u.s. department of energy .

draft consent - based siting process for consolidated storage and disposal facilities for spent nuclear fuel and high - level waste , january 12 , 2017 , https: / / www.energy.gov / sites / prod / files / 2017 / 01 / f34 / draft%20consent - based%20siting%20process%20and%20siting%20considerations.pdf .

assessment of disposal options for doe - managed high - level radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel , october 2014 , http: / / www.energy.gov / ne / downloads / assessment - disposal - options - doe - managed - high - level - radioactive - waste - and - spent - nuclear .

strategy for the management and disposal of used nuclear fuel and high - level radioactive waste , january 2013 , http: / / energy.gov / sites / prod / files / strategy%20for%20the%20management%20and%20disposal%20of%20used%20nuclear%20fuel%20and%20high%20level%20radioactive%20waste.pdf .

used fuel disposition campaign: disposal research and development roadmap , march 2011 , http: / / energy.gov / sites / prod / files / ufd_disposal_r%26d_roadmap_rev_0.1.pdf .

u.s. nuclear regulatory commission .

safety evaluation report related to disposal of high - level radioactive wastes in a geologic repository at yucca mountain , nevada , volume 3: repository safety after permanent closure , nureg - 1949 , v3 , ml14288a121 , october 16 , 2014 , 781 pp .

voegele , michael d. and donald l. vieth , waste of a mountain: how yucca mountain was selected , stu died , and dumped .

nye county press , 2016 .

920 pp .

 ( 2 vol. ) .

walker , j. samuel .

the road to yucca mountain: the development of radioactive waste policy in the united states .

university of california press .

2009 .

228 pp .

