the energy policy and conservation act ( epca , p.l .

94-163 ) authorized drawdown of the reserve upon a finding by the president that there is a "severe energy supply interruption. .

this was deemed by the statute to exist if three conditions were joined: if " ( a ) an emergency situation exists and there is a significant reduction in supply which is of significant scope and duration ; ( b ) a severe increase in the price of petroleum products has resulted from such emergency situation ; and ( c ) such price increase is likely to cause a major adverse impact on the national economy. .

congress enacted additional drawdown authority in 1990 ( energy policy and conservation act amendments of 1990 , p.l .

101-383 ) after the exxon valdez oil spill , which interrupted the shipment of alaskan oil , triggering spot shortages and price increases .

the intention was to provide for an spr drawdown under a less rigorous finding than that mandated by epca .

this section , 42 u.s.c .

§ 6241 ( h ) , has allowed the president to use the spr for a short period without having to declare the existence of a "severe energy supply interruption" or the need to meet obligations of the united states under the international energy program .

as noted previously , the energy policy act of 2005 made the spr authorities permanent .

these authorities also provided for u.s. participation in emergency - sharing activities of the international energy agency without risking violation of antitrust law and regulation .

under the additional authorities authorized in p.l .

101-383 , a drawdown may be initiated in the event of a circumstance that "constitutes , or is likely to become , a domestic or international energy supply shortage of significant scope or duration" and where "action taken ... would assist directly and significantly in preventing or reducing the adverse impact of such shortage. .

this authority allows for a limited use of the spr .

no more than 30 million barrels may be sold over a maximum period of 60 days , and this limited authority may not be exercised at all if the level of the spr is below 500 million barrels .

this was the authority behind the bush administration's offer of 30 million barrels of spr oil on september 2 , 2005 , which was part of the coordinated drawdown called for by the international energy agency .

the same authority may have been the model for a swap ordered by president clinton on september 22 , 2000 .

the history of the spr traces differences of opinion over what could be deemed a "severe energy supply interruption. .

as has been noted , the original intention of the spr was to create a reserve of crude oil stocks that could be tapped in the event of an interruption in crude supply .

however , in the last few years , there have been increases in the price of products independent of crude prices , as well as increases in crude prices that correlate to "tight" markets , but not to measurable shortages in crude supply .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress to amend the authorities for drawdown of both the spr and the northeast heating oil reserve ( s. 967 , s. 283 ) would allow a drawdown under such a set of circumstances , which would have been seen as anomalous in the past .

authorizing a drawdown of the spr and the nhor in the event of a "severe energy supply disruption," both bills have language that includes a price component in the definition of what constitutes such a "disruption" — either an observed price increase , or the likelihood of one .

a debate during the 1980s over when , and for what purpose , to initiate a drawdown of spr oil reflected the significant shifts that were taking place in the operation of oil markets after the experiences of the 1970s , and deregulation of oil price and supply .

sales of spr oil authorized by the 104 th congress — and in committee in the 105 th — renewed the debate for a time .

the rise in oil prices from 2005-2008 renewed interest in the debate over the appropriate time to call upon the spr .

the spr drawdown plan , submitted by the reagan administration in late 1982 , provided for price - competitive sale of spr oil .

the plan rejected the idea of conditioning a decision to distribute spr oil on any "trigger" or formula .

to do so , the administration argued , would discourage private sector initiatives for preparedness or investment in contingency inventories .

many analysts , in and out of congress , agreed with the administration that reliance upon the marketplace during the shortages of 1973 and 1979 would probably have been less disruptive than the price and allocation regulations that were imposed .

but many argued that the spr should be used to moderate the price effects that can be triggered by shortages like those of the 1970s or the tight inventories experienced during the spring of 1996 , and lack of confidence in supply availability .

early drawdown of the spr , some argued , was essential to achieve these objectives .

the reagan administration revised its position in january 1984 , announcing that the spr would be drawn upon early in a disruption .

this new policy was hailed as a significant departure , considerably easing congressional discontent over the administration's preparedness policy , but it also had international implications .

some analysts began to stress the importance of coordinating stock drawdowns worldwide during an emergency lest stocks drawn down by one nation merely transfer into the stocks of another and defeat the price - stabilizing objectives of a stock drawdown .

in july 1984 , responding to pressure from the united states , the international energy agency agreed "in principle" to an early drawdown , reserving decisions on "timing , magnitude , rate and duration of an appropriate stockdraw" until a specific situation needed to be addressed .

although a number of factors contributed to the virtual doubling in some northeastern locales of home heating oil prices during the winter of 1999-2000 , one that drew the particular attention of lawmakers was the sharply lower level of middle distillate stocks — from which both home heating oil and diesel fuels are produced — immediately beforehand .

it renewed interest in establishment of a regional reserve of home heating oil .

epca includes authority for the secretary of energy to establish regional reserves as part of the broader strategic petroleum reserve .

with support from the clinton administration , congress moved to specifically authorize and fund a regional heating oil reserve in the northeast .

the fy2001 interior appropriations act ( p.l .

106-291 ) provided $8 million for the northeast heating oil reserve ( nhor ) .

the regional reserve was filled by the middle of october 2000 at two sites in new haven , ct , and terminals in woodbridge , nj , and providence , ri .

the nhor is intended to provide roughly 10 days of northeast home heating oil demand .

there was controversy over the language that would govern its use .

opponents of establishing a regional reserve suspected that it might be tapped at times that some consider inappropriate , and that the potential availability of the reserve could be a disincentive for the private sector to maintain inventories as aggressively as it would if there were no reserve .

the approach enacted predicated drawdown on a regional supply shortage of "significant scope and duration," or if — for seven consecutive days — the price differential between crude oil and home heating oil increased by more than 60% over its five - year rolling average .

the intention was to make the threshold for use of the regional reserve high enough so that it would not discourage oil marketers and distributors from stockbuilding .

the president could also authorize a release of the nhor in the event that a "circumstance exists ( other than the defined dislocation ) that is a regional supply shortage of significant scope and duration," the adverse impacts of which would be "significantly" reduced by use of the nhor .

during mid - and late december 2000 , the 60% differential was breached .

however , this was due to a sharp decline in crude prices rather than to a rise in home heating oil prices .

in fact , home heating oil prices were drifting slightly lower during the same reporting period .

as a consequence , while the 60% differential was satisfied , other conditions prerequisite to authorizing a drawdown of the nhor were not .

a general strike in venezuela that began in late 2002 resulted , for a time , in a loss of as much as 1.5 million barrels of daily crude supply to the united states .

with refinery utilization lower than usual owing to less crude reaching the united states , domestic markets for home heating oil had to rely on refined product inventories to meet demand during a particularly cold winter .

prices rose , and there were calls for use of the nhor ; still , the price of heating oil fell significantly short of meeting the guidelines for a drawdown .

in connection with the fy2004 interior appropriations , both the house and senate appropriations committees included language in their committee reports directing that doe advise congress as to the "circumstances" under which the nhor might be used .

the provision implied that some in congress were not satisfied with the formula currently in place that would permit drawdown of the nhor .

the language was not included in the final fy2004 interior appropriations bill .

as the sharp increases in home heating oil prices during 2005 are averaged into the five - year rolling average , the price differential needed to trigger use of the nhor will increase further .

however , the president can invoke the authorities for an nhor drawdown even if the price threshold is not met .

s. 283 , introduced on january 21 , 2009 , would permit drawdown on the basis of price as well as supply .

the bill would mandate a release of 20% of the heating oil held in the reserve if the average retail price for home heating oil in the northeast exceeds $4.00 per gallon on november 1 of the fiscal year .

an additional 20% would be released in four additional installments if the average retail price exceeded $4.00 / gallon on the first of each month , december through march .

