the vss were developed in response to concerns raised in the 1970s and 1980s about thethen largely unregulated voting technology industry .

in 1977 , an fec advisory panel recommendedthe development of voluntary standards , following an fec - requested study released in 1975 by thenational bureau of standards ( renamed the national institute of standards and technology , nist,in 1988 ) .

two years later , congress enacted legislation directing the fec to perform a study on thematter in cooperation with the national bureau of standards .

the study , submitted to congress in1984 , reaffirmed the advisory panel's recommendation , and the fec received federal funding overthe next several years to develop the vss ; however , congress did not establish the vss specificallyby statute ( see crs report rs21156 , federal voting systems standards and guidelines:congressional deliberations , by by [author name scrubbed] for more detail about congressionaldeliberations ) .

the vss were first released in 1990 .

they applied to computer - based voting systems - - namely , punchcard , marksense ( optical scan ) , and direct recording electronic ( dre ) systems .

theywere developed for both hardware and software and included functional and documentationrequirements , performance characteristics , and testing procedures .

no standards were developed forlever - machine or hand - counted paper ballot systems .

the fec developed a plan to implement the vss through cooperative action by the fec,nist , a set of laboratories that would be called the independent test authorities ( itas ) , state andlocal governments , and voting system vendors .

under the plan , states would adopt the standards andthe itas would test voting systems to determine whether they met the standards .

nist's intendedrole was to assist in accreditation of the itas .

however , the plan did not materialize as originallyconceived .

instead , the national association of state election directors ( nased ) , which wasestablished in 1989 , appointed a voting systems board ( 1 ) to choose itas and administer a process for qualifying votingsystems under the vss .

the testing program began in 1994 .

nased chose the election center,a professional organization of election officials , to serve as the secretariat for voting systemqualification .

states began adopting the vss , with some requiring that voting systems be qualified underthe standards before being used in the state , and others adopting elements of the vss into staterequirements .

as implementation proceeded and technology continued to evolve , calls increased forrevising and updating the vss .

the fec began a project to update the standards in 1997 .

thesecond version was approved by the fec in may 2002 .

the revision took a broader approach thanthe original version , focusing on the voting medium - - paper - based versus electronic - - rather thanspecific kinds of voting systems .

it also included or expanded coverage of functions andrequirements not in the original version - - such as accessibility and some aspects of usability,telecommunications , and audit trails .

while this update was underway , congress was considering legislation to respond to theproblems that arose in the november 2000 presidential election .

the enacted version , hava , thehelp america vote act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-252 ) , was signed into law in october 2002 .

it includesvoting system requirements and an administrative structure for promulgating standards and certifyingsystems .

the act established the eac and assigned it responsibility for developing the vvsg .

italso created three bodies - - a standards board , a board of advisors , and a technical guidelinesdevelopment committee ( tgdc ) - - to provide advice on standards and other matters ; and it gavenist a substantial role .

for example , it made the director of nist the chair of the tgdc .

sec .

222of hava effectively renamed the vss as the voluntary voting system guidelines ( vvsg ) , ( 2 ) to be developed by the eacpursuant to recommendations by the tgdc and with support from nist .

thus , hava provideda statutory basis for the vss .

hava does not direct the eac to include any specific issues in theguidelines .

however , in the debate on the house floor before passage of the hava conferenceagreement on october 10 , 2002 , a colloquy ( congressional record , daily ed. , 148: h7842 ) stipulatedan interpretation that the guidelines specifically address the usability , accuracy , security,accessibility , and integrity of voting systems .

also , sec .

221 ( e ) requires nist to provide supportto the tgdc for development of guidelines relating to security , voter privacy , human factors , remotevoting , and fraud detection and prevention .

the current vss will serve as the guidelines until new ones are completed .

work ondevelopment of the first version of the vvsg , a partial revision of the vss , began in 2004 with theappointment of the tgdc .

that committee transmitted its recommendations , in the form of aproposed version 1 of the vvsg , to the eac on may 12 , 2005 .

after reviewing the recommendedguidelines and making some revisions , mostly but not entirely of an organizational nature , ( 3 ) the eac released the draft vvsg on june 27 , 2005 , for a 90-day public comment period , with adoption initially anticipated inoctober 2005 .

 ( 4 ) they willgo into effect two years after being adopted .

 ( 5 ) hava also requires the eac to provide for testing and certification of voting systems ( â§231 ) by laboratories it has accredited , with support from nist , thereby transferring that responsibilityfrom nased .

the act stipulates that the current system of nased certification will continue untilthe eac adopts its replacement .

hava does not specify whether the guidelines it establishes areto be used as the standard against which voting systems are tested and certified , but that is how the vss have been used , and it is how the eac intends to use the vvsg .

 ( 6 ) nist began the process of soliciting applications for accreditation in june 2005 , under itsnational voluntary laboratory accreditation program ( nvlap ) .

 ( 7 ) it will make recommendationsthrough this program on accreditation of individual laboratories .

because of the length of theaccreditation process , in august the eac adopted a resolution to provide temporary accreditationto the laboratories ( itas ) accredited by nased .

 ( 8 ) .

most sections of the draft version of the vvsg released for public comment are virtuallyidentical to those in the 2002 update of the vss .

that was a consequence of a stated intent by theeac to create a version that could be used in preparation for the 2006 election cycle .

 ( 9 ) consequently , major revisionfocused mainly on usability and certain aspects of security .

major changes included addition of a conformance clause ; revised and expanded standards for accessibility and usability ; revised standards for security , including voter - verified paper ballots used withelectronic voting machines ( dres ) ( 10 ) ; some changes to testing procedures ; and some new and expanded appendices .

a more extensive revision is reportedly underway .

 ( 11 ) a brief summary ofprovisions in the current draft is provided below , and a section - by - section summary is included atthe end of this report in appendix 1 .

these summaries are intended only to aid in understanding thebasic scope and contents of the guidelines from a legislative perspective ; other writers might chooseto emphasize different aspects .

the vvsg , like the vss , are divided into two volumes .

volume i provides performanceguidelines for voting systems and is intended for a broad audience .

it includes descriptions offunctional requirements and performance standards , as well as requirements for vendors in qualityassurance and in configuration management , a complex discipline that involves ensuring that asystem and its components function in the ways they are specified to function under variousmodifications and throughout their life cycles .

it includes an extensive glossary and references,suggested practices for election officials in some areas covered by the guidelines , and discussion ofverification concepts for future design of voting systems .

volume ii provides details of the testing process for certification of voting systems .

it isaimed at a narrower audience of vendors , testing laboratories , and election officials .

it includes adescription of the data that vendors are required to provide when submitting a system for testing , andbasic requirements for testing against the standards described in volume i .

it also provides guidanceand requirements for testing laboratories in planning tests and reporting certification results .

many of the issues described below , as well as a number of more specific ones , have beencaptured in the various public comments made on the draft vvsg .

 ( 12 ) commenters includeelection officials , vendors , academic researchers , representatives of professional associations andinterest groups , and members of the public .

however , the discussion is not limited to issues raisedin the comments .

several bills introduced in the 109th congress could affect the scope or other aspectsof the vvsg .

they include the following proposals: adding provisions on security of electronic data ( h.r .

278 ) ; requiring submission to and testing of voting machine software bystates before an election ( h.r .

470 ) ; requiring use of a voter - verified paper audit trail ( h.r .

278 , h.r .

550 ; h.r .

704 , h.r .

939 , s. 330 , s. 450 ) ; requiring the use of a verification method involving paper , audio , orother means , and relevant standards ( h.r .

533 , s. 17 ; h.r .

939 for voters with disabilities ) ; requiring that voting systems used for disability access separate thefunctions of vote generation , verification , and casting ( h.r .

550 , h.r .

939 , s. 450 ) ; requiring the eac to develop best practices for voter - verification forpersons with disabilities and languages other than english ( h.r .

550 ) ; requiring the eac to develop standards on conflict of interest fortesting laboratories , manufacturers , and / or other entities involved with voting machines ( h.r .

470 , h.r .

533 , h.r .

550 , h.r .

3094 ) ; requiring the eac to develop standards for the minimum number ofvoting machines at polling places ( h.r .

533 , h.r .

939 , s. 17 , s. 450 ) ; requiring the use of open - source software in voting systems ( h.r .

3094 ) and the development of relevant standards by the eac ( h.r .

533 , h.r .

550 , h.r .

939 , s. 450 ) ; prohibiting the use of wireless communications by voting systems ( h.r .

550 , h.r .

939 , h.r .

3094 , s. 450 ) ; requiring public disclosure of information relating to certification ofvoting systems ( h.r .

550 ) ; requiring the eac to establish standards for early voting ( h.r .

533 , h.r .

939 , s. 17 , s. 450 ) andfor a federal write - in absentee ballot ( h.r .

4141 ) ; requiring manufacturers to follow security standards as specified bynist ( h.r .

939 , s. 450 ) ; requiring the eac to establish a benchmark for voter error - rates ( h.r .

939 , s. 450 ) ; requiring eac certification of technological security of state voterregistration systems ( h.r .

939 , s. 450 ) ; prohibiting states from not registering certain voters or removing themfrom registration roles unless accuracy standards established by nist are met ( h.r .

3094 ) .

none of the above bills have received committee or floor action in either chamber .

ansi .

the american national standards institute , a private , nonprofit organization thatadministers and coordinates the u.s. voluntary private - sector standardization system .

bios .

basic input / output system , a form of rom used in computers to provide basicfunctions such as control of disk drives .

 ( 66 ) cots .

commercial off - the - shelf , referring to readily available , commercial software orhardware .

dre .

direct ( or digital ) recording electronic voting system , a kind of voting system whereballot choices a voter makes are recorded directly onto electronic media rather than paper .

eac .

the federal election assistance commission , a four - member , bipartisan commission,established by hava , that replaced the former office of election administration in thefederal election commission .

fec .

the federal election commission , which was responsible for federal guidance andinformation relating to election administration before the enactment of hava .

fisma .

the federal information security management act , first enacted as part of thehomeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-292 ) and later in modified form in thee - government act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-347 ) .

hava .

the help america vote act of 2002 , which , among other things , established theeac , required it to develop the vvsg , and established a mechanism for that .

idv .

independent dual verification refers to "electronic voting systems that produce multiple[at least two] records of ballot choices whose contents are capable of being audited to highlevels of precision. .

 ( 67 ) iec .

the international electrotechnical commission , a standards organization for electrical,electronic and related technologies .

ieee .

the institute of electrical and electronics engineers , an international professionalorganization that is also involved in the development of standards .

iesg .

the internet engineering steering group is part of the internet society , a professionalorganization .

the iesg is responsible for the technical management of ietf activities .

ietf .

the internet engineering task force , a community of professionals involved in theevolution of internet architecture , with the goal of improving internet operations through thedevelopment of standards , best practices , and other information .

iso .

international organization for standardization , a federation of the principal standardsbodies from countries around the world .

ita .

independent testing authority , a laboratory accredited by nased to performcertification testing of voting systems .

lan .

local - area network , referring to a computer network that spans a comparatively smallarea , such as an office or building , as opposed to a wide - area network ( wan ) .

mtbf .

mean time between failures , defined in the vvsg as "the value of the ratio of theoperating time [of a voting system] to the number of failures which have occurred in thespecified time interval. .

 ( 68 ) nased .

the national association of state election directors , a professional association that,before hava , administered the national certification program for voting systems .

nist .

the national institute of standards and technology , required by hava to provideassistance to the eac in the development of the vss and the process for certification ofvoting systems .

nvlap .

the national voluntary laboratory accreditation program , a nist programinvolved in the identification and assessment of candidates testing laboratories for the vvsg certification program .

oea .

the former office of election administration within the fec .

oea was abolishedupon the establishment of the eac .

rom .

read - only memory , a kind of computer memory in which data has been prerecordedand which is retained when the computer is turned off .

it often contains small bios programsnecessary to start the computer when power is turned on .

 ( 69 ) tdp .

technical data package , the "vendor documentation relating to the voting systemrequired to be submitted with the system as a precondition of certification testing. .

 ( 70 ) tgdc .

technical guidelines development committee , a 15-member committee establishedby hava and chaired by the director of nist .

the main function of the tgdc is to makerecommendations to the eac on the vvsg .

vspr .

voting system performance rating , an independent project designed to developperformance rating standards for u.s. voting systems .

vss .

the federal voluntary voting systems standards ( vss ) developed by the fec .

vvpat .

voter - verified paper audit trail , a printed record of all of a voter's ballot choicesthat the voter can review before the ballot is cast .

this term is usually used to refer to an idvmethod used with dres , rather than standard paper - based ballot systems such as optical scan .

vvsg .

the federal voluntary voting system guidelines , developed by the eac withassistance from nist , as required by hava .

wan .

a wide - area network , referring to a computer network that spans a comparativelywide geographic area , as opposed to a local - area network ( lan ) .

