a fugitive felon is any person who is fleeing to avoid prosecution for a felony crime or to avoid custody or confinement after conviction for a felony crime .

sections 202 ( x ) and 1611 ( e ) ( 4 ) ( a ) of the social security act specify that fugitive felons are not eligible to receive benefits administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) .

this prohibition includes supplemental security income ( ssi ) benefits under title xvi of the social security act as well as social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) and old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi , more commonly known as retirement and widows social security benefits ) under title ii of the social security act .

benefits already paid to fugitive felons are considered overpayments by the ssa and must be paid back to the government .

benefits can be restored if a person who was considered a fugitive felon is exonerated of all charges .

the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , p.l .

104-193 , provided for the prohibition of ssi benefit payments to fugitive felons and went into effect in august 1996 .

the social security protection act of 2004 , p.l .

108-203 , extended the prohibition of benefit payments to fugitive felons to the ssdi and oasi programs .

these prohibitions went into effect january 1 , 2005 .

the ssa estimates that since the prohibition on ssi payments to fugitive felons went into effect in august 1996 , the agency has suspended the benefits of nearly 78,000 fugitive felons , including nearly 24,000 in fy2003 .

these suspensions are estimated to have saved the ssi program more than $83 million in payments not made to fugitive felons and in overpayments to fugitive felons recovered by the ssa .

the social security protection act of 2004 , p.l .

108-203 , gives the ssa commissioner a limited ability to pay benefits to fugitive felons if , in her opinion , mitigating circumstances should be considered .

however , mitigating circumstances can be used only to pay benefits to a fugitive felon if the felony offense that is the basis for the warrant is both nonviolent and not related to a violation of the drug laws .

cases involving violent crimes or felonies resulting from the use , sale , or manufacture of illegal drugs are not eligible for the mitigating circumstances exception ; under no circumstances can a fugitive felon with an active outstanding warrant for these charges receive ssi , ssdi , or oasi benefits .

on december 6 , 2005 , the second circuit court of appeals ruled that the ssa policy of suspending or denying ssi benefits to individuals whenever there is an outstanding felony arrest warrant is contrary to the agency's regulations and the underlying statutory provisions .

as a result of this decision , the ssa issued an acquiescence ruling that will affect the way the fugitive felon provisions of the social security act are applied to applicants and beneficiaries in three states .

fowlkes was living in schenectady , new york , and receiving ssi benefits when the ssa learned of two outstanding virginia arrest warrants , one for petty larceny and the other for a voter registration offense .

applying its policy with regard to fugitive felons in poms , ssa suspended fowlkes' benefits .

under the poms guidance , fowlkes' intent to flee , or his knowledge of the pending charges , was deemed irrelevant to his suspension of benefits .

on appeal , fowlkes argued that he was not a fugitive felon ineligible for ssi benefits under 42 u.s.c .

ยง 1382 ( e ) ( 4 ) ( a ) , because the statutory language requires he have an intention to flee , which fowlkes argued he lacked prior to march 2000 because he was unaware of the indictments against him in virginia , and which fowlkes argued he lacked after march 2000 when he became aware of the indictments because he was financially unable to return to the charging state .

in addition , fowlkes argued that the ssa regulations require a court order finding that fowlkes was a fleeing felon before the ssa can suspend benefits , and that no such court order existed in his case .

the circuit court held that the ssa's interpretation of the statute embodied in poms was in direct conflict with the plain language of the statute and its implementing regulations .

the court stated as follows: the statute does not permit the commissioner to conclude simply from the fact that there is an outstanding warrant for a person's arrest that he is "fleeing to avoid prosecution. .

42 u.s.c .

ยง 1382 ( e ) ( 4 ) ( a ) .

"fleeing" in ยง 1382 ( e ) ( 4 ) ( a ) is understood to mean the conscious evasion of arrest or prosecution .

see black ' s law dictionary 670 ( 8 th ed .

2004 ) ( defining "flight" as "[t]he act or an instance of fleeing , esp .

to evade arrest or prosecution" ) .

thus , there must be some evidence that the person knows his apprehension is sought .

the statute's use of the words "to avoid prosecution" confirms that for "flight" to result in a suspension of benefits , it must be undertaken with a specific intent , i.e. , to avoid prosecution .

thus , the court found the ssa's implementing regulation to be consistent with the statutory requirements because the regulation includes a requirement of a finding of intentional "flight. .

indeed , the court posited that the regulation "may be stricter than the statute , insofar as it provides that the effective date of a benefits suspension is the date of issuance of a warrant or order issued by a court or other authorized tribunal on the basis of a finding that an individual fled or was fleeing from justice .

thus , the regulation does not permit the agency to make a finding of flight ; rather , it demands a court or other appropriate tribunal to have issued a warrant or order based on a finding of flight. .

the court found that the poms passages cited by the commissioner were in direct conflict with the regulation in that they contemplate suspension of benefits without any finding of "flight" by a court or other tribunal .

the court held that benefits may be suspended only as of the date of a warrant or order issued by a court or other authorized tribunal on the basis of a finding that a person was fleeing or had fled from justice .

the circuit court remanded the fowlkes case back to the district court for further proceedings consistent with the court's holding that the ssa is only permitted to suspend benefits because of a person's fugitive felon status as of the date that a warrant or court order finding that a person has fled or is fleeing from justice was issued .

on april 6 , 2006 , the ssa issued an acquiescence ruling that explains how the agency will apply the fowlkes v. adamec ruling to agency decisions to suspend the benefits of persons deemed to be fugitive felons .

although the fowlkes case dealt only with ssi benefits , this acquiescence ruling will apply to all administrative determinations or decisions by the ssa involving title ii and title xvi applicants , title ii beneficiaries and title xvi recipients who live in states within the jurisdiction of the court of appeals for the second circuit ( i.e. , connecticut , new york , and vermont ) .

the acquiescence ruling went into effect on april 6 , 2006 , however , it can be applied retroactively to the date of the court's decision in fowlkes , december 6 , 2005 , if a beneficiary or recipient can demonstrate that the application of the acquiescence ruling would have changed the outcome of his or her case .

within the states affected by the fowlkes decision , the ssa will no longer rely solely on the existence of an outstanding warrant to determine the fugitive status of a beneficiary .

rather , before making a determination that an individual is fleeing to avoid prosecution , and thus is a fugitive felon , the ssa "must have evidence that the individual knows that there is an outstanding felony arrest warrant , and the outstanding arrest warrant must have been issued on the basis that the individual has fled or is fleeing from justice. .

however , in all other parts of the country , the ssa will continue its policy of suspending benefits based solely on the existence of a warrant , without any consideration of whether the person is actually fleeing or attempting to avoid being captured , as set forth in poms guidance .

