the cable communications policy act of 1984 , 98 stat .

2779 , p.l .

98-549 , established for the first time a national regulatory policy concerning cable television communications .

the act established a comprehensive cable regulatory scheme , delineating regulatory authority among the federal , state , and local levels .

increasing cable service rates and customer service complaints , however , prompted congress to revisit the law as local authorities and consumer groups lobbied for new legislation .

on october 5 , 1992 , congress passed the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 , 106 stat .

1460 , p.l .

102-385 .

this law addressed such issues as cable rates , must - carry rules , retransmission consent , program access , franchising authority , service standards , and more .

promulgation of regulations required by the 1992 act was done by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) .

the regulations were completed in stages , according to dates set by the act .

the fcc's first set of cable rate rules implementing this act went into effect september 1 , 1993 .

the fcc expected , on average , a 10% reduction in overall cable bills .

however , "on average" did not mean that all rates decreased 10% , or even that all rates decreased .

one reason was that all cable systems did not charge rates that the fcc determined to be "unreasonable. .

some rates increased , and congress and the fcc decided to address the issue of rate hikes .

after conducting a review of cable rates following issuance of its 1993 rate regulations , the fcc decided to revisit this issue .

on march 30 , 1994 , the fcc issued rules for a second round of cable rate regulations .

these new rules were intended to cut cable rates , on average , an additional 7% .

no predictions were made estimating the number of cable subscribers who would see further reductions in their cable bills .

the new rules took effect on may 15 , 1994 .

the telecommunications act of 1996 , 110 stat .

115 , p.l .

104-104 , was passed by the 104 th congress in february 1996 .

this act eliminated most cable television rate regulations beyond the basic tier as of march 31 , 1999 .

in most cases , rates for a basic tier of services ( defined as the tier that includes "over the air" broadcast stations ) continues to be regulated either by local franchising authorities ( lfas ) or state authorities .

most small cable operators ( those serving less than 1% of all cable subscribers and having no affiliation with any company whose gross annual revenues exceed $250 million ) were freed from rate regulation immediately .

the fcc continues to monitor cable rate activity and issues an annual report on cable industry prices and one on competition in video markets .

according to the 2005 fcc annual report on cable industry prices , released in december 2006 , the overall average monthly price for basic - plus - expanded basic cable service increased by 5.2% from $40.91 to $43.04 over the 12-month period ending january 1 , 2005 .

industry statistics on cable rates vary slightly from fcc statistics ( see below ) , but cable companies in recent years have stated that sharply rising costs of obtaining sports and entertainment programming coupled with system upgrades caused them to increase rates for subscribers .

ongoing consumer concerns about rate increases for subscription television prompted congress to mandate a general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) study of cable rates released in october 2003 .

in its report , telecommunications: issues related to competition and subscriber rates in the cable television industry , gao sought to examine the impact of competition on cable rates , assess the reliability of information contained in the annual fcc report on cable industry prices , and examine the causes of recent cable rate increases .

in surveys of the industry conducted by gao for its report , gao concluded that the annual fcc report did not appear to provide a reliable source of information on the cost factors underlying rate increases or on the effects of competition , most notably costs associated with upgrading equipment and services .

gao recommended that fcc take steps to improve the reliability of data in its report .

gao also found that several key factors , including a 34% average increase in programming costs incurred by cable operators during the past three years — specifically a 59% average increase in sports programming costs — and cost increases from system upgrades have put upward pressure on operators to raise rates to their customers .

the gao report also discussed the option of converting cable system pricing to à la carte ( per channel ) pricing instead of the current tiered system .

it noted that despite the customer benefit of greater choice , à la carte pricing could impose additional equipment costs on the customer and alter the current economics of the industry , especially how cable providers generate advertising revenues .

according to the fcc's twelfth annual report on competition in video markets , released in march 2006 , approximately 65.4 million homes in the united states , or 69.4% of all multichannel video program distributor ( mvpd ) television homes , subscribed to cable television as of june 2004 .

as defined by the fcc , an mvpd distributor is "an entity engaged in the business of making available for purchase , by subscribers or customers , multiple channels of video programming. .

such entities include cable operators , direct broadcast satellite ( dbs ) services , and — in much smaller numbers — subscribers to five other technologies that deliver programming .

subscriptions to dbs in recent years have increased rapidly .

as of june 2005 , dbs subscribers numbered more than 26.1 million , or 27.7% of all mvpd subscribers .

mvpd ( cable and noncable ) subscribers total approximately 94 million homes .

the other five technologies ( mmds , hsd , pco , bsp , and ovs ) represent the approximately 2.9% of remaining mvpd subscribers .

as a result of the telecommunications act of 1996 , telephone companies can provide video services in direct competition with the local cable television company and in certain cases may merge with the local cable company .

cable television companies are also able to offer local phone service and broadband internet services ( including such services as "voice over internet protocol" [voip] ) .

although individual consumers will presumably have more choices as a result of competition in the developing communications market , particularly from satellite services such as dbs , forecasts of what will happen in this new and complex environment are conflicting and uncertain .

many providers of cable television programming are owned by or affiliated with cable television operators .

concerns that such programmers may only provide their programming to their corporate affiliates prompted congress to approve a provision in the cable act of 1992 addressing "program access" concerns .

program access provisions prevent the use of exclusive contracts between cable operators and their affiliated programmers for satellite delivered programming .

the fcc was instructed in the statute to reexamine the continuing need for the prohibition after it had been in effect for 10 years .

the prohibition was set to expire on october 5 , 2002 , but the fcc issued a report and order on june 13 , 2002 , extending for five years ( until 2007 ) the statutory prohibition .

the fcc found that the prohibition continues to be necessary to preserve and protect competition and diversity in the distribution of video programming .

broadband or high - speed internet services can be offered through a series of technologies including cable , digital subscriber lines ( dsl ) provided by telephone carriers , satellite television , fixed wireless , and others .

cable television companies offer broadband services via a cable modem .

classifying broadband cable service as an "information service," a "telecommunications service," or as a combination of the two has important regulatory implications .

generally , classification as an information service would subject cable broadband services to minimal federal regulation and no requirement that they provide open access to their systems to competing internet service providers ( isps ) .

classification as a telecommunications service could subject cable broadband services to common carrier regulation and could require provision of open access to competing isps .

recently , the courts and the fcc have come to different conclusions regarding classification of these services .

in a ruling on march 14 , 2002 , the fcc ruled that cable modem service is properly classified as an interstate information service .

the ruling further determined that cable modem service is not a "cable service" and that cable modem service does not contain a separate "telecommunications service" and is not subject to common carrier regulation ( the rules that govern telephone providers ) .

however , in an opinion filed on october 6 , 2003 , the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit came to a different conclusion regarding the classification of cable modem services .

the court ruled in brand x internet service v. fcc that cable modem services are legally in part a telecommunications service , which could lead to the requirement that cable operators open their lines to competing internet service providers .

this decision vacated in part the fcc march 2002 declaratory order , which classified cable modem service as exclusively an information service free from the rules of access governing telecommunications services .

the fcc appealed the ninth circuit's decision , but the appeals court denied the fcc's petition for a full court review on march 31 , 2004 .

the fcc and the solicitor general of the united states then filed an appeal with the u.s. supreme court .

on june 27 , 2005 , the high court overturned the ninth circuit's decision , ruling that cable companies do not have to open their lines to isps .

in the 6-3 decision , the court basically supported the fcc's decision to classify cable modem service as an information service .

u.s. federal communications commission .

"regulation of cable tv rates. .

fcc consumer facts .

september 2006. http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / consumerfacts / cablerates.html .

this two - page fact sheet provides brief information on state and local franchising authorities' cable television responsibilities , including the regulation of rates for basic service tiers .

 — — .

"choosing cable channels. .

fcc consumer facts .

december 2006. http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / consumerfacts / cablechannels.html .

this two - page fact sheet explains how cable channels are packaged and distributed to consumers .

it includes a brief description of tiers , "a la carte," and pay - per - view programming .

 — — .

"general information on cable tv and its regulation. .

fact sheet .

june 2000. http: / / www.fcc.gov / mb / facts / csgen.html .

this extensive fact sheet presents background information on the history and evolution of the cable industry in the united states , including the evolution of parts of the communications act of 1934 that affect cable television , discussion of issues such as must - carry regulations , and information on the regulation of cable television by state and local authorities , including local franchising authority agreements and customer service guidelines .

additional fact sheets on specific cable tv topics are available at http: / / www.fcc.gov / mb / facts / #cable .

 — — .

"fcc role in cable rate regulation ends. .

consumer alert .

march 1999. http: / / www.fcc.gov / bureaus / miscellaneous / factsheets / cblrate.html .

this two - page notice details the end of federal regulation of expanded basic cable rates as of march 31 , 1999 , which was mandated by the telecommunications act of 1996 , p.l .

104-104 .

crs report rl33542 , broadband internet regulation and access: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32398 , cable and satellite television network tiering and " a la carte " options for consumers: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31260 , digital television: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22217 , the digital tv transition: a brief overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21768 , satellite television: reauthorization of the satellite home viewer improvement act ( shvia ) — background and key issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33338 , the fcc ' s " a la carte " reports , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32589 , the federal communications commission: current structure and its role in the changing telecommunications landscape , by [author name scrubbed] .

