climate change has been a continuing policy issue since the united states ratified the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

an integral part , and sometimes driving part , of the ensuing debate has been the issue of cost — in several manifestations .

for the george w. bush administration , the kyoto protocol was "fatally flawed in fundamental ways," including requiring compliance with mandates that "would have a negative economic impact with layoffs of workers and price increases for consumers. .

this concern about cost has been a significant feature of the congressional debate on h.r .

2454 .

as passed by the house , the bill would mandate an 83% reduction in the country's greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from 2005 by 2050 .

the reduction would be primarily achieved through a market - based , cap - and - trade program , beginning in 2012 that supporters believe will result in cost - effective reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and encourage other countries to initiate their own programs .

facets of the cost issue that have raised concern include absolute costs to the economy , distribution of costs across industries , competitive impact domestically and internationally , incentives for new technology , and uncertainty about possible costs .

with the congressional debate moving to the senate , concern about costs and economic impacts has attention focused on options to address these issues and to move the debate forward .

these options range from incremental mechanisms within a tradeable permit program , such as banking and borrowing of credits , which minimally affect overall emissions reduction targets , to more fundamental proposals , such as a carbon tax , which would take climate change policy in a new and somewhat uncharted direction .

this paper explores these options to address the cost issue in four parts .

first , the basic economic tradeoff between controlling the quantity of ghg emissions and the program's compliance costs is introduced and explained .

second , the five dimensions of the cost issue that have arisen so far in the climate change debate are identified and discussed .

third , a representative sample of proposed approaches to address cost concerns is compared and analyzed according to the five cost dimensions identified previously .

finally , the proposed options are summarized and opportunities to combine or merge different approaches are analyzed .

the paper does not provide a detailed discussion of allocation and implementation issues that creating a market - based mechanism ( particularly a cap - and - trade program ) would entail .

in general , market - based mechanisms to reduce ghg emissions , the most important being carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , focus on specifying either the acceptable emissions level ( quantity ) or the compliance costs ( price ) and allowing the marketplace to determine the economically efficient solution for the other variable .

for example , a tradeable permit program sets the amount of emissions allowable under the program ( i.e. , the number of permits available limits or caps allowable emissions ) , while permitting the marketplace to determine what each permit will be worth .

likewise , a carbon tax sets the maximum unit cost ( per ton of co 2 equivalent ) that one should pay for reducing emissions , while the marketplace determines how much actually gets reduced .

in one sense , preference for a carbon tax or a tradeable permit system depends on how one views the uncertainty of costs involved and benefits to be received .

for those confident that achieving a specific level of co 2 reduction will yield significant benefits — enough so that even the potentially very high end of the marginal cost curve does not bother them — a tradeable permit program may be most appropriate .

co 2 emissions would be reduced to a specific level , and in the case of a tradeable permit program , the cost involved would be handled efficiently , though not controlled at a specific cost level .

this efficiency occurs because through the trading of permits , emissions reduction efforts focus on sources at which controls can be achieved at least cost .

however , if one feels uncertain of the environmental benefits of a specific level of reduction and anxious about the downside risk of substantial control costs to the economy , then a carbon tax may be most appropriate .

in this approach , the level of the tax effectively caps the marginal cost of control that affected activities would pay under the reduction scheme , but the precise level of co 2 reduction achieved is less certain .

emitters of co 2 would spend money controlling co 2 emissions up to the level of the tax .

however , because the marginal cost of control among millions of emitters is not well known , the overall emissions reductions for a given tax level on co 2 emissions is subject to some uncertainty .

hence , a major policy question is whether one is more concerned about the possible economic cost of the program and therefore willing to accept some uncertainty about the amount of reduction received ( i.e. , carbon taxes ) ; or one is more concerned about achieving a specific emissions reduction level with costs handled efficiently , but not capped ( i.e. , tradeable permits ) .

a model for a tradeable permit approach is the sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) allowance program contained in title iv of the 1990 clean air act amendments ( 42 u.s.c .

7651 ) .

also called the acid rain program , the tradeable permit system is based on two premises .

first , a set amount of so 2 emitted by human activities can be assimilated by the ecological system without undue harm .

thus the goal of the program is to put a ceiling , or cap , on the total emissions of so 2 rather than limit ambient concentrations .

second , a market in pollution licenses between polluters is the most cost - effective means of achieving a given reduction .

this market in pollution licenses ( or allowances , each of which is equal to 1 ton of so 2 ) is designed so that owners of allowances can trade those allowances with other emitters who need them or retain ( bank ) them for future use or sale .

initially , most allowances were allocated free by the federal government to utilities according to statutory formulas related to a given facility's historic fuel use and emissions ; other allowances have been reserved by the government for periodic auctions to ensure market liquidity .

there are no existing u.s. models of an emissions tax , although five european countries have carbon - based taxes .

the closest u.s. example is the tax on ozone - depleting chemicals ( odcs ) .

to facilitate the phaseout of odcs under the montreal protocol and subsequent amendments , the united states imposed a tax on specific odcs in 1990 .

this tax was designed to supplement the allowance trading program that the epa had designed to implement the international agreements .

several activities trigger the tax , including the production and / or importation of the chemicals , or the importation of products that contain them or used them in their production processes .

in addition , inventories of certain odcs held on january 1 of each year are subjected to a "floor stocks tax. .

five dimensions of costs associated with reducing ghg emissions are discussed in this section: ( 1 ) absolute costs , ( 2 ) distribution of costs , ( 3 ) long - term costs , ( 4 ) price signal and stability , and ( 5 ) uncertainty of costs .

the absolute costs of a ghg reduction program are a function of the interplay among the tonnage reduction required , the timetable imposed on that reduction , and the techniques available and used to achieve that reduction ( the "three ts" ) .

variables involved with the tonnage requirement include the magnitude and firmness of the reduction requirement and the number of gases and sectors involved in the program .

variables involved with the timetable include its length and number of phases , along with the number and extent of any deadline extensions allowed and on what criteria .

finally , variables involved with techniques include promotion and availability of new technology , the degree of flexibility permitted in complying with the program , and any ceiling on compliance costs .

all these program design parameters influence the absolute cost of the program and the timing and extent of any benefits received .

a second concern with costs is their distribution across the various sectors of the economy .

as indicated by table 1 , ghg emissions are spread throughout the economy , with about 81% emitted by the electric power , transportation , and industry sectors .

restricting participation by any group could increase the absolute cost of the program and would certainly increase the costs to the remaining participants .

however , numerous rationales have been put forward to justify excluding one group or sector from a reduction requirement , or to provide some other special consideration .

rationales offered include a sector or industry's concern about ( 1 ) international competitiveness , ( 2 ) lack of cost - effective control options , ( 3 ) inability to make necessary capital investments , ( 4 ) economic disruption , ( 5 ) credit for previous efforts that reduced emissions , and ( 6 ) the "minor" contribution that industry or sector makes to the overall problem .

it is the multitude of such variables that make constructing an acceptable reduction allocation scheme very difficult .

a third concern is the long - term cost considerations of a ghg reduction program .

climate change policy has to be thought of in decades , not years .

ultimately , a successful climate change program would involve a long - term transition to a less carbon - emitting economy .

generally , studies that indicate the availability and cost - effectiveness of emerging new technologies to achieve this transition include an economic mechanism to provide the necessary long - term price signal to direct research , development , demonstration , and deployment efforts .

developing such a price signal involves variables such as the magnitude and nature of the market signal , and the timing , direction , and duration of it .

in addition , studies indicate combining a sustained price signal with public support for research and development efforts is the most effective long - term strategy for encouraging development of new technology .

as stated by morgenstern: "the key to a long term research and development strategy is both a rising carbon price , and some form of government supported research program to compensate for market imperfections. .

a fourth consideration is the stability of the price signal in whatever form it takes ( eg , allowance prices , carbon taxes , auction prices ) .

a stable and reliable signal is necessary to minimize economic disruption and to encourage new technology .

experience with existing emissions markets suggests that short - term price spikes and troughs occur that have at least short - term economic effects , either disrupting the market ( in the case of high prices ) or discouraging new technology ( in the case of low prices ) .

causes of this volatility can include ( 1 ) lack of trading volume , ( 2 ) illiquidity in the market , ( 3 ) external events , and ( 4 ) regulatory uncertainty .

history with previous emissions trading programs suggests that if a greenhouse gas program is based on a market - based implementation strategy , the inclusion of flexibility mechanisms to ensure reasonable market stability is desirable .

a final cost consideration is the cost uncertainty presented by the wide range of projected costs of ghg reduction .

to the extent one understands the variables that create the range presented by different forecasting models , one can design a program to address those variables .

projected costs of a proposed greenhouse gas reduction program will differ among models , based on the various economic and technological assumptions either embedded in the particular model's processes ( endogenous variables ) or assumed externally and inserted into the model .

weyant has identified five assumptions that explain many of the differences in greenhouse gas reduction program cost estimates : basecase projections of future ghg emissions and climate damages .

the specifics of the reduction program examined ( particularly the amount of flexibility permitted in complying with its mandates ) .

how dynamic the model is , representing substitution possibilities by producers and consumers , including the turnover of capital equipment .

how the rate and processes of technological change are modeled .

how benefits are modeled .

figure 1 , below , illustrates how these and other variables ( such as type of model used ) can influence the estimated costs of climate change legislation .

measured by impact on gdp , the figure indicates impacts generally ranging from a positive 2% increase in gdp to a 4% decrease .

interestingly , the variables used in projecting cost and benefits are sufficiently robust to obscure a strong correlation between reduction requirements and cost .

the range indicated also reflects the perspectives and parameters assumed by the forecast authors .

in a previous report , crs noted that cost analyses are influenced by the perspective ( or lens ) through which one views the problem .

analysts viewing climate change policy through a technological perspective see it as an impetus for improved efficiency through technology improvements in the economy , consistent with concepts such as life - cycle costs .

analysts viewing policy through an economic lens work through the boundaries of market economics and cost - benefit considerations .

finally , analysts viewing the issue through an ecological lens look to the benefits of controlling greenhouse gases and are suspicious of "baseline" scenarios that suggest that "business as usual" is an acceptable yardstick from which to measure policy changes .

each of these lenses implies fundamentally different ways of assessing policy actions and modeling potential costs and benefits .

the quantitative results are cost estimates that range from actual savings to the economy ( from ghg reductions ) to substantial costs .

an illustration of this can be seen in the contrast between two cost analyses of h.r .

2454 .

the results presented below were obtained by the american council for capital formation / national association of manufacturers ( accf / nam ) high cost case and the "high technology" sensitivity case conducted by eia using the same model: eia's nems model .

table 2 summarizes the general approach of the two analyses according to the three perspectives identified above .

in its sensitivity case , eia mimics h.r .

2454 's various technology and efficiency provisions by employing its high technology baseline that has more aggressive technology development assumptions than its reference case , and also includes banking , and phased - in offsets .

in contrast , accf / nam is not confident that new technology , new energy sources , and market mechanisms ( eg , carbon offsets , banking ) will be sufficiently available to achieve h.r .

2454 's emission targets .

accordingly , accf / nam's high cost case assumptions differ substantially from eia's high technology sensitivity analysis by discouraging banking , restricting the availability of offsets to half that allowed in h.r .

2454 , and significantly restricting availability of various low - and non - carbon technologies beyond what is embedded in the nems base case .

as indicated by table 3 , the widely different cost assumptions provided the expected results , although both analyses remained in the 0-4% gdp range common for greenhouse gas reduction analysis .

allowance price estimates diverge significantly by 2030 , but this cost measure tends to exaggerate differences between results and should not be confused with average costs or program costs .

this is particularly true for analyses of h.r .

2454 , as accf / nam did not publish its environmental results in terms of greenhouse gases reduced ; thus , one can not compare the allowance price with what is being reduced over time .

unfortunately , the analyses do not present sufficient sensitivity analysis and other information to determine whether it is the economic assumptions ( eg , discount rates and offset availability ) , the behavioral assumptions ( eg , impact of efficiency programs ) , the technology assumptions ( eg , availability ) , or what combination of these assumptions that explains the differences in results .

the following analysis of options to address the cost concerns identified above is loosely arranged by the focus of the specific option: ( 1 ) the tonnage requirement , ( 2 ) the time frame , and ( 3 ) the techniques allowed for compliance .

it should be noted that several options examined affect more than one of the "ts. .

also , the options are not mutually exclusive — many can be combined to create more refined options .

the selected options discussed above are summarized in the appendix .

as suggested , the various options identified have different strengths and weaknesses , depending on the facet of costs one wants to address .

fortunately , many of the options are not mutually exclusive , nor do they require complete adoption ; parts of individual approaches can be combined with other parts to meet program specifications in terms of firmness of the goal ( also called the "hardness" of the emissions cap ) and time frame .

to illustrate , a program focused on achieving a specific tonnage reduction with some flexibility in implementation but not in a manner that threatens the integrity of the cap could incorporate several of these options .

the most obvious mechanism to include in the quantity - based cap - and - trade would be banking and borrowing options that would increase flexibility of the program across time without any deterioration in the tonnage requirement .

flexibility and protection against price increases could be enhanced by expanding supply options to include all greenhouse gases , sequestration , and international trading .

depending on one's confidence in the individual supply options , use could be restricted to a maximum percentage of reduction achieved through the option ( common in many proposals ) or to a more flexible percentage restraint based on credit prices ( as in rggi's cap - and - trade scheme ) .

proper monitoring and enforcement could minimize any potential effect on the cap .

this illustration would not necessarily provide either the long - term price signal or funding necessary for new technology .

one supplemental option that could help mitigate this problem would be credit auctions .

auctions would have no effect on the cap , but would provide the program with a revenue flow that could be at least partly directed toward research and development .

the auction could be designed to raise revenues only by auctioning a small percentage of the credits ( such as the current acid rain program ) , or be comprehensive and auction all credits , thus improving overall economics and providing a clear market signal ( as many rggi participants are doing ) .

in the latter case , coordinating the auction with any trigger price mechanism for expanded supply options would promote harmonious implementation .

depending on the structure of the auction chosen , the comprehensive auction would also provide a clear market price for reductions and , with the addition of forward markets , some indication of the general direction of those prices .

finally , the auction and its resulting revenues could also be used to address pressing distributional cost issues .

although the mixture of options used in this illustration could potentially mitigate several of the cost issues identified here , it would not provide cost certainty .

the quantity side of the equation is the controlling factor under this illustration ; prices could be tempered by the market flexibility introduced by the options , but actual costs would not capped .

in contrast , a more price - oriented illustration could employ a safety valve to place an absolute limit on credit prices .

in such a hybrid system , the focus of the program is the safety valve limit as much as any tonnage cap .

the quantity - based limits of the emissions cap determine the probability that the safety valve would be triggered , assuming a well - functioning market .

however , in addition to the supply - demand dynamic that the credit market will reflect , any market failure or disruption resulting from external events could trigger the safety valve for participants .

ultimately , quantity is subordinate to price .

one can potentially reduce the probability that the safety valve would be invoked by including several of the other options discussed here .

expanding supply options would enlarge the pool of available reductions and potentially improve the stability of the credit market if properly integrated .

employing a dynamic tonnage target or an economic - based circuit breaker could help address any economic growth spike that might trigger the safety valve .

the question of using these options in a safety valve program is whether they would affect the cap more or less than invoking the safety valve .

in contrast , borrowing and banking would help stabilize markets without having any effect on the cap .

like the illustration above , this approach would not necessarily promote new technology — indeed the safety valve could discourage such development , unless it generated revenue that was directed toward research and development .

if revenues were deemed insufficient for new technology ( and to address distributional concerns if desired ) , the safety valve program could be supplemented with an auction .

however , in any case , this illustration is driven by price concerns — concerns that make coordinating new technology development and minimizing impacts on the emissions cap difficult .

a final illustration could also be the simplest — imposition of a carbon tax .

the clear focus of the program would be the level of the tax , the steepness of any future increases in the tax , and who has to pay the tax .

as noted earlier , it could be crafted to address all the cost concerns identified in this report ; however , it would represent a new direction in u.s. climate change and current international efforts .

three events provide impetus for revisiting the cost issue with respect to designing a greenhouse gas reduction program .

the first is the election of a new president publicly committed to substantial reductions in greenhouse gases over the next several decades .

the second was passage of h.r .

2454 by the house that would mandate a 83% reduction in the country's greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 by 2050 .

the reduction would be primarily achieved through a market - based , cap - and - trade program , beginning in 2012 .

the third is the copenhagen accord that may begin the process of incorporating developing countries in a global climate change framework by committing them to implement "mitigation actions," along with monitoring , reporting , and verification procedures "in accordance with guidelines adopted by the conference of the parties. .

facets of the cost issue that have raised concern include absolute costs to the economy , distribution of costs across industries , competitive impact domestically and internationally , incentives for new technology , and uncertainty about possible costs .

market - based mechanisms attempt to address the cost issue by introducing flexibility into the implementation process .

the cornerstone of that flexibility is permitting sources to decide their appropriate implementation strategy within the parameters of market signals and other incentives .

that signal can be as simple as a carbon tax or comprehensive credit auction that tells the emitter the value of any reduction in greenhouse gases , to a credit marketplace that is constrained by a ceiling price ( safety valve ) and includes incentives for new technology .

as illustrated here , the combinations of market mechanisms are numerous , allowing decision makers to tailor the program to address specific concerns .

in a sense , the options discussed here represent a continuum between alternatives focused on the price side of the equation ( eg , carbon taxes ) through hybrid schemes ( eg , safety valves ) to alternatives focused on the quantity side ( eg , banking and borrowing ) .

they are tools to assist in the assessment of potential greenhouse gas reduction approaches , leaving any policy decision on balancing the price - quantity issue to the ultimate decision makers .

this balance will not be easy to achieve .

by offering flexibility to program designers and participants , market - based mechanisms can assist in implementing a ghg reduction program at less cost than more traditional command - and - control methods .

however , the complexity of market mechanisms ( particularly trading programs ) increases substantially with the scope of emitting sources included ( particularly if international trading is envisioned ) and the specificity of any allocation scheme .

thus , perhaps the most difficult issue to be addressed in designing a market - based implementation strategy for reducing ghg emissions is determining who is included , and who is exempted .

