hurricane katrina has resulted in the displacement of tens of thousands of families from theirhomes .

while its magnitude is unprecedented , the resulting need to shelter and house displacedfamilies is not .

the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the nation's agencywith a mission to provide safe and decent housing for all americans , has played a role in meetingthose needs in the past and is playing a role in the wake of katrina .

this report is designed to lookat hud's current programs and their ability and authority to respond to housing crises , and the waythat congress has expanded that role and authority in the past .

it does not track the department'sresponse to hurricane katrina ; see crs report rs22358 , hud's response to hurricane katrina ,by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] .

in responding to disasters , hud generally focuses on aiding families in the final two stagesof housing need ; temporary and permanent housing .

hud's programs and assistance in response todisasters fall generally into one of three categories: direct assistance , flexible block grants to statesand localities , and mortgage programs .

in order to better understand the role of hud in meeting the housing needs of families andcommunities impacted by disasters , the following section looks at several past disasters characterizedby major housing losses .

this section is meant to be an introduction and is not meant to be acomprehensive assessment of post - disaster housing and community recovery .

it does not includea discussion of broad community redevelopment nor does it include a discussion of the use of taxincentives .

table 1 lists past disasters in which congress has provided supplemental appropriations tohud , dating back to 1992 .

table 1 .

emergency supplemental appropriations for disasterassistance in which hud received funds , fy1992-fy2005 source: crs search of supplemental appropriations legislation identified in crs report rl33053 , federal stafford act disaster assistance: presidential declarations , eligible activities , andfunding , by [author name scrubbed] .

on august 24 , 1992 , hurricane andrew struck the coast of southern florida as a category5 hurricane , and then moved across the gulf of mexico to louisiana , weakening to a category 3hurricane as it moved northward .

 ( 15 ) the majority of the damage occurred in florida's south dadecounty , including the cities of homestead , florida city , and miami .

at the time , andrew was themost destructive hurricane the united states had experienced .

twenty six people died,approximately 250,000 were displaced , and damage was estimated to reach $26.5 billion .

 ( 16 ) in all , over 25,000 homeswere destroyed , and more than 101,000 were damaged .

 ( 17 ) in response to hurricane andrew , congress passed the dire emergency supplementalappropriations act , which the president signed into law on september 23 , 1992 ( p.l .

102-368 ) .

ittransferred $183 million from fema to hud for additional section 8 vouchers , not only for victimsof hurricane andrew , but for those of hurricane iniki , which struck hawaii on september 11 , 1992,and typhoon omar , which struck guam on august 28 , 1992 .

the transfer was expected to fund anestimated 12,000 two - year vouchers for families left homeless by hurricane andrew .

 ( 18 ) another $100 million wasallocated for the development or acquisition of public housing , including major reconstruction ofobsolete public housing projects , in the areas affected by hurricanes andrew and iniki , and typhoonomar .

congress also appropriated $60 million for the home program .

an additional $500,000 wasappropriated for housing counseling assistance to both tenants and homeowners .

finally , fhareceived $30.3 million to allow it to insure loans worth up to $2.4 billion to assist with rebuildingefforts .

these loans were expected to support about 95,000 units of single - family and multi - familyhousing .

 ( 19 ) inconnection with use of the section 8 funds , the public housing funds , and the home funds , p.l.102-368 gave the secretary of hud the power to waive any provision of any statute or regulationthat the secretary administered , except those that require nondiscrimination .

hurricane andrew destroyed over 11,000 manufactured homes in florida and louisiana.manufactured homes were hit hardest by the hurricane .

 ( 20 ) for example , andrew destroyed 97% of all manufactured homesin dade county , compared to 11% of all single family homes .

 ( 21 ) after studying the damageto manufactured homes , hud developed new construction standards to increase their windresistance .

 ( 22 ) the newrule required improved design to make structures resistant to wind up to 110 miles per hour .

 ( 23 ) .

during the summer of 1993 , 10 midwestern states experienced rainfall levels that exceededthe normal range , resulting in large - scale flooding of the mississippi and missouri rivers , andvarious smaller rivers and tributaries that flow into them .

 ( 24 ) in nine states ( illinois , iowa , kansas , minnesota , missouri,nebraska , north dakota , south dakota , and wisconsin ) rivers overflowed their banks and levees,destroying homes and requiring many to evacuate .

according to fema , 534 counties were declaredeligible for disaster aid , and 168,340 people applied for federal assistance .

approximately 50 peopledied as a result of the floods , and 54,000 people were left homeless .

estimates of property damageranged from $12 to $16 billion .

 ( 25 ) in august 1993 , congress passed the supplemental appropriations for relief from themajor , widespread flooding of the midwest act ( p.l .

103-75 ) .

the law appropriated $50 millionfor hud's home program , and $200 million for cdbg , of which $25 million was earmarked forimmediate recovery needs not reimbursable by fema .

on february 12 , 1994 , p.l .

103-211 madeavailable an additional $500 million in cdbg funds for both the midwest flood recovery efforts,and the damage caused by the 1994 northridge earthquake in california .

of the $500 million , thehud secretary was given the authority to transfer up to $75 million to the home program .

inconnection with use of both the home and cdbg funds , p.l .

103-75 gave the secretary of hudthe power to waive any provision of any statute or regulation that the secretary administered , exceptthose relating to fair housing , nondiscrimination , the environment , and labor standards .

hud directed that cdbg funds be used only to repair , replace or restore facilities , includinghousing , damaged by the floods .

 ( 26 ) hud waived the limits on the amount of cdbg funds that couldbe used for new construction for flood - damaged properties .

all nine affected states received cdbgfunds in 1993 and 1994 .

illinois received $84.1 million , iowa $96.3 million , kansas $37.2 million,minnesota $27.1 million , missouri $136.8 million , nebraska $23.1 million , north dakota $19.6million , south dakota $12.8 million , and wisconsin $13.1 million .

 ( 27 ) home dollars were alsodistributed to each of the nine flood - damaged states .

illinois received $10.8 million , iowa $11.4million , kansas $3.4 million , minnesota $2.7 million , missouri $15.3 million , nebraska $1.3million , north dakota $2.6 million , south dakota $1.3 million , and wisconsin $1.3 million .

after floods it is common for local communities to engage in mitigation activities that willprotect properties located on flood plains against future damage .

mitigation activities include buyouts , relocation , elevation , and flood proofing .

in the buy out , local communities purchase theproperties of businesses and homeowners located on flood plains .

owners agree to sell voluntarilyso that they can afford to relocate to areas that are not at risk of flooding .

some of the cities thatwere damaged by the midwest flood used cdbg money to buy out properties located on floodplains .

for example , st. charles county , missouri used $8.8 million in cdbg funds together with$5.78 million from fema to purchase 1,159 properties located on the flood plain .

 ( 28 ) arnold , missouri used$1.4 million in cdbg funds combined with an additional $2.9 million from fema to buy out 72properties .

after the midwest flood , a total of 12,385 properties were mitigated through acombination of funds , including cdbg .

of these , 11,888 were bought out , 356 were relocated , 31were elevated , and 110 were flood proofed .

 ( 29 ) .

at 4:30 on the morning of january 17 , 1994 , a 6.7 magnitude earthquake hit the greater losangeles area .

the northridge earthquake was the costliest in the nation's history , with lossesestimated at between $20 and $40 billion .

more than 50 people were killed and more than 9,000were injured .

 ( 30 ) over65,000 residential buildings were damaged in los angeles , which represented more than 250,000units of multifamily housing and almost 50,000 units of single family housing .

 ( 31 ) congress responded to the disaster by passing several supplemental appropriations bills .

thenorthridge emergency supplemental appropriations bill , signed into law on february 12 , 1994 ( p.l.103-211 ) , provided nearly $900 million in appropriations to hud programs for impactedcommunities .

two - hundred million was directed to provide section 8 rental assistance / vouchers toimpacted families .

twenty - five million was provided to repair damaged public housing and $100million was provided to repair damaged privately - owned assisted housing through the flexiblesubsidy fund .

 ( 32 ) congress provided cdbg with $500 million , up to $75 million of which was transferrable to thehome block grant program , to be used both for communities impacted by the northridgeearthquake as well as those still recovering from the earlier midwest flooding .

for all of thesefunds , the secretary was given the authority to waive or specify alternative requirements for anystatute or regulation in connection with the obligation of the secretary or use by the recipient of thefunds , as long as the waiver was not inconsistent with the overall purpose of the statute or regulation .

the waiver authority was not available in the case of fair housing , nondiscrimination , environmentalor labor standards .

in addition to the funding provided , p.l .

103-211 made modifications to thesection 203 ( h ) and section 203 ( k ) programs within the federal housing administration , expandingthe benefits that could be provided to households impacted by the northridge earthquake , althoughthe changes were only effective for 18 months .

the northridge earthquake resulted in the displacement of thousands of families ; as of april1994 , 88,000 people had not returned home , 57,000 of whom were staying with friends and family .

in recognition of the serious housing problem , los angeles convened a housing task force onjanuary 20 , 1994 that included participants from the city , the county , the american red cross , thecalifornia department of housing and community development , the governors office ofemergency services , fema , and hud .

the task force had two main objectives ; first , to get peopleinto shelters and registered with fema and second , to quickly get people out of shelters and intoreplacement housing .

 ( 33 ) emergency short - term vouchers , funded both through the section 8 program and throughcdbg ( 34 ) were providedto impacted families .

a high percentage of those voucher holders were able to use them within thesame zip code as the home from which they were displaced .

 ( 35 ) city officials intervieweda year after the northridge earthquake expressed concern about what would happen to families withtemporary vouchers when they expired , noting that most families who had received them had notceased using them .

 ( 36 ) they stated that the city was pursuing options to have the vouchers made permanent and , in fact,they were eventually made permanent by congress and absorbed into the housing authority of losangeles county's mainstream voucher program .

 ( 37 ) a july 26 , 1994 report by the hud inspector general praisedhud and the phas for responding quickly to the northridge disaster by providing vouchers , butfound that there was an overlap in federal help .

families were provided vouchers without firsthaving been screened to assure that they were not also receiving fema assistance .

hud's officeof public and indian housing responded that families may have used the fema assistance forpurposes beyond rent , such as storage , purchase of furniture , moving expenses and utility connectioncharges and that the assistance should therefore not necessarily be considered duplicative .

hud used the $100 million in supplemental flexible subsidy funds to develop a newprogram , introduced that spring , called the hud earthquake loan program ( help ) .

the funds wereavailable first for fha - insured multifamily properties that were impacted by the earthquake , andsecond for other non - fha - insured multifamily hud - assisted properties that had beenimpacted .

 ( 38 ) helpfunds could be used to cover mortgage payments , loss of rent , temporary staffing costs , tenantrelocation expenses , building repair or replacement , retrofitting , and to meet code requirements .

ahud inspector general report issued in 1998 found that hud had not designed the help initiativewith sufficient controls to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse .

the report identified at least $7.1 millionin questionable funds awarded to 27 projects and directed the department to investigate and attemptto recover those funds .

 ( 39 ) home and cdbg funds were used in the short - term to provide rental assistance , to meetsocial service needs ( i.e .

set up intake centers and provide housing counseling ) , ( 40 ) and some funds were usedfor longer - term redevelopment , including financing repairs on units that could not qualify for smallbusiness administration ( sba ) loans .

 ( 41 ) shortly before the earthquake struck , hud had amended theminimum property standards to which hud funded housing must comply to include seismic safetystandards .

it was hoped that new units assisted with help , home , or cdbg funds would be betterequipped for a future earthquake as a result of the changes to these standards .

 ( 42 ) .

the 2004 atlantic hurricane season was one of the most active and destructive in recentmemory .

eight named storms formed , four of which , in the span of about four weeks , wreakedhavoc on the southern united states across 12 states , although florida was by far hit the hardest .

on august 13 , a category 4 hurricane , charley , made landfall on the southwest coast of florida .

thestrongest storm to hit the united states since hurricane andrew , charley caused about $14 billionin damages and resulted in 10 deaths in the united states .

 ( 43 ) on september 6 , a category 2 hurricane , frances , made landfallin the united states , striking the central western coast of florida .

frances left five dead in floridaand $9 billion in damages .

 ( 44 ) less than two weeks later , on september 16 , ivan , a category3 hurricane made landfall on the gulf coast of alabama and the western florida panhandle .

hurricane ivan left 25 dead in the united states and over $13 billion in damages .

 ( 45 ) finally , on september 26,category 3 hurricane jeanne struck the eastern coast of florida , leaving four floridians dead and$6.8 billion in damages .

 ( 46 ) president bush responded by making five supplemental funding requests to congress ofalmost $14 billion .

congress responded by passing two supplemental funding measures totaling$13.6 billion .

the military construction appropriations act and emergency hurricanesupplemental appropriations law ( p.l .

108-324 ) , provided $150 million for cdbg .

the funds weredesignated only for use for disaster relief , long - term recovery , and mitigation in communitiesaffected by disasters designated by the president between august 31 , 2003 , and october 1 , 2004 .

the funds were to be awarded by the secretary directly to states , who were permitted to allocatethem to entitlement communities .

the secretary was also given discretion to waive or specifyalternative requirements for any statute or regulation in connection with the obligation of thesecretary or use by the recipient of the funds , as long as the waiver was not inconsistent with theoverall purpose of the statute or regulation .

the waiver authority did not apply to fair housing,nondiscrimination , environmental or labor standards , and at least 50% of the funds provided had tobenefit primarily low - and moderate - income families .

the funds could not be used for any projectunderway before the disaster unless the project was impacted by the disaster .

states were requiredto provide a 10% match .

the conference report accompanying the law ( h.rept .

108-773 ) directedhud to coordinate with fema to ensure that funds were used only for disasters and targeted to theareas of greatest need .

the conferees also directed hud to report back to the appropriationscommittees prior to any allocation of funds and to submit quarterly reports on their use thereafter .

prior to the allocation of emergency cdbg funds , hud took a number of steps to respondto the 2004 florida hurricanes .

hud identified vacant hud subsidized multifamily units andhud - owned homes that could be used as temporary housing , relocated displaced hud - assistedfamilies , permitted home and cdbg grantees to reprogram existing funds to meet disaster needs,activated the 203 ( h ) program and 203 ( k ) program waivers and issued a 90-day foreclosuremoratorium for fha - insured properties .

 ( 47 ) on december 10 , 2005 , hud published a notice in the federal register informing impactedstates of their eligibility for emergency cdbg funds .

the notice included the state allocations andinformed states that , in order to access the funds , they must first submit a plan detailing how theywill use the funds .

the allocation formula used sba and fema data on unmet housing , businessand public assistance needs for all designated areas in major disaster declarations .

the formulaweighted unmet housing needs at 50% , unmet business needs at 25% , and unmet public assistanceneeds at 25% .

the notice also specified waivers applicable to home and cdbg funds used fordisaster assistance , primarily related to planning requirements .

 ( 48 ) over the course of the recovery , hud also provided more than $26 million in emergencycapital reserve funding to repair damaged public housing units ; $40 million in additional section 8voucher funding to meet the increased costs of serving currently assisted families whose rent hadgone up because of a housing shortage caused by the hurricanes ; $10 million for repair of section202 and section 811 properties ; and $16 million to relocate displaced hud - assisted families .

 ( 49 ) the four 2004 hurricanes resulted in damage to more than 700,000 homes ( 50 ) in florida .

poor familieswere disproportionately impacted .

 ( 51 ) in response , on november 10 , 2004 , the governor of floridanamed a hurricane housing task force to advise the state legislature on how to create more affordablehousing .

on february 18 , 2005 , the group made its final report .

it recommended , in addition to theregular allocation of housing funds , the state legislature approve a one - time infusion of $354 millionin state funds to develop several new affordable housing programs including , among others , ahurricane housing recovery program , a rental recovery loan program , and a farmworkerhousing recovery program .

 ( 52 ) in march 2005 , the state of florida department of community affairs ( dca ) submitted itsplan to spend its emergency cdbg funds to hud .

the action plan for disaster recovery statesthat emergency cdbg funds will be used for repairs , long - term recovery and mitigation .

givencongress's direction that funds be used in the hardest hit areas , the dca's plan specifies that ratherthan providing funds to all 67 areas that had been declared emergencies in the wake of thehurricanes , they will invite the 15 communities that were hardest hit to apply for emergency cdbgfunds .

the plan specifies that the first priority will be given to infrastructure and public assistanceprojects .

second priority will go to economic development and business assistance projects,including those designed to promote job creation and / or retention .

third priority is given to housingrepair and development projects .

the plan explains that housing projects are given the lowestpriority because of the expectation that the state legislature will fund the governor's affordablehousing plan ( described earlier ) .

 ( 53 ) .

in times of major disaster , private citizens often cannot reasonably be expected to addresstheir own housing and shelter needs .

when the united states housing act of 1937 set forth ahousing policy for the nation , it stated that the federal government should act where there is aserious need that private citizens or groups cannot or are not addressing responsibly .

 ( 54 ) while the federal emergency management agency is the primary federal entity chargedwith responding to a disaster , hud is the primary entity charged with meeting the nation's housingneeds .

the exact role that each agency is to play following a disaster is not entirely clear .

femaassistance is available to meet a range of housing needs , from emergency shelters , to trailers , to homerepair grants .

the review of past disasters included in this report shows that hud's programs haveprimarily been used to provide longer - term housing aid , such as rental vouchers and new housingconstruction , as well as aid to communities to repair infrastructure and promote economicdevelopment .

in the months following 2005's hurricane katrina , hud's programs were not calledon to play a major role in responding to families' housing needs .

fema's response has been metwith criticism from observers , including members of congress , some of whom have called for anexpansion of hud's role .

as the focus shifts from response to katrina to the inevitable review ofthat response , the appropriate role for hud to play following a disaster may be the subject ofcongressional debate .

