during the cold war , the u.s. nuclear arsenal contained many types of delivery vehicles for nuclear weapons , including short - range missiles and artillery for use on the battlefield , medium - range missiles and aircraft that could strike targets beyond the theater of battle , short - and medium - range systems based on surface ships , long - range missiles based on u.s. territory and submarines , and heavy bombers that could threaten soviet targets from their bases in the united states .

the short - and medium - range systems are considered nonstrategic nuclear weapons and have been referred to as battlefield , tactical , and theater nuclear weapons .

the long - range missiles and heavy bombers are known as strategic nuclear delivery vehicles .

in 1990 , as the cold war was drawing to a close and the soviet union was entering its final year , the united states had more than 12,000 nuclear warheads deployed on 1,875 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles .

as of july 1 , 2009 , according to the counting rules in the original strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) , the united states had reduced to 5,916 nuclear warheads on 1,188 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles .

under the terms of the 2002 strategic offensive reduction treaty ( known as the moscow treaty ) between the united states and russia , this number was to decline to no more than 2,200 operationally deployed strategic nuclear warheads by the end of 2012 .

the u.s. department of state reported that the united states has already reached that level , with only 1,968 operationally deployed strategic warheads in december 2009 .

the new start treaty , signed by president obama and president medvedev on april 8 , 2010 , reduces those forces further , to no more than 1,550 warheads on deployed launchers and heavy bombers .

according to the u.s. department of state , on september 1 , 2018 , the united states had 1,398 warheads on 659 deployed icbms , slbms , and heavy bombers , within a total of 800 deployed and nondeployed icbms , slbms , and heavy bombers .

although these numbers do not count the same categories of nuclear weapons , they indicate that the number of deployed warheads on u.s. strategic nuclear forces has declined significantly in the decades following the end of the cold war .

yet , nuclear weapons continue to play a key role in u.s. national security strategy , and the united states does not , at this time , plan to either eliminate its nuclear weapons or abandon the strategy of nuclear deterrence that has served as a core concept in u.s. national security strategy for more than 60 years .

in a speech in prague on april 5 , 2009 , president obama highlighted "america's commitment to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons. .

but he recognized that this goal would not be reached quickly , and probably not in his lifetime .

and , even though the president pledged to reduce the roles and numbers of u.s. nuclear forces , the 2010 nuclear posture review noted that "the fundamental role of u.s. nuclear weapons , which will continue as long as nuclear weapons exist , is to deter nuclear attack on the united states , our allies , and partners. .

moreover , in the 2010 npr and in the june 2013 report on the nuclear employment guidance of the united states , the obama administration indicated that the united states would pursue programs that would allow it to modernize and adjust its strategic forces so that they remained capable in coming years .

the trump administration emphasized its continuing support for the u.s. nuclear arsenal in its nuclear posture review , which was released on february 2 , 2018 .

this document notes that "the current threat environment and future uncertainties now necessitate a national commitment to maintain modern and effective nuclear forces , as well as the infrastructure needed to support them. .

the report not only reaffirms the basic contours of the current u.s. force structure and the ongoing modernization programs , it also calls for the development of a new low - yield warhead for deployment on trident ii ( d - 5 ) missiles .

most members of congress have supported the general contours of u.s. nuclear posture .

while some programs have been open to scrutiny , congress has continued to support funding for most aspects of the ongoing modernization programs .

nevertheless , questions about the costs of these programs , and the trade - offs they might require within the defense budget , have surfaced in recent years , particularly following the passage of the budget control act in 2011 .

these concerns may receive additional attention in the 116 th congress .

while senator james inhofe , who will likely chair the senate armed services committee , has offered strong support for the nuclear modernization programs , representative adam smith , who is likely to chair the house armed services committee , has noted that "the current $1.5 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons and upgrade our nuclear weapons complex is unrealistic and unaffordable. .

this report reviews the ongoing programs that will affect the expected size and shape of the u.s. strategic nuclear force structure .

it begins with an overview of this force structure during the cold war , and summarizes the reductions and changes that have occurred since 1991 .

it then offers details about each category of delivery vehicle — land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) , submarine launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , and heavy bombers — focusing on their current deployments and ongoing and planned modernization programs .

the report concludes with a discussion of issues related to decisions about the future size and shape of the u.s. strategic nuclear force .

this report focuses on the numbers and types of weapons in the u.s. strategic nuclear force structure .

it does not address the broader question of why the united states chooses to deploy these numbers and types of weapons , or more generally , the role that u.s. nuclear weapons play in u.s. national security strategy .

this question is addressed in other crs reports .

however , as the new trump administration reviews and possibly revises the plans for u.s. nuclear force structure , congress could address broader questions about the relationship between these forces and the role of nuclear weapons .

in 2001 , the bush administration argued that , because the united states and russia were no longer enemies , the united states would not size or structure its nuclear forces simply to deter the "russian threat. .

instead , nuclear weapons would play a broader role in u.s. national security strategy .

the obama administration , in contrast , noted that there is a relationship between the size of the u.s. arsenal and the size of the russian arsenal .

the 2010 npr states that russia's nuclear force will remain a significant factor in determining how much and how fast we are prepared to reduce u.s. forces .

because of our improved relations , the need for strict numerical parity between the two countries is no longer as compelling as it was during the cold war .

but large disparities in nuclear capabilities could raise concerns on both sides and among u.s. allies and partners , and may not be conducive to maintaining a stable , long - term strategic relationship , especially as nuclear forces are significantly reduced .

the trump administration , in the 2018 nuclear posture review , stated that the "global threat conditions have worsened markedly since the most recent , 2010 npr. .

it emphasized that "russia and china are contesting the international norms" and that "russia and north korea have increased the salience of nuclear forces in their strategies and plans and have engaged in increasingly explicit nuclear threats. .

as a result , it stated that the 2018 npr is "strategy driven and provides guidance for the nuclear force structure and policy requirements needed now and in the future to maintain peace and stability in a rapidly shifting environment with significant future uncertainty. .

the bush administration's 2001 nuclear posture review determined that the united states would need to maintain between 1,700 and 2,200 operationally deployed nuclear warheads .

the bush administration also indicated that the united states would maintain in storage many of the warheads removed from deployed forces , and would maintain the capability to restore some of these warheads to the deployed forces to meet unexpected contingencies .

the obama administration concluded , in its npr , that the united states could reduce its forces to 1,550 deployed warheads , and agreed to do so under the new start treaty , but it also planned to retain the capability to restore warheads to its deployed forces .

it also plans to retain many warheads in storage , although it has indicated that the size of the total stockpile could decline as the united states reduces its deployed forces to the new start limits .

the obama administration also indicated that the united states could reduce its numbers of deployed and nondeployed warheads further , but that it should do so in parallel with russia .

it indicated , in the 2010 npr , that "large disparities in nuclear capabilities could raise concerns on both sides and among u.s. allies and partners , and may not be conducive to maintaining a stable , long - term strategic relationship. .

in june 2013 , the department of defense completed a new study , as a follow - up to the npr , to determine how deeply the united states might reduce its forces , and how it should deploy the remaining forces .

press reports indicate the pentagon reviewed a number of alternatives in this study , with some contemplating reductions as low as 300 warheads , but the administration concluded that the united states could reduce u.s. deployed strategic forces by about one - third , to a level of 1,000-1,100 warheads , if it did so along with russia .

they united states would not proceed with unilateral cuts in the u.s. arsenal .

the trump administration did not directly address questions about the size of the u.s. nuclear arsenal in the 2018 nuclear posture review .

it indicated that it would continue to support the implementation of new start , at least through 2021 , and that it would continue to pursue the nuclear modernization programs that began during the obama administration .

it stated that , as a part of this modernization program , the united states would deploy a minimum of 12 columbia class submarines and 400 missiles within 450 launch facilities under the gbsd program .

it did not , however , offer recommendations on the numbers of warheads that would be deployed on these missiles or indicate whether the united states would remain within the limits established by new start after the treaty expired .

recently , rear admiral john tammen , the navy's director for submarine warfare , said that the navy would keep the production line for columbia class submarines open , after completing the 12 submarines , to maintain the option of increasing the size of the fleet .

moreover , the navy's 30-year shipbuilding plan includes a line for 5 additional heavy missile submarines , after the completion of the columbia class program , that might serve as replacements for the ohio - class cruise missile submarines .

on the other hand , general john hyten , the commander of u.s. strategic command , recently noted that the size and structure of the u.s. nuclear force is determined by the threats faced by the united states .

he noted that , if the united states wanted to reduce the size of the force and curtail spending on nuclear modernization , it would have to reduce the threat , possibly by "renegotiating arms control treaties to further reduce the nuclear arsenals of the united states and russia. .

over the years , analysts have questioned why the united states must maintain such a large force of nuclear weapons .

they have questioned whether the united states would attack with such a large number of weapons if its own national survival were not at risk , and they note that only russia currently has the capability to threaten u.s. national survival .

they assert that the united states could likely meet any other potential contingency with a far smaller force of nuclear weapons .

some have concluded , instead , that the united states could maintain its security with a force of between 500 and 1,000 warheads .

others , however , dispute this view and note that the united states has other potential adversaries , and , even if these nations do not possess thousands of nuclear warheads , some may expand their nuclear forces or chemical and biological capabilities in the future .

some have argued that the united states also needs to assure its allies of its commitment to their security , and this goal could require a force of significant size , regardless of the number of potential targets an adversary nation might possess .

they also argue that a "minimum deterrent" of only a few hundred warheads would require a strategy of targeting an adversary's cities and population centers , rather than military capabilities .

they note that this strategy has been rejected by both republican and democratic administrations throughout the nuclear age .

when the bush administration announced the results of the 2001 nuclear posture review , it indicated that the united states would retain a triad of icbms , slbms , and heavy bombers for the foreseeable future .

the obama administration also offered continuing support for the retention of the strategic triad .

in recent testimony , robert scher , the assistant secretary of defense for strategy , plans , and capabilities , reiterated the administration's support for the nuclear triad .

he argued that the united states needed to "maintain a deterrent that is inherently robust and stable," even though the united states did not need "to mirror every potential adversary , system - for - system or yield - for - yield. .

he indicated that the obama administration believed that the triad continued to "provide the credibility , flexibility , and survivability to meet and adapt to the challenges of a dynamic 21 st century security environment. .

the 2018 nuclear posture review offers a similar justification for retaining the nuclear triad .

it notes that "the triad's synergy and overlapping attributes help ensure the enduring survivability of our deterrence capabilities against attack and our capacity to hold a range of adversary targets at risk throughout a crisis or conflict .

eliminating any leg of the triad would greatly ease adversary attack planning and allow an adversary to concentrate resources and attention on defeating the remaining two legs. .

it also lists additional capabilities and attributes that it views as essential to meeting u.s. deterrence needs , and argues that "the multiplicity of platforms , weapons , and modes of operation inherent in the triad and u.s. non - strategic nuclear forces , provide a significant margin of flexibility and resilience. .

congress has also offered its support for the retention of the nuclear triad .

the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

114-328 , section 1671 ) states the modernization of the nuclear triad is a key element "in support of a strong and credible nuclear deterrent. .

the trump administration is also likely to continue to support the nuclear triad .

although , as a candidate , president trump seemed unfamiliar with the concept of the triad , secretary of defense mattis offered his support during his confirmation hearings in january 2017 .

as the obama administration outlined plans to modernize and replace the delivery vehicles in all three legs of the strategic triad , many analysts began to question whether the united states could afford to retain the triad and whether it could retain a robust deterrent without one of the current types of strategic delivery vehicles .

specifically , some called for reductions in or even the elimination of the u.s. icbm force .

others have noted that , under the current financial pressures , the air force may not be able to afford a new icbm after 2030 .

moreover , even if the financial pressures did not exist , some argued the air force should eliminate the icbm force because it no longer serves u.s. national security needs .

for example , in a study published in may 2012 , the global zero organization argued for the elimination of the icbm force because it views these missiles as dangerous and destabilizing in the current security environment .

it noted that "icbms can only support nuclear wartime operations against russia" and that current - generation icbms "fired from the existing bases , on their minimum energy trajectories," have to overfly russia and china or fly near russia to reach targets in potentially adversarial countries .

it contends that , if u.s. missiles fly over or near russia on their way to more southerly targets in iran or syria , russia might be confused by ambiguous attack indications and might then launch its own retaliatory attack against the united states .

second , the report asserted that , because icbms are based in fixed silos that are vulnerable to destruction in an attack , they must depend heavily upon "launch on warning" to survive and retaliate in some scenarios .

as a result , according to the report , icbms exacerbate the risk that the united states might launch its weapons on false warning .

former secretary of defense william perry has also questioned the future need for the icbm force .

he noted that icbms are not an essential part of the u.s. nuclear deterrent because the bomber force and ssbn force are sufficient to promise an overwhelming response if the united states is attacked .

specifically , he said that "any sane nation would be deterred by the incredible striking power of our submarine force. .

he suggested that the united states could keep its icbm force for a number of years , but that he would not recapitalize it through the gbsd program .

analysts who support the continued deployment of u.s. icbms dispute many of these assertions .

first , they noted that , although each individual icbm silo may be vulnerable to destruction if targeted by several incoming warheads , an attack that threatened to destroy the entire u.s. icbm force would have to consist of hundreds , if not thousands of attacking warheads .

this is because the united states maintains nearly 450 icbm silos hardened against nuclear blast , and an attacker would have to target two or three warheads against each silo to ensure their destruction .

further , because the united states now deploys each minuteman missile with only a single warhead , the attacker would have to expend two to three times as many warheads as he could hope to destroy .

this calculation underpins the conclusion , which is widespread among nuclear policy analysts , that single - warhead icbms enhance stability and discourage attack because they are not lucrative targets .

some analysts have also argued that the united states could reduce the size of its slbm fleet and retain only 8 or 10 submarines .

they argued that this reduction now , and the future acquisition of fewer replacement submarines , could save the navy $6 - $7 billion over the next 10 years .

they also noted that this change need not reduce the number of operational warheads on slbms , because the united states would deploy each submarine with 24 missiles , rather than the 20 planned under new start , and could increase the number of warheads on each missile .

however , with so few submarines , the united states might have to eliminate one of its submarine bases , leaving it with submarines based only in the atlantic or only in the pacific ocean .

or the united states might have to reduce the number of submarines on station , and , therefore , the number of warheads available to the president promptly , at the start of a conflict .

these changes may not be consistent with current submarine operations and employment plans .

president obama and the u.s. military may want to consider the implications of these basing , operational , and policy changes , before deciding whether or not to reduce to 1,000 warheads , as opposed to choosing the warhead number first then deciding later how to base and operate the remaining nuclear forces .

analysts outside government have also questioned the administration's plans to replace the air - launched cruise missile ( alcm ) with the new long - range strike missile ( lrso ) in the 2020s .

as noted above , some argue that this missile will be redundant , as the air force is already planning to deploy a new penetrating bomber .

they note that , during the 1980s , the united states deployed cruise missiles both to extend the service life of the b - 52 bombers , which could no longer penetrate soviet air defenses , and to provide a means to attack and destroy those air defenses prior to follow - on attacks with penetrating bombers .

but , according to the program's critics , if the air force deploys 100 new bombers that can penetrate advanced air defenses , it will not need cruise missiles to destroy those defenses .

moreover , even if the united states does plan to attack an adversary's air defenses , it could do so with existing conventional cruise missiles , such as the extended range version of the joint air - to - surface standoff missile ( jassm ) missile .

the air force has disputed the assertion that the bomber and cruise missile capabilities are redundant .

air force officials have noted that the two systems are complementary , with each providing different capabilities for the united states and different profiles that would complicate an adversary's attempts to defend against a u.s. attack .

some analysts also note that advanced air defense systems have proliferated among potential u.s. adversaries , and that these capabilities "make it harder for our forces to reach their targets. .

deploying both penetrating bombers and long - range cruise missiles , therefore , will strengthen the u.s. nuclear deterrent .

in addition to debating the value of each of the legs of the nuclear triad , some analysts have addressed questions about whether the united states should develop and deploy new types of nuclear weapons in response to the challenges posed by emerging nuclear adversaries .

attention has focused , in particular , on lower - yield weapons .

some argue that these weapons would strengthen deterrence by giving the united states more limited , tailored , and , therefore , credible options for nuclear use than are currently available with higher - yield weapons .

others , however , argue that the deployment of low - yield nuclear weapons could undermine deterrence and make nuclear war more likely , because they might be seen as a more "usable" nuclear weapons .

press reports indicate that a defense science board study completed in december 2016 called for the pentagon to consider the deployment of lower - yield nuclear weapons and the development of options for the limited use of nuclear weapons .

in early february 2017 , general david goldfein , the chief of staff of the air force , indicated that he also thought the nuclear posture review should consider the development of lower - yield warheads , as a part of a new look at "what constitutes deterrence in the 21 st century. .

the trump administration addressed this issue during its nuclear posture review and concluded that "in the near - term , the united states will modify a small number of existing slbm warheads to provide a low - yield option. .

the report notes that the united states has long maintained cruise missile warheads and b61 bombs that provide a low - yield option , but it also argues that a low - yield slbm warhead will "ensure a prompt response option that is able to penetrate adversary defenses. .

the report asserts that this "supplement" to the u.s. nuclear force posture will enhance deterrence by "by denying potential adversaries any mistaken confidence that limited nuclear employment can provide a useful advantage over the united states and its allies. .

the npr's rationale for a new low - yield slbm warhead differs , in some respects , from the debate evident in the literature over the past few years .

where the previous debate focused on the possible need for a low - yield warhead in regional scenarios , the npr specifically points to russia's nuclear doctrine and russia's purported "escalate to de - escalate strategy" as the justification for this warhead .

the npr argues that russia "mistakenly assesses that the threat of nuclear escalation or actual first use of nuclear weapons would serve to 'de - escalate' a conflict on terms favorable to russia. .

the npr , therefore , "concluded that a new capability was required to ensure the russian leadership does not miscalculate regarding the consequences of limited nuclear first use.... russia must instead understand that nuclear first use , however limited , will fail to achieve its objectives , fundamentally alter the nature of a conflict , and trigger incalculable and intolerable costs for moscow. .

according to one analyst , by modifying a small number of w - 76 warheads , the united states will "strengthen russian perceptions of u.s. credibility and will. .

analysts outside government have raised a number of concerns about the possible deployment of a low - yield version of the w76 warhead .

some have argued that , because the united states already has warheads with low - yield options on cruise missiles and b61 bombs , it already has the flexibility and means to deter russia's escalation to low - yield nuclear weapons during a conventional conflict .

others argue that the new warhead will add little to the u.s. deterrent capability because russia would be unable to determine the yield of an attacking warhead until it had detonated .

moreover , if russia could not determine the yield of the warhead , and chose to retaliate before assessing the yield , the u.s. use of a low - yield warhead could lead russia to escalate to a much broader and more destructive nuclear conflict .

those who support the npr's recommendation have responded to these concerns by noting that russia is not likely to escalate to full - scale nuclear war before confirming the nature of the u.s. attack .

in addition , some have pointed out that because the u.s. goal is to deter russian nuclear use in the first place , concerns about how the war might unfold if deterrence failed are highly speculative .

they believe that a u.s. low - yield warhead would raise the nuclear threshold because the united states would be more likely to respond to russia's use of low - yield nuclear weapons if it had a low - yield option of its own .

because russia would know that the united states had this option , russia would be less likely to escalate to nuclear use during a conventional conflict .

when the obama administration submitted the 1251 report to the senate during the new start ratification process , it indicated that it expected to spend around $210 billion over the next 10 years ( 2011-2021 ) to maintain and modernize the u.s. nuclear arsenal .

this total , however , did not include most of the costs of producing and procuring the next generation of submarines , bombers , and missiles , as these activities would occur after the timeframe contained in the report .

moreover , it became evident , as congress reviewed the administration's plans to modernize the nuclear enterprise , that it was difficult , if not impossible , to determine how much the united states spent each year on nuclear weapons , as the funding was divided between the department of defense and the department of energy , and , in many cases , was combined with funding for other , nonnuclear activities .

in other words , the united states does not maintain a single , unified budget for nuclear weapons and other nuclear activities .

in response to both the growing concerns about the pending costs of nuclear weapons modernization programs and the confusion about how to calculate the annual costs of the nuclear enterprise , congress directed the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to estimate the costs of u.s. plans for operating , maintaining , and modernizing nuclear weapons , the delivery systems , and the doe nuclear weapons complex over the next 10 years .

cbo issued its report in late 2013 .

it found that the united states was likely to spend $355 billion over the next 10 years on its nuclear weapons enterprise .

this total included $56 billion for command , control , communications , and early warning activities and $59 billion for additional costs based on historical cost growth of similar programs .

neither of these categories had been included in the administration's estimate in 2010 .

when cbo considered the same categories as the administration , it estimated 10-year spending of $241 billion , a number close to the estimate provided by the administration .

cbo updated its estimate in january 2015 , and reported that it calculated that the united states would spend $348 billion between 2015 and 2024 ; excluding command and control and cost growth , the total that was comparable to the administration's 2010 estimate was now $247 billion .

cbo updated its report again in february 2017 , estimating that the united states would spend $400 billion on nuclear weapons between 2017 and 2026 .

congress also mandated that the dod and doe provide 10-year cost estimates of the expected costs of nuclear weapons programs , and that gao evaluate the cost estimates .

in july 2017 , gao released its review of the dod and doe combined report for fy2017 .

the combined report estimates that the costs of sustaining and modernizing nuclear delivery systems , the nuclear command and control system , the nuclear stockpile , and the nuclear security enterprise will total $342 billion between fy2017 and fy2026 .

both the cbo studies and the dod / doe reports indicate that the united states is on track to spend , on average , $35-$40 billion per year as it sustains and modernizes its nuclear weapons programs .

this indicates that the united states could spend at least $1-$1.2 trillion on nuclear weapons programs and modernization over the next 30 years .

this estimate is consistent with others that have been presented by organizations outside government .

for example , in january 2014 , analysts at the james martin center for nonproliferation studies estimated that the united states might spend $1 trillion , or an average of just over $30 billion per year , over the next 30 years , to modernize its nuclear enterprise .

in addition , in a briefing prepared in may 2013 , the air force estimated that the investments in nuclear modernization programs would peak in between 2025 and 2035 , at approximately $30 billion per year .

while there appears to be a broad base of agreement about the magnitude of the costs that the united states is likely to incur as it modernizes its nuclear arsenal , there has been less agreement about whether the united states can , or should , proceed with all of these programs .

many analysts have noted that , with the passage of the budget control act in 2011 , the amount of funding available for defense spending would be nearly $1 trillion lower than expected when the obama administration first outlined the nuclear modernization program .

in this environment , rising costs for nuclear weapons programs could to cut into funding for other pentagon priorities .

while congress has raised the caps in the budget control act , increasing spending on defense programs and reducing the pressure on the modernization programs , the relief could be temporary .

recently , the office of management and budget mandated that the pentagon reduce its planned budget for fy2020 from $733 billion to $700 billion , which would cut below the fy2019 budget of $716 billion .

moreover , this problem may not disappear after the budget control act expires in 2021 .

as noted in a recent report by a well - known budget analyst , the trump administration's five - year defense spending plan remains relatively flat , and "a defense budget that roughly keeps pace with inflation means that the military loses buying power. .

representative adam smith , who is likely to chair the house armed services committee in the 116 th congress , has also questioned the costs and direction of the u.s. nuclear modernization programs .

he has noted that "we need to take a responsible approach to the nuclear weapons enterprise , and recognize that the current $1.5 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons and upgrade our nuclear weapons complex is unrealistic and unaffordable. .

others , however , argue that the united states not only can afford to bear the costs of these systems , but cannot afford the costs of failing to modernize its nuclear arsenal .

admiral haney , the commander of strategic command , made this point in a hearing before the house armed services committee , when he said that "achieving strategic deterrence in the 21 st century requires continued investment in strategic capabilities and renewed multigenerational commitment of intellectual capital. .

he argued that "any cuts to that budget , including those imposed by sequestration , will hamper our ability to sustain and modernize our military forces. .

he noted that , as the modernization programs progressed , spending on nuclear weapons was likely to rise from around 2.5% - 3% of dod's budget to around 5% - 6% of that budget in the late 2020s to 2030s .

when asked whether the united states could afford to make this investment , he noted that other nations have been modernizing their forces and continued to pose an "existential threat" to the united states .

he noted that "in order to maintain and sustain its strategic stability , it's very important that we have that kind of balance" with these nations .

and he asked , "quite frankly , the question really is , can we afford not to" proceed with the modernization programs .

the 2018 nuclear posture review offered a similar response to concerns about the cost of the nuclear modernization programs .

it noted that dod currently spends 2% - 3% of its budget to maintain and operate the nuclear force ; this will rise to about 6.4% of its budget at the "highpoint" of the modernization program .

this total does not include the costs associated with nnsa's life extension programs or the recommended investment in recapitalization of nnsa's infrastructure .

moreover , although congress has raised the caps in the budget control act to allow for additional spending on defense , the analysis in the npr does not address questions about whether the nuclear modernization will compete with other dod priorities for scarce funding .

