acting under a court - ordered deadline , on may 14 , 2008 , interior secretary dirk kempthorne announced a decision to list the polar bear as threatened throughout its range , and subsequently issued a final special rule for its conservation .

congress has addressed the regulations .

a provision of the omnibus appropriations bill of 2009 ( h.r .

1105 ) would authorize the secretary of the interior to withdraw or reissue the regulation "without regard to any provision of statute or regulation. .

this means that no rulemaking steps would be required , such as notice and comment periods .

the bill would allow the previous regulations to return to effect .

a proposed amendment ( s.amdt .

599 ) would require the secretaries to follow full rulemaking procedures if they withdrew or re - promulgated the regulations , and require a comment period of at least 60 days .

the decision to list the species under the endangered species act ( esa ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1531 et seq. ) .

highlights the intersection of two significant issues currently before congress — climate change and species protection .

listing decisions must rest solely on the best available scientific understanding of the species .

for this species , a major threat is loss of its primary habitat on the arctic sea ice , an ecosystem that is changing rapidly .

the polar bear , ursus maritimus , is the largest terrestrial carnivore and a top predator , inhabiting circumpolar arctic regions wherever sea ice is present for a substantial part of the year .

polar bears are well adapted to the arctic , where ice thickness can increase or decrease rapidly as well as differ significantly from year to year and between regions .

nineteen known or identified populations of polar bears are estimated to total 20,000 to 25,000 animals ( figure 1 ) .

two of these populations occur within u.s. jurisdiction — the southern beaufort sea population ( shared about equally with canada ) , estimated at 1,526 animals ; and the chukchi / bering seas population ( shared with russia ) , estimated at about 2,000 animals .

robust data on polar bear populations are difficult to obtain .

globally , less than one - third of the world's 19 polar bear populations are known to be declining , and more than one - third are increasing or stable .

in the remaining third , data are insufficient to estimate population trends and their status has not been assessed .

in the united states , the polar bear population shared with canada in the southern beaufort sea may be starting to decline .

in the chukchi sea population , shared with the russia , over - harvest on the russian side is considered a problem .

elsewhere , studies suggest that polar bear numbers are declining in western hudson bay ; a multi - year study , following local reports of more bears being seen in the northern parts of the population range , will determine if the observed decline is the result of a change in distribution or an actual reduction in abundance .

simulations suggest that polar bear populations are also declining in baffin bay , kane basin , and norwegian bay .

the status of polar bears in the central arctic basin — where there are transient bears that normally reside in other regional populations — is unknown .

two of the most southerly polar bear populations , in southern hudson bay and davis strait , show no evidence of population decline over the past two decades of decreasing sea ice .

much of what is known about the polar bear populations and habitat is confined to regions close to shore that have been studied during long summer days , with little known about what happens on drifting sea ice far from shore , especially in winter when there is little or no daylight .

some observers urge caution in interpreting studies of sea ice change that are based primarily on surveys of nearshore regions , rather than the drifting sea ice environment in the central arctic basin , where ice may be thickest .

while the central arctic basin currently is marginal habitat for small numbers of transient bears from other populations , changing climate could cause this area to become more important as a refugium for polar bears .

on may 14 , 2008 , in response to a court - ordered deadline , interior secretary kempthorne announced a decision to list polar bears as threatened under the esa .

the listing decision itself was supported by environmental groups and various scientific societies ; others , including the state of alaska , opposed it , arguing that the science supporting listing was weak .

 ( see discussion below. ) .

in addition , the secretary announced interim final special rules under section 4 ( d ) of esa to address how the agency will handle the consultation that federal agencies must carry out for actions which "may affect" listed species and how the prohibitions on takings under esa's section 9 may be limited .

here , the situation was reversed: environmental groups decried the rules , saying that they violated the esa , and did not sufficiently address recovery of the species ; opponents of listing felt that the special rules would lessen the economic impact of listing , would help prevent the esa being used as a lever to force action on global climate change , and might allow northern economic development greater freedom .

 ( see discussion below. ) .

legal challenges both to the listing and to the special rules were announced shortly after the announcement of the decision .

the actions leading to the listing are described below , followed by an analysis of litigation concerning polar bears , and of controversies concerning the listing itself and the special rule .

the lawsuit by the center for biological diversity ( cbd ) that forced the listing of the polar bear under the esa was neither the first nor the last lawsuit pertaining to the bear .

this section discusses different legal actions brought under several different laws that affect the polar bear: esa , mmpa , the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§ 4321 et seq .

 ) , and the administrative procedure act ( 5 u.s.c .

§ 551 et seq. ) .

the polar bear was listed under the esa as a result of a petition filed by the center for biological diversity ( cbd ) .

the petition was filed in february 2005 , and when the 90-day finding deadline came and went without response by fws , cbd filed suit to force compliance with the statute .

the 90-day finding was published february 9 , 2006 , and pursuant to an agreement reached by cbd and fws , the 12-month finding was published january 9 , 2007 .

another lawsuit was filed in january 2008 when the one - year deadline for a final listing determination passed .

the district court for the northern district of california directed fws to issue a final listing determination on or before may 15 , 2008 , and to make that determination effective immediately , instead of allowing 30 days for the decision to become effective .

on may 15 , 2008 , the polar bear listing was published .

the esa allows "any person" to bring suit against the united states , with some restrictions .

one restriction is that potential plaintiffs must file a notice with the offending agency 60 days before filing suit .

the 60-day notice requirement is to allow the agency to correct any omission prior to going to court or to show that it is already diligently prosecuting the violation .

the citizen suit provision allows any person to seek an injunction against a person or the united states to stop a violation of the act , and allows suits against fws or nmfs specifically for those actions that are non - discretionary , such as missed deadlines .

suits based on the esa but not falling into those categories are not subject to citizen suit under this provision , but might be raised under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

however , esa is not the only law on which lawsuits regarding the polar bear are based .

challenges have also been made under the mmpa and nepa , using the apa as a vehicle to gain access to the courts , as neither of those laws permits citizen suits .

suits filed under these statutes do not need 60 days' notice .

many lawsuits were filed , the details of which are described below .

one suit was brought in the district court for the northern district of california .

the remaining lawsuits were filed in the district court for the district of columbia .

dozens of parties moved to intervene as either plaintiff or defendant in these lawsuits .

intervenors in each district moved to consolidate the litigation .

the special tribunal known as the judicial panel of multidistrict litigation ruled that the actions should be consolidated before one d.c. judge .

supporters of increased protection for polar bears argue that polar bears are the most iconic arctic species , representing the arctic as lions represent africa .

they further assert that it would be irresponsible to let the polar bear become extinct as a result of human action , and would be a terrible blow to the psyche of humankind .

however , some critics suggest that listing polar bears as threatened is premature , with this species being used as a "poster child" for the evils of climate change by the popular press in recognition of polar bears' charismatic appeal .

some believe that other species , such as the less - glamorous walrus , could be facing similar or greater immediate risk .

some scientists also point out that , since polar bears have survived at least two major warming periods over the last 10,000 years , including the intense warming event that ended the last glacial maximum about 8,000 to 9,000 years ago ( when temperatures were believed to have been much warmer than now ) , polar bears and other arctic mammals could be capable of adjusting , adapting , and coping with the current climatic change .

at the end of the last ice age , the northern hemisphere entered an extended period of rapid warming , with temperatures in arctic regions eventually reaching levels several degrees warmer than today .

at that time , the sea ice above north america is known to have retreated substantially , allowing arctic species such as bowhead whales and walrus to move northward into areas of the canadian arctic that they cannot reach today .

the mid - holocene warm period peaked about 11,000-9,000 years ago near alaska and about 8,000-5,000 years ago near greenland and northern europe .

in both areas , temperatures rose rapidly 10° - 15° celsius ( 18° - 27°f ) to a point significantly warmer than present ( about 2.5° celsius warmer ( 4.5°f ) ; but less than the temperatures projected by the intergovernmental panel on climate change for 2100 ) , and about 5° - 10° celsius ( 9° - 18°f ) of that warming took place within 30 years or less .

another significant but shorter warm period occurred about 1,000 years ago , when arctic temperatures were slightly warmer than today .

this warming also triggered sea ice reductions in arctic regions and was accompanied by significant reductions in greenland glaciers , creating so much arable land that viking settlers established farms on the west coast of greenland that were occupied for about 400 years .

there is no evidence to suggest that ice in the arctic basin disappeared entirely during either of these warm periods , which were of equal or greater warming than predicted by the intergovernmental panel on climate change's climate - warming models , nor did any ice - dependent species become extinct .

polar bears and their primary prey existed before the last ice age , and significant populations of them remain today .

the tight association of polar bears and their prey species with moving sea ice may give them a flexibility that land - based carnivores do not have .

critics , however , counter that polar bears today are not coping with changing climate alone , but also face a host of other human - induced factors — including shipping , oil and gas exploration , contaminants , and reduced prey populations — that compound the threat to their continued existence .

