many european countries , especially those in western europe , have experienced significant influxes of muslim immigrants over the last half - century .

although studies indicate that europe's share of the global muslim population is relatively small ( 3% or less ) , they also suggest that the number of muslims in europe is increasing as a result of continued muslim immigration and higher birth rates among muslims than non - muslims .

while the growing presence of muslims in europe poses a wide range of social and economic policy questions for european governments , the realization that some segments of europe's muslim population may be susceptible to radicalization and terrorist recruitment has also sparked security concerns on both sides of the atlantic in the decade since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states .

the vast majority of muslims in europe are not involved in radical activities , and the july 2011 killing spree in norway by a far - right extremist serves as a stark reminder that the perpetrators of violent extremism may be of any ethnicity , religion , or political ideology .

however , events such as the march 2004 madrid bombings by an al qaeda - inspired group of north africans , the november 2004 murder of dutch filmmaker theo van gogh by a young dutch muslim extremist , and the july 2005 attacks on london's mass transit system carried out by young muslims born and / or raised in the united kingdom , have brought the issue of "homegrown" islamist extremism to the forefront of european political debate .

in particular , such incidents have raised questions about whether european governments have done enough to promote the integration of muslims into mainstream european society .

many experts believe that while far from the sole cause of radicalization and terrorism , past failures to fully integrate muslims into european civic , political , and economic life may leave some european muslims more vulnerable to extremist ideologies .

european governments have responded with a mix of strategies aimed , on the one hand , at improving the integration of muslims , and on the other hand , at strengthening security measures and tightening immigration and asylum policies to prevent radicalization and combat terrorism .

u.s. officials have been concerned that u.s. allies in europe have become targets of islamist terrorism .

over the past decade , european countries have been strong law enforcement partners for the united states in the fight against terrorism ; many have also supported u.s. military interventions in afghanistan and iraq .

u.s. officials worry that some attacks or attempted attacks by islamist terrorists in europe are aimed at influencing european public opinion and changing european foreign policies , especially those that seek to cooperate with or buttress u.s. efforts in the middle east .

some analysts , for example , point to the march 2004 madrid bombings three days before spanish parliamentary elections , which resulted in a defeat for the incumbent conservative government that had backed the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 ; the new socialist government withdrew spanish forces from iraq shortly after assuming power .

others assert that spain's involvement in the u.s. - led war in iraq was long opposed by a large majority of the spanish public , and that the socialists had made a campaign promise to withdraw spanish troops from iraq long before the terrorist attacks .

moreover , u.s. authorities and some members of congress worry that europe may be a potential recruiting ground for attacks against the united states or u.s. interests abroad .

since the 2001 terrorist attacks , u.s. and european leaders and law enforcement authorities have cooperated closely to investigate terrorist suspects , prevent terrorist attacks , and deny terrorists sanctuary on both sides of the atlantic .

despite some u.s. - european differences on issues ranging from data protection to terrorist detainee policies , u.s. and european officials have worked together to enhance police and judicial cooperation , improve information - sharing , stem terrorist financing , and strengthen border controls and transport security in an effort to better combat terrorism .

in the last few years , u.s. and european policymakers have also begun focusing greater attention on ways to prevent radicalization by undermining the appeal of violent extremist ideology .

according to the u.s .

coordinator for counterterrorism , daniel benjamin , such "countering violent extremism" measures ( or cve , as often termed by u.s. officials ) seek to "stop those most at risk of radicalization from becoming terrorists" through social programs , counter - ideology initiatives , and working with civil society to de - legitimize the al qaeda narrative .

the united states has sought to partner with other countries , including many in europe , to share information and discuss "best practices" aimed at preventing radicalization and countering violent extremism .

in 2010 , the united states and the european union ( eu ) convened an expert - level dialogue for the first time on preventing violent extremism .

previous congresses have held hearings on islamist extremism in europe .

congressional interest in how european countries are managing their muslim populations has been motivated , in part , by concerns that violent islamist extremists with european citizenship may enter the united states under the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) .

the vwp allows for short - term , visa - free travel to the united states for citizens of participating countries , many of which are in europe .

u.s. officials note that zacarias moussaoui , the "20 th " september 11 hijacker , and richard reid , the airplane "shoe bomber," travelled to the united states on the vwp .

although successive u.s. administrations and many members of congress continue to support the vwp as a means to facilitate legitimate transatlantic travel , tourism , and commerce , the 110 th congress instituted changes to the vwp that , among other measures , seek to strengthen its security components .

this report examines policies aimed at promoting integration , combating terrorism , and countering violent extremism in five european countries with significant muslim populations: france , germany , the netherlands , spain , and the united kingdom .

all of these countries are key u.s. allies in the fight against global terrorism .

all five countries are also members of the european union .

although responsibility for shaping laws and policies related to integration and countering radicalization largely rests with the national governments of the eu's 27 member states , the eu's role is far from negligible .

eu member states have come to believe that the eu can and should play a role in encouraging good integration practices .

also notable since 2001 are eu efforts to boost its collective ability to counter terrorism and combat violent extremism .

as such , the report includes a section on eu policies that may significantly affect muslim populations .

given the wide breadth of potential economic , social , and security policies that could be employed to promote integration and counter extremism , the various policies and programs discussed in each country section should be considered illustrative and not exhaustive .

moreover , the report focuses mostly on european domestic policies to promote integration , prevent radicalization , and combat terrorism .

it does not deal extensively with european foreign policies or efforts to engage the wider muslim world , although these elements are also viewed by many as crucial to countering violent extremism and terrorism .

over the last several years , european governments have come to recognize the necessity of better integrating their muslim populations , both to reduce societal tensions and inequalities , and as part of their efforts to help prevent radicalization and counter violent extremism .

as noted previously , the vast majority of muslims in europe are not involved in extremist activities .

however , the frequent disruption of terrorist plots and recruitment efforts in europe , and incidents such as the december 2010 suicide bombing in sweden and the march 2011 shootings of u.s. service personnel in germany , continue to concern european policymakers , as well as their u.s. counterparts , given the role of many european countries as key u.s. allies in the fight against global terrorism .

despite the strong political commitment by many european leaders to tackle the parallel challenges of improving muslim integration , curbing radicalization , and combating violent extremism , european governments continue to grapple with a number of policy issues .

regarding integration , for example , analysts observe that a central question for many european countries is whether the burden lies primarily with european governments and societies to essentially make room for a more diverse array of cultures and customs , or with muslims and other ethnic minorities to adapt their ways of life to european political and cultural traditions .

some commentators assert that until recently , most european countries largely adopted the former approach , but that european governments and publics are increasingly turning toward the latter and requiring more assimilation by muslims and other non - european ethnic groups .

at the same time , most european countries — with the exception of france — seem reluctant to fully embrace assimilation .

rather , they appear to be searching for a policy that upholds the values placed on diversity and tolerance but which falls somewhere in between the "failed" multicultural policies of the past and complete assimilation .

most european governments appear to recognize the value of distinguishing between policies aimed at promoting integration and those that seek to counter radicalization , but in practice , the line between them can often be blurry and some policies may be working at cross - purposes .

while some experts view islamic dress bans as a means to encourage secularism and the integration of muslims , others see them largely as an attempt to stem radicalization and as doing more harm than good because of the feelings of discrimination they may engender .

many european governments also continue to struggle with determining which muslim groups and community organizations they should engage with as they attempt to encourage greater dialogue and muslim political participation .

some muslim leaders considered moderate by many in the muslim community have not been invited to cooperate with certain european governments because of positions they have taken in support of groups such as hamas or hezbollah .

on the other hand , a number of muslim leaders involved in various government discussions may be viewed by some muslims , especially younger ones , as co - opted opportunists or sell - outs .

furthermore , european policymakers are encountering difficulties in crafting strategies to counter violent extremism and prevent radicalization given that studies indicate that the radicalization process is a highly individualized one .

some observers continue to stress past failures by european governments to adequately integrate their muslim communities and the feelings of marginalization this may produce as key factors in making some european muslims more vulnerable to extremist ideologies .

others point out that european muslims who have engaged in terrorism have disparate socio - economic backgrounds , with some being seemingly well - integrated and well - educated .

a number of experts contend that while encouraging better integration of muslims is an important societal need for many european countries , other factors are equally if not more important in preventing radicalization , such as countering the narrative that some violent extremists use to justify their actions .

devising public policies to target the wide range of potential causes of and avenues toward violent extremism is no easy task , and assessing their implementation is also proving difficult .

finally , balancing measures to combat violent islamist extremism and terrorist recruitment with european democratic ideals , civil liberty protections , and human rights concerns remains challenging .

for example , the extent to which liberal societies should tolerate , in the name of free speech , those who preach intolerance is a key question for many european governments , particularly those with histories of authoritarianism and state repression .

countries such as germany and spain remain cautious about limiting the rights of freedom of speech and assembly , and wary of stronger surveillance and security policies that could intrude on the right to privacy or on religious freedoms .

for most european countries , efforts in the integration field and those aimed at countering violent extremism remain in their early stages .

successful implementation will require continued political will by european governments and the determination , in some countries , to tackle long - ingrained societal attitudes that largely continue to perceive muslims ( whether european citizens or not ) as outsiders .

doing so , however , will also require european publics to confront the questions of who is european and what it means to be european .

some analysts note that european leaders would be well advised to encourage greater public discussion about europe's future identity , especially in light of the july 2011 killings in norway by a right - wing extremist disturbed by what he viewed as the "islamification" of europe .

others point out that in addition to improving measures to counter islamist extremists , european security services must pay more attention to the threats posed by domestic radicals on both the extreme right and left .

as noted previously , u.s. officials have expressed concerns since the 2001 terrorist attacks that europe might be a launching point for future attacks on the united states and u.s. interests abroad .

successive u.s. administrations and members of congress have welcomed european initiatives to promote better integration of muslims , curtail islamist extremism , and improve u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation in the hopes that such efforts will ultimately help prevent future terrorist incidents and root out terrorist cells in europe and beyond .

u.s. interests in how european countries are managing their growing muslim populations and european strategies to prevent radicalization have also been motivated by concerns about the u.s. visa waiver program , especially given that terrorists with european citizenship have entered u.s. territory on the vwp .

over the last few years , u.s. and european policymakers have sought to deepen cooperation on measures aimed at countering violent extremism , and to share "best practices" on ways to stem radicalization and disrupt terrorist recruitment efforts .

at times , some u.s. policymakers and analysts have worried that a main goal of terrorist attacks in europe by islamist extremists has been to alter european foreign policies , especially those of european countries that have been closely aligned with the united states in the fight against terrorism and on other issues in the greater middle east , such as the israeli - palestinian conflict .

however , in general , most experts assess that european countries have not significantly changed their counterterrorism approaches or broader foreign policies in direct response to a terrorist attack ; any shifts in european policies usually correspond more closely with european elections and changes in government .

nevertheless , some commentators opine that in the longer term , europe's growing muslim populations may make some european allies more cautious about supporting u.s. policies that could risk inflaming their own "muslim streets. .

analysts also note that europe's struggle with its own identity as it grapples with integrating muslims into european society has called into question a long - standing u.s. foreign policy goal: promoting eu membership for turkey , a predominantly muslim country .

for many years , the united states has advocated eu membership for turkey , a strategic ally at the crossroads of europe and the middle east , as a way to anchor turkey firmly in the west and debunk the notion of a clash of civilizations between islam and the west .

although some eu member states support eventual turkish membership , as noted previously , other eu countries and many eu citizens are hesitant given turkey's size , the relatively large portion of its population considered poor in economic terms , and its muslim culture and heritage .

as a result , some commentators are increasingly doubtful about turkey's long - term eu prospects .

the eu maintains that the "shared objective" of the ongoing accession negotiations with turkey is membership , but also stresses that it will be an "open - ended process , the outcome of which cannot be guaranteed. .

the united states and other countries have long sought to prevent the radicalization of individuals to limit security threats posed by secular and religious terrorism .

terrorism carried out in the name of islam or of muslims has been of increasing interest to citizens and governments in the united states and europe as a result of attacks by al qaeda , its sympathizers , and other islamist groups with discrete agendas .

islam , muslims , and islamists .

islam is a monotheistic religion with an estimated 1.6 billion observers , who refer to themselves as muslims .

muslims believe that in the early 7 th century ce , a prophet named mohammed in mecca , in what is now western saudi arabia , recited guidance directly from allah ( the arabic word for god ) that completed the divine instructions first given to other prophets recognized in judaism and christianity .

the islamic holy book , known as the quran , contains the revelations recited by mohammed , as compiled in the early decades of the islamic faith .

today , the global community of muslims includes a variety of distinct sects and spans ethnic , linguistic , and geographic boundaries .

while some muslims hold permissive or syncretic views to which various fundamentalists may object , other muslims support strict social and religious practices that some muslims and non - muslims may regard as extreme .

the term islamist refers to groups and individuals who support a formal political role for islam through the implementation of islamic religious law by the state , political action through a religious party , or the creation of a religious system of governance .

islamists differ in their theological programs and political priorities .

islamists may use nonviolent or violent tactics in pursuit of local , national , or transnational agendas .

violent extremism .

the obama administration uses the term "violent extremism" to refer to ideologies , secular or religious , that support or encourage ideologically motivated - violence to further political goals .

according to the administration , supporters of "[violent extremist] groups and their associated ideologies come from different socioeconomic backgrounds , ethnic and religious communities , and areas of the country , making it difficult to predict where violent extremist narratives will resonate. .

this approach places violent islamist extremism within a larger context of violent extremism and related policy responses .

in the united states and europe , some government programs to combat violent extremism in islamic communities work directly with theologically conservative islamic groups and islamists who reject violence: these groups' religious beliefs are thought to lend credibility to de - radicalization efforts among radicalized individuals .

some critics question the wisdom of this conceptual approach .

one critical argument suggests that violent islamist extremism is distinct from other forms of extremist ideology and requires a specific and tailored response .

another critical argument contends that conservative muslims and islamists should not be embraced as allies in countering violent extremism because they may share the political beliefs and long - term goals of violent islamist extremists and differ only in terms of their preferred tactics .

other critics find certain islamic beliefs and practices generally objectionable on religious or secular grounds and argue that what they regard as "religious extremism" should be the focus of government scrutiny and concern regardless of evidence of groups' or individuals' direct support for or involvement in political violence .

radicalization and recruitment .

ongoing academic and public sector research efforts seek to understand the reasons that individuals embrace or reject violent extremism .

studies of al qaeda sympathizers involved in recent terrorism cases suggest that the specific radicalization processes for individuals often differ , but some shared characteristics can be discerned .

foremost among these characteristics are an individual's parallel feelings of personal marginalization , political dissent , and moral outrage that are given structure through a worldview that sees the west as conspiring against muslims or islam .

a large body of ideological material perpetuates this worldview , and some of this material encourages individuals to support violent groups or commit violence individually .

increasingly , officials observe that individual supporters of al qaeda self - mobilize through small networks of like - minded individuals whether in - person or via the internet , rather than as a response to direct recruiting efforts by a centralized terrorist apparatus .

such small networks may consist of friends , relatives , neighbors , students , or fellow worshippers , but some analysts suggest that in many cases linkages among members of violent extremist groups are rooted in other shared experiences or pre - existing relationships .

other studies further suggest that "thrill seeking" impulses and anti - establishment sentiment among young people — perhaps more universal factors than the appeal of a specific religious or political ideology — are key factors driving the embrace of violent extremist ideologies among muslims and non - muslims .

the variety of paths toward radicalization and the diversity of communities that are the focus of counter - extremism efforts in different countries suggest that tailored , flexible responses are necessary .

