in response to requests by several members of congress in january 2005 , the u.s .

copyright office agreed to examine issues surrounding "orphan works. .

orphan works are copyrighted works whose owners are difficult or impossible to identify and / or locate .

the copyright office issued a notice of inquiry requesting public comment from interested parties on the subject .

the office accepted written comments and hosted public roundtable discussions on the topic .

in january 2006 , it issued its report on orphan works , which includes proposed legislative language to address the problem identified .

hearings were held in the 109 th and 110 th congresses on the orphan works problem .

this report surveys the findings of the report on orphan works ( "report" ) , considers the copyright office's proposed amendment to the copyright act to address the issue , and analyzes introduced orphan works legislation in the 109 th and 110 th congresses .

no similar legislation has yet been introduced in the 111 th congress .

by conducting stakeholder discussions and reviewing extensive submissions of comments , the u.s .

copyright office's study considers the landscape surrounding orphan works .

at the outset , it sets forth what were not considered to be orphan work problems , namely , situations where a prospective user contacted the owner but did not receive permission to use the work .

the analysis also narrows the situations in which it views orphan works as presenting an insurmountable problem to prospective users .

it delineates several provisions of the copyright law that might permit use of an orphan work ( or any copyrighted work ) absent an owner's permission: the "idea / expression" dichotomy , rooted in the first amendment and codified at 17 u.s.c .

102 ( b ) , prohibits copyright protection for ideas , procedures , concepts , etc .

that may otherwise be embodied in a copyright - protected work .

this jurisdictional limitation on copyright protection may be especially useful to prospective users of works of non - fiction , and "utilitarian" works like computer programs , textbooks , manuals , etc .

fair use , codified at 17 u.s.c .

§ 107 , permits limited use of copyright - protected work for purposes such as criticism , comment , news reporting , teaching , scholarship , or research .

other express exemptions in the copyright act at §§ 108 , 110 , and 117 allow specified uses of copyrighted works associated with preservation , education , and religious activities .

the report identifies many obstacles to identifying and locating copyright owners and assigns general categories of uses that appear to be most impacted by orphan works , namely , uses by "subsequent creators" who may create a derivative commercial work incorporating the orphan work ; "large scale access uses" by institutions such as libraries that make available a wide body of work to the public ; "enthusiast" uses by individuals who have an interest in a particular work , subject , or artist ; and "private" uses , the most common illustration being someone who wishes to reproduce a family photograph or make a potentially infringing use of obsolete or orphaned computer software .

the report explains that the 1976 copyright act arguably exacerbated the orphan works problem by abandoning formalities such as renewal registration , and why the international copyright regime to which the united states is a signatory both precludes a re - adoption of formalities and limits the scope of permissible exemptions to the copyright holders' rights .

the study reviews solutions proposed by those involved in the orphan works dialogue .

it groups and considers them in four categories , described in the report as follows: • solutions that already exist under current law and practice .

these were usually noted only in passing ; commenters ( even commenters opposed to any orphan works provision ) did not take the position that the existing law is sufficient to solve the orphan works problem .

• non - legislative solutions .

an example of a solution in this category is a proposal for improved databases for locating owners of works .

these solutions were also usually noted only in passing , and were not advanced as sufficient to fix the problem .

• legislative solutions that involve a limitation on remedies when a user uses an orphan work .

the most substantive comments fell into this category , and most of the comments by professional organizations or academics fell into this category .

• other legislative solutions .

examples of proposed solutions in this category are deeming all orphaned works to be in the public domain , or changing the tax or bankruptcy codes to reduce the factors that cause orphan works to come into existence in the first place .

it also considers several of the solutions proposed .

for example , one approach might be that utilized by the canadian copyright board , which reviews applications for use of orphan works and approves them prior to use .

this method receives support by some for the certainty that it provides and opposition by others who view it as administratively cumbersome , expensive , and largely ineffective in promoting actual use of orphan works .

no legislation relating to orphan works has yet been introduced in the 111 th congress as of the date of this report .

what follows is an analysis of orphan works bills that were considered by the 109 th and 110 th congresses .

although congress has not yet passed orphan works legislation , recent developments in the private sector have further increased public interest in the orphan works problem .

specifically , questions have been raised about the fate of orphan works under the proposed settlement agreement that would resolve litigation regarding google's proposal to scan , digitize , and index millions of print books in the collections of several major libraries , without seeking the permission of the copyright owners of those books .

authors and publishers had brought a class action lawsuit to enjoin google's reproduction of the books and to recover monetary damages for the company's alleged copyright infringement .

a settlement agreement was first announced in october 2008 , but the terms of the settlement prompted questions about google's potential monopolization of book searching , the treatment of orphan works , protection of searchers' privacy , and the rights of foreign authors .

a revised settlement agreement was submitted to the reviewing court in november 2009 .

the agreement calls for google to compensate rights holders for prior and future uses of their work .

in addition , google would be responsible for funding the creation and initial operations of a not - for - profit entity , called the registry , which would represent rights holders in negotiating future uses of their content with google .

however , some commentators are concerned that , with respect to books that may be orphan works , the absence of known or identifiable rights holders effectively means that these particular books digitized by google could not be further used without the agreement of the registry and / or google .

others have criticized the settlement for , in their opinion , "unilaterally giving all digital rights to orphan works to google. .

supporters of the settlement noted that many alleged orphan works are not , in fact , orphans , and that the settlement will prompt their owners to identify themselves , or reveal that the works are in the public domain , thus helping to resolve the orphan works problem .

others argue that orphan works concerns are far less for books compared to other copyrightable subject matter: first , finding the rights owner of a book is not as daunting as many seem to believe .

books do not present the classic orphan works problem , photographs do .

photographs , both in the physical world and online , often become separated from their identifying information .

this makes finding the rights owner a near impossibility .

books , however , always contain author and publisher information , and there's often a copyright registration record to help locate the rights owner .

second , although a copyright - protected book may have been published as long ago as 1923 , the vast majority copyright - protected books in our libraries are far more recent .

in a hearing before the house judiciary committee in september 2009 , the register of copyrights offered her views about the proposed settlement's impact on future orphan works legislation: congress should be particularly concerned about the settlement since it would interfere with the longstanding efforts of congress and many other parties to address the issue of orphan works .

the broad scope of the out - of - print provisions and the large class of copyright owners they would affect will dramatically impinge on the exclusive rights of authors , publishers , their heirs and successors .

such alteration should be undertaken by congress if it is undertaken at all .

indeed , this committee has already invested significant time in evaluating the orphan works problem and weighing possible solutions .

that process is not over .

the google book settlement would frustrate the committee's efforts and make it exceedingly difficult for congress to move forward .

a much more productive path would be for google to engage with this committee and with other stakeholders to discuss whether and to what degree a diligent search for the rights holder should be a precondition of a user receiving the benefits of orphan works legislation , or whether a solution that is more like a compulsory license may make sense for those engaged in mass scanning .

whatever the outcome , congress is much better situated than the judiciary to consider such important and far - reaching changes to the copyright system .

in defending the settlement , a representative of google asserted that the settlement "is a strong complement to , and not a substitute for , orphan works legislation. .

he disagreed with the register's claim that the settlement would change copyright law: the settlement represents the resolution of a long and hard - fought litigation among multiple parties with divergent interests .

the suggestion that the settlement usurps the role of congress to set copyright policy because the suit took the form of a class action is flatly wrong .

the settlement does not establish new copyright law ; it is not even a determination on the merits of copyright law .

all the settlement represents is the means by which the class of rightsholders decided to resolve the lawsuit .

it remains to be seen whether the court's consideration of the settlement agreement in the google library project litigation affects the course of potential orphan works legislation in the 111 th congress .

the court granted preliminary approval of the revised agreement on november 19 , 2009 , and scheduled a final fairness hearing on it for february 18 , 2010 .

the court will consider any objections from class members , as well as conduct an independent review of the proposed agreement , in determining whether to grant final approval .

