article i of the constitution , in sections 2 and 3 , authorizes the house of representatives and senate to choose their own officers .

the number of such congressional support personnel , as well as their specific responsibilities , is left to the discretion of each chamber .

over time , both chambers have authorized a number of offices to assist them , collectively or individually , in their work .

these offices perform legislative , administrative , financial , and ceremonial functions .

they also ensure the protection of congress and preserve its institutional memory .

the roles of house support offices have been established by house rules , statute , and custom .

they may also be shaped by congressional authorities with oversight , funding , or appointing responsibility for the offices .

the house administration committee , for example , has jurisdiction over legislation pertaining to services to the house .

the committee is also charged with providing policy direction for the inspector general and oversight of the clerk , sergeant at arms , chief administrative officer , and the inspector general .

the committee may approve a reorganization of these offices .

it also frequently distributes "dear colleague" letters to communicate its response to internal operational issues relating to these and other support offices .

the house appropriations committee , subcommittee on legislative branch , through its consideration of the annual spending measure for the legislative branch , also shapes the chamber's internal operations .

guidance from the committee may be found in hearings , the house report accompanying the legislative branch appropriations bill , the bill text , and the conference committee report .

the speaker , as the appointing authority for some of these offices and as a member of the house office building commission , also has influence over their work .

this report is an overview of the relationships among , and different roles and functions performed by , the "daily operations" offices in the u.s. house of representatives .

the organizational authorities are also addressed .

certain entities shared with the senate , like the legislative support agencies , are included in this report , although it focuses whenever possible on their service to the house .

offices with responsibilities in more than one area are addressed in successive sections .

more detailed information on select offices is available in additional congressional research service products identified throughout .

members of the u.s. house of representatives and their staff have numerous avenues for assistance in legislative matters .

support offices are available to participate in all stages of the legislative process , from background research on public policy issues , to the drafting of potential bills , through the submission , consideration , and evaluation of proposed legislation .

the three legislative branch agencies , the congressional research service ( crs ) , congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and the government accountability office ( gao ) , serve both chambers .

other legislative support offices are dedicated mainly to serving the house of representatives .

with four house office buildings , approximately 10,000 employees , and visits from dignitaries and tourists alike , the u.s. house of representatives has over time developed a means of ensuring the institution's smooth operation .

the administrative support offices address various needs of members and staff , ensure the proper maintenance of the house facilities , and facilitate the exchange of information both within the capitol and beyond .

three support offices , including the inspector general , the office of compliance , and the office of general counsel , work to ensure that the house of representatives maintains proper oversight over its internal activities and complies with legal requirements regarding employment and other practices .

a number of offices share responsibility for maintaining the ceremonial traditions of the u.s. house of representatives and the preservation of its institutional memory .

the capitol police , under the direction of the capitol police board , has been delegated primary responsibility for security on capitol hill .

the house and senate appropriations committees provide oversight of funding , administration , operations , and policies , with the committee on house administration and the speaker providing additional oversight on matters pertaining to the house .

two other offices , including the house sergeant at arms and the office of the attending physician , work with the police to ensure the safety and comfort of members , their staff , and visitors .

along with the architect of the capitol , the sergeant at arms and doorkeeper of the senate , and the chief of the capitol police ( acting in an ex - officio , non - voting capacity ) , the house sergeant at arms provides guidance for security measures and policy across the capitol by serving as a member of the capitol police board .

the legislative branch appropriations act for fy2003 redefined the board , stating that its purpose "is to oversee and support the capitol police in its mission and to advance coordination between the capitol police and the sergeant at arms of the house of representatives and the sergeant at arms and doorkeeper of the senate , in their law enforcement capacities , and the congress. .

the office of the sergeant at arms coordinates daily security needs with the capitol police .

duties include arranging for protective details for house leadership , requesting security clearances for appropriate staff , coordinating a security presence at hearings upon request , and supervising logistics for major events involving members .

the sergeant at arms also works with law enforcement coordinators ( lecs ) from each office .

the sergeant at arms of the house of representatives is also required to "attend the house during its sittings and maintain order under the direction of the speaker or other presiding officer. .

this is a duty the sergeant at arms has executed since 1789 .

the sergeant at arms is also charged with enforcing the rules of access to the hall of the house as well as the room above it .

the office of the attending physician provides emergency medical assistance for members of congress , justices of the supreme court , staff , and visitors .

care may range from performing minor first aid services to administering treatment until a patient may be transported to a local hospital .

the office also participates in the planning for , and response to , any disaster that may occur .

after the anthrax attacks in 2001 , for example , the office coordinated the testing and care of affected staffers .

the office of the attending physician offers cpr and first aid courses and arranges educational health fairs for congressional staff .

the office also provides travel immunization advice for official congressional travel .

additional services are offered to members for an annual fee .

services include routine exams , consultations , and certain diagnostic tests .

the office does not provide vision or dental care , and prescriptions may be written but not dispensed .

fees are established by the committee on house administration , upon the recommendation of an independent consulting actuary .

fees , and further descriptions of services , may be announced in "dear colleague" letters .

the office is led by a medical officer from the u.s. navy , a tradition begun in 1928 .

expenses are provided for as a joint expense of the house and senate in the annual legislative branch appropriations acts .

the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act provided an allowance for the attending physician , a senior medical officer , three medical officers , and 13 additional assistants .

while these personnel remain on the payroll of the navy , the legislative branch bills include a "reimbursement to the department of the navy for expenses incurred for staff and equipment assigned to the office of the attending physician," to be credited to the applicable appropriation .

