energy tax policy involves the use of the government's main fiscal instruments — taxes ( financial disincentives ) and tax subsidies ( or incentives ) — to alter the allocation or configuration of energy resources .

in theory , energy taxes and subsidies , like tax policy instruments in general , are intended either to correct a problem or distortion in the energy markets or to achieve some social , economic ( efficiency , equity , or even macroeconomic ) , environmental , or fiscal objective .

in practice , however , energy tax policy in the united states is made in a political setting , being determined by the views and interests of the key players in this setting: politicians , special interest groups , bureaucrats , and academic scholars .

this implies that the policy does not generally , if ever , adhere to the principles of economic or public finance theory alone ; that more often than not , energy tax policy may compound existing distortions , rather than correct them .

the idea of applying tax policy instruments to the energy markets is not new , but until the 1970s , energy tax policy had been little used , except for the oil and gas industry .

recurrent energy - related problems since the 1970s — oil embargoes , oil price and supply shocks , wide petroleum price variations and price spikes , large geographical price disparities , tight energy supplies , and rising oil import dependence , as well as increased concern for the environment — have caused policymakers to look toward energy taxes and subsidies with greater frequency .

comprehensive energy policy legislation containing numerous tax incentives , and some tax increases on the oil industry , was signed on august 8 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

the law , the energy policy act of 2005 , contained about $15 billion in energy tax incentives over 11 years , including numerous tax incentives for the supply of conventional fuels .

however , record oil industry profits , due primarily to high crude oil and refined oil product prices , and the 2006 mid - term elections , which gave the control of the congress to the democratic party , has changed the mood of policymakers .

instead of stimulating the traditional fuels industry — oil , gas , and electricity from coal — in addition to incentivizing alternative fuels and energy conservation , the mood now is to take away , or rescind , the 2005 tax incentives and use the money to further stimulate alternative fuels and energy conservation .

a minor step in this direction was made , on may 17 , 2006 , when president bush signed a $70 billion tax reconciliation bill ( p.l .

109-222 ) .

this bill included a provision that further increased taxes on major integrated oil companies by extending the depreciation recovery period for geological and geophysical costs from two to five years ( thus taking back some of the benefits enacted under the 2005 law ) .

and currently , the major tax writing committees in both houses are considering further , but more significant , tax increases on the oil and gas industry to fund additional tax cuts for the alternative fuels and energy conservation industries .

these bills are being considered as part of the debate over new versions of comprehensive energy policy legislation in the 110 th congress ( h.r .

6 ) .

this report discusses the history , current posture , and outlook for federal energy tax policy .

it also discusses current energy tax proposals and major energy tax provisions enacted in the 109 th congress .

 ( for a general economic analysis of energy tax policy , see crs report rl30406 , energy tax policy: an economic analysis , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the history of federal energy tax policy can be divided into four eras: the oil and gas period from 1916 to 1970 , the energy crisis period of the 1970s , the free - market era of the reagan administration , and the post - reagan era — including the period since 1998 , which has witnessed a plethora of energy tax proposals to address recurring energy market problems .

several negative energy market developments since about 1998 , characterized by some as an "energy crisis," have led to congressional action on comprehensive energy proposals , which included numerous energy tax incentives .

the 109 th congress enacted the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) , which included the most extensive amendments to u.s. energy tax laws since 1992 , and the tax relief and health care act of 2006 , which extended the energy tax subsidies enacted under the 2005 energy policy act ( epact05 ) .

the above background discussion of energy tax policy may be conveniently summarized in table 2 , which shows current energy tax provisions — both special ( or targeted ) energy tax subsidies and targeted energy taxes — and related revenue effects .

a minus sign ( " - " ) indicates revenue losses , which means that the provision is a tax subsidy or incentive , intended to increase the subsidized activity ( energy conservation measures or the supply of some alternative and renewable fuel or technology ) ; no minus sign means that the provision is a tax , which means that it should reduce supply of , or demand for , the taxed activity ( either conventional fuel supply , energy demand , or the demand for energy - using technologies , such as cars ) .

note that the table defines those special or targeted tax subsidies or incentives as those that are due to provisions in the tax law that apply only to that particular industry and not to others .

thus , for example , in the case of the oil and gas industry , the table excludes tax subsidies and incentives of current law that may apply generally to all businesses but that may also confer tax benefits to it .

there are numerous such provisions in the tax code ; a complete listing of them is beyond the scope of this report .

however , the following example illustrates the point: the current system of depreciation allows the writeoff of equipment and structures somewhat faster than would be the case under both general accounting principles and economic theory ; the joint committee on taxation treats the excess of depreciation deductions over the alternative depreciation system as a tax subsidy ( or "tax expenditure" ) .

in fy2006 , the jct estimates that the aggregate revenue loss from this accelerated depreciation deduction ( including the expensing under irc §179 ) is $6.7 billion .

a certain , but unknown , fraction of this revenue loss or tax benefits accrues to the domestic oil and gas industry , but separate estimates are unavailable .

this point applies to all the industries reflected in table 2 .

continued high crude oil and petroleum product prices and oil and gas industry profits , and the political realignment of the congress resulting from the 2006 congressional elections continued the energy policy shift toward increased taxes on the oil and gas industry , and the emphasis on energy conservation and alternative and renewable fuels rather than conventional hydrocarbons .

in the 110 th congress , the shift became reflected in proposals to reduce oil and gas production incentives or subsidies , which were initially incorporated into , but ultimately dropped from comprehensive energy policy legislation .

in the debate over these two comprehensive energy bills , raising taxes on the oil and gas industry , by either repealing tax incentives enacted under epact05 , by introducing new taxes on the industry , or by other means was a key objective , motivated by the feeling that additional tax incentives were unnecessary — record crude oil and gasoline prices and industry profits provides sufficient ( if not excessive ) incentives .

in early december 2007 , it appeared that the congressional conferees had reached agreement on another comprehensive energy bill , the energy independence and security act ( h.r .

6 ) , and particularly on the controversial energy tax provisions .

the democratic leadership in the 110 th congress proposed to eliminate or reduce tax subsidies for oil and gas and use the additional revenues to increase funding for their energy policy priorities: energy efficiency and alternative and renewable fuels ( i.e. , reducing fossil fuel demand ) rather than an energy ( oil and gas ) supply increase .

in addition , congressional leaders wanted to extend many of the energy efficiency and renewable fuels tax incentives that either had expired or were about to expire .

the compromise on the energy tax title in h.r .

6 proposed to raise taxes by about $21 billion to fund extensions and liberalization of existing energy tax incentives .

however , the senate stripped the controversial tax title from its version of the comprehensive energy bill ( h.r .

6 ) and then passed the bill ( 86-8 ) on december 13 , 2007 , leading to the president's signing of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) , on december 19 , 2007 .

the only tax - related provisions that survived were ( 1 ) an extension of the federal unemployment tax act surtax for one year , raising about $1.5 billion , ( 2 ) higher penalties for failure to file partnership returns , increasing revenues by $655 million , and ( 3 ) an extension of the amortization period for geological and geophysical expenditures from five to seven years , raising $103 million in revenues .

the latter provision was the only tax increase on the oil and gas industry in the final bill .

those three provisions would offset the $2.1 billion in lost excise tax revenues going into the federal highway trust fund as a result of the implementation of the revised corporate average fuel economy standards .

the decision to strip the much larger $21 billion tax title stemmed from a white house veto threat and the senate's inability to get the votes required to end debate on the bill earlier in the day .

senate majority leader harry reid's ( d - nev. ) effort to invoke cloture fell short by one vote , in a 59-40 tally .

since then , the congress had tried several times to pass energy tax legislation , and thus avoid the impending expiration of several popular energy tax incentives , such as the "wind" energy tax credit under internal revenue code ( irc ) §45 , which , since its enactment in 1992 , had lapsed three times only to be reinstated .

several energy tax bills have passed the house but not the senate , where on several occasions , the failure to invoke cloture failed to bring up the legislation for consideration .

senate republicans objected to the idea of raising taxes to offset extension of expiring energy tax provisions , which they consider to be an extension of current tax policy rather than new tax policy .

in addition , senate republicans objected to raising taxes on the oil and gas industry , such as by repealing the ( irc ) §199 deduction , and by streamlining the foreign tax credit for oil companies .

the bush administration repeatedly threatened to veto these types of energy tax bills , in part because of their proposed increased taxes on the oil and gas industry .

u.s. congress , senate budget committee , tax expenditures: compendium of background material on individual provision , committee print , december 2006 , 109 th cong. , 2 nd sess .

u.s. congress , joint tax committee , " description of the tax provisions in h.r .

2776 , the renewable energy and energy conservation tax act of 2007 , " june 19 , 2007 ( jcx - 35-07 ) .

u.s. congress , joint tax committee , " description of the chairman ' s modification to the provisions of the energy advancement and investment act of 2007 , " june 19 , 2007 ( jcx - 33-07 ) .

u.s. congress , joint tax committee , description and technical explanation of the conference agreement of h.r .

6 , title xiii , " energy tax policy tax incentives act of 2005 , " july 27 , 2005 .

crs report rs21935 , the black lung excise tax on coal , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33302 , energy policy act of 2005: summary and analysis of enacted provisions , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

 ( pdf ) crs report rl30406 , energy tax policy: an economic analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30406 , energy tax policy: an economic analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33763 , oil and gas tax subsidies: current status and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22558 , tax credits for hybrid vehicles , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22322 , taxes and fiscal year 2006 budget reconciliation: a brief summary , by david l. brumbaugh .

crs report rl33305 , the crude oil windfall profit tax of the 1980s: implications for current energy policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34669 , side - by - side comparison of energy tax bills in the house ( h.r .

6049 ) and senate ( s. 3478 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34676 , side - by - side comparison of the energy tax provisions of h.r .

6899 and the proposed substitute of s. 3478 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34689 , oil industry financial performance and the windfall profits tax , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

