for decades , the united states and israel have maintained strong bilateral relations based on a number of factors , including robust domestic u.s. support for israel and its security ; shared strategic goals in the middle east ; a mutual commitment to democratic values ; and historical ties dating from u.s. support for the creation of israel in 1948 .

u.s. foreign aid has been a major component in cementing and reinforcing these ties .

although successive administrations have disapproved of some israeli policies , including settlement construction in the west bank , u.s. officials and many lawmakers have long considered israel to be a vital partner in the region , and u.s. aid packages for israel have reflected this calculation .

some observers , including opponents of u.s. aid to israel , argue that u.s. assistance to israel supports israeli arms purchases without providing sufficient scrutiny of controversial israeli military actions that — these observers assert — contravene various laws and international norms , particularly regarding treatment of palestinians .

while overall u.s. public support for israel remains strong , american public attitudes toward israel are growing more polarized .

in january 2018 , the pew research center released poll results about the dispute between israel and the palestinians .

among other findings , pew reported that "46% of americans say they sympathize more with the israelis , 16% say they sympathize more with the palestinians and about four - in - ten ( 38% ) either volunteer that their sympathies are with both ( 5% ) , neither ( 14% ) or that they do not know ( 19% ) . .

pew also highlighted a widening partisan divide between republicans and democrats over their support for israel , noting that 79% of republicans sympathize more with israel than the palestinians , compared with 27% of democrats .

since 1999 , overall u.s. assistance to israel has been outlined in 10-year government - to - government memoranda of understanding ( mous ) .

mous are not legally binding agreements like treaties , and thus do not require senate concurrence .

also , congress may accept or change year - to - year assistance levels for israel , or provide supplemental appropriations .

nevertheless , past mous have significantly influenced the terms of u.s. aid to israel ; congress has appropriated foreign aid to israel largely according to the terms of the current mou .

congress and successive administrations have demonstrated strong support for joint u.s. - israeli missile defense projects designed to thwart a diverse range of threats .

the range spans from short - range missiles and rockets fired by nonstate actors , such as hamas and hezbollah , to mid - and longer - range ballistic missiles in syria's and iran's arsenals .

congress provides regular u.s. funding for israeli and u.s. - israeli missile defense programs in defense authorization and appropriations bills .

israel and the united states each contribute financially to several weapons systems and engage in codevelopment , coproduction , and / or technology sharing in connection with them .

the following section provides background on israel's four - layered active defense network: iron dome ( short range ) , david's sling ( low to mid - range ) , arrow ii ( upper - atmospheric ) , and arrow iii ( exo - atmospheric ) .

in 2016 , the israeli and u.s. governments began collaborating on a new system to detect underground smuggling tunnels and counter cross - border tunnels used ( most prominently by hamas in the summer 2014 conflict ) to infiltrate israel .

reportedly , this new technology uses acoustic or seismic sensors and software to detect the sounds of digging by monitoring vibrations underground .

section 1279 of p.l .

114-92 , the fy2016 national defense authorization act , authorized the establishment of a u.s. - israeli anti - tunnel cooperation program .

this authorization allowed funds from the research , development , test , and evaluation defense - wide account to be used ( in combination with israeli funds ) to establish anti - tunnel capabilities that detect , map , and neutralize underground tunnels that threaten the united states or israel .

the authorization requires the secretary of defense to report to congress on , among other things , the sharing of research and development costs between the united states and israel .

section 1278 of p.l.115-91 , the fy2018 national defense authorization act , extended the authority of the anti - tunnel cooperation program through december 31 , 2020 .

it also required that not less than 50% of u.s. contributions to the program should be used for "research , development , test , and evaluation activities in the united states in connection with such support. .

u.s. aid and arms sales to israel , like those to other foreign recipients , are subject to u.s. law .

some u.s. citizens and interest groups periodically call upon congress to ensure that u.s. military assistance to israel is conditioned on the israeli government's compliance with applicable u.s. laws and policies and with international humanitarian law .

since 1973 , israel has received grants from the state department's migration and refugee assistance account ( mra ) to assist in the resettlement of migrants to israel .

funds are paid to the united israel appeal , a private philanthropic organization in the united states , which in turn transfers the funds to the jewish agency for israel .

between 1973 and 1991 , the united states gave about $460 million for resettling jewish refugees in israel .

annual amounts have varied from a low of $12 million to a high of $80 million , based at least partly on the number of jews leaving the former soviet union and other areas for israel .

congress has changed the earmark language since the first refugee resettlement funds were appropriated in 1973 .

at first , the congressional language said the funds were for "resettlement in israel of refugees from the union of soviet socialist republics and from communist countries in eastern europe. .

but starting in 1985 , the language was simplified to "refugees resettling in israel" to ensure that ethiopian jews would be covered by the funding .

technically , the legislative language designates funds for refugee resettlement , but in israel little differentiation is made between jewish "refugees" and other jewish immigrants , and the funds are used to support the absorption of all immigrants .

since 1972 , the united states has extended loan guarantees to israel to assist with housing shortages , israel's absorption of new immigrants from the former soviet union and ethiopia , and its economic recovery following the 2000-2003 recession , which was probably caused in part by the israeli - palestinian conflict known as the second intifada .

loan guarantees are a form of indirect u.s. assistance to israel , since they enable israel to borrow from commercial sources at lower rates .

congress directs that subsidies be set aside in a u.s. treasury account in case of a possible israeli default .

these subsidies , which are a percentage of the total loan ( based in part on the credit rating of the borrowing country ) , have come from the u.s. or the israeli government .

israel has never defaulted on a u.s. - backed loan guarantee .

in 2003 , then - prime minister ariel sharon requested an additional $8 billion in loan guarantees to help israel's ailing economy .

the loan guarantee request accompanied a request for an additional $4 billion in military grants to help israel prepare for possible attacks during an anticipated u.s. war with iraq .

p.l .

108-11 , the fy2003 emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act , authorized $9 billion in loan guarantees over three years for israel's economic recovery and $1 billion in military grants .

p.l .

108-11 stated that the proceeds from the loan guarantees could be used only within israel's pre - june 5 , 1967 , area of control ; that the annual loan guarantees could be reduced by an amount equal to the amount israel spends on settlements outside of israel's pre - june 1967 area of control ; that israel would pay all fees and subsidies ; and that the president would consider israel's economic reforms when determining terms and conditions for the loan guarantees .

on november 26 , 2003 , the department of state announced that the $3 billion in loan guarantees for fy2003 were reduced by $289.5 million because israel continued to build settlements in the occupied territories and continued construction of a security barrier separating key israeli and palestinian population centers .

in fy2005 , the u.s. government reduced the amount available for israel to borrow by an additional $795.8 million .

since then , israel has not borrowed any funds .

according to the u.s. department of the treasury , israel is legally obligated to use the proceeds of guaranteed loans for refinancing its government debt and also has agreed that proceeds shall not be used for military purposes or to support activities in areas outside its pre - june 5 , 1967 , areas of control ( the west bank — including east jerusalem — and gaza and the golan heights ) .

however , u.s. officials have noted that since israel's national budget is fungible , proceeds from the issuance of u.s. - guaranteed debt that are used to refinance israeli government debt free up domestic israeli funds for other uses .

as of 2018 , israel has issued $4.1 billion in u.s. - backed bonds .

after deducting the amounts mentioned above , israel might still be authorized to issue up to $3.814 billion in u.s. - backed bonds .

however , if the israeli government sought to issue new u.s. - backed bonds , it is unclear whether the loan guarantees available to israel might be subject to reduction based on israel's estimated expenditures for settlements in the occupied territories .

since the original loan guarantee program authorization for israel in 2003 , congress has extended the program four times .

the program is currently authorized through the end of fy2019 .

in general , israel may view u.s. loan guarantees as a "last resort" option , which its treasury could use if unguaranteed local and international bond issuances become too expensive .

according to one israeli official in 2012 , "we consider the loan guarantees as preparation for a rainy day... .

this is a safety net for war , natural disaster and economic crisis , which allows israel to maintain economic stability in unstable surroundings. .

israeli officials may believe that although they have not used the loan guarantees in the last 13 years , maintaining the program boosts the country's fiscal standing among international creditors in capital markets .

through foreign operations appropriations legislation , congress has funded the asha program as part of the overall development assistance ( da ) appropriation to the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) .

according to usaid , asha is designed to strengthen self - sustaining schools , libraries , and medical centers that best demonstrate american ideals and practices abroad .

asha has been providing support to institutions in the middle east since 1957 , and a number of universities and hospitals in israel have been recipients of asha grants .

in fy2015 ( the most recent year for which data are available ) , asha grant recipients in israel included shaare zedek medical center in jerusalem , st. john eye hospital group , nazareth hospital , and the hadassah medical organization .

according to usaid , institutions based in israel have received the most program funding in the middle east region .

in the early 1970s , israeli academics and businessmen began looking for ways to expand investment in israel's nascent technology sector .

the sector , which would later become the driving force in the country's economy , was in need of private capital for research and development at the time .

the united states and israel launched several programs to stimulate israeli industrial and scientific research , and congress has on several occasions authorized and appropriated funds for this purpose to the following organizations: the bird foundation ( israel - u.s. binational research & development foundation ) .

bird , which was established in 1977 , provides matchmaking services between israeli and american companies in research and development with the goal of expanding cooperation between u.s. and israeli private high - tech industries .

the mission of the foundation is "to stimulate , promote and support joint ( nondefense ) industrial r&d of mutual benefit to…" the two countries .

projects are supported in the areas of homeland security , communications , electronics , electro - optics , software , life sciences , and renewable and alternative energy , among others .

according to the foundation , $339 million in grants have been awarded to almost a thousand projects .

awards typically range from $700,000 to $900,000 .

the award size varies based on total project budget and other considerations .

the recipients must provide at least 50% of the total project budget .

while support for military projects are not a part of the program , several of the completed ventures have yielded products that might be useful in a military setting , including the aircraft enhanced vision system ( evs ) camera , "which is designed to provide day / night improved orientation during taxiing or flying .

it allows visual landing in reduced visibility conditions , such as fog , haze , dust , smog etc. .

the foundation also funded the creation of a through - wall location and sensing system that is portable and "detects whether people are present behind walls , how many , and where they are situated. .

the bsf foundation ( u.s. - israel binational science foundation ) .

bsf , which was started in 1972 , promotes cooperation in scientific and technological research .

the bard foundation ( binational agriculture and research and development fund ) .

bard was created in 1978 and supports u.s. - israeli cooperation in agricultural research .

in 1995 , the united states and israel established the u.s. - israel science and technology foundation ( usistf ) to fund and administer projects mandated by the u.s. - israel science and technology commission ( usistc ) , a bilateral entity jointly established by the united states department of commerce and the israel ministry of industry , trade , and labor in 1994 to foster scientific , technological , and economic cooperation between the two countries .

in 2005 , congress began to consider legislation to expand u.s. - israeli scientific cooperation in the field of renewable energy .

lawmakers reviewed legislation in the house and the senate entitled , "the united states - israel energy cooperation act. .

various forms of the bill would have authorized the department of energy to establish a joint u.s. - israeli grant program to fund research in solar , biomass , and wind energy , among other directives .

section 917 of p.l .

110-140 , the renewable fuels , consumer protection , and energy efficiency act of 2007 , contains the original language of the u.s. - israel energy cooperation act ( h.r .

1838 ) .

although it did not appropriate any funds for joint research and development , it did establish a grant program to support research , development , and commercialization of renewable energy or energy efficiency .

the law also authorized the secretary of energy to provide funds for the grant program as needed .

congress authorized the program for seven years from the time of enactment , which was on december 19 , 2007 .

then , in december 2014 , the president signed into law p.l .

113-296 , the united states - israel strategic partnership act of 2014 , which reauthorized the u.s. - israeli energy cooperation program for an additional 10 years until september 30 , 2024 .

to date , congress and the administration have provided a total of $15 .7 million for the grant program , known as bird energy .

as of 2017 , total combined u.s. and israeli investment in bird energy for 37 approved projects stands at $30 million .

as one of the world's leaders in water reuse and desalination technology , israel has expanded its cooperation with various u.s. states to export water reuse technology .

at the federal level , congress has supported u.s. - israeli cooperation through legislation .

p.l.114-322 , the wiin act ( water infrastructure improvements for the nation act ) , calls on the white house office of science and technology policy to develop a coordinated strategic plan that , among other things , strengthens "research and development cooperation with international partners , such as the state of israel , in the area of desalination technology. .

in 2016 , congress passed p.l.114-304 , the united states - israel advanced research partnership act of 2016 , a law that permanently authorized the expansion of an existing joint research - and - development program at the u.s. department of homeland security and expanded it to include cybersecurity technologies .

in january 2017 , the house passed h.r .

612 , the united states - israel cybersecurity cooperation enhancement act of 2017 .

if enacted , the bill would "establish a grant program to support cybersecurity research and development in accordance with existing bilateral agreements between the united states and israel. .

