on november 27 , 2006 , the librarian of congress announced six exemptions to the digital millennium copyright act's ( dmca's ) prohibition on circumvention of technological measures controlling access to copyrighted works .

these exemptions allow users of copyrighted works to circumvent access control devices , under certain specified conditions , for a period of three years , in order to ( 1 ) make compilations of video clips for film and media studies courses ; ( 2 ) archive obsolete computer programs or games ; ( 3 ) bypass "dongles," or hardware locks , that are obsolete ; ( 4 ) use read - aloud functions or screen readers with e - books ; ( 5 ) connect wireless telephone handsets to communication networks ; and ( 6 ) test for or correct security flaws in works distributed on compact discs .

these exemptions will remain in effect until the librarian of congress makes a new determination as to classes of works to be exempted from the dmca circumvention prohibition , which are expected to be published in fall 2009 following a rulemaking proceeding .

this report describes the statutory basis for the exemptions , the triennial rulemaking proceeding that results in them , and the exemptions granted in 2006 .

section 1201 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) of the dmca provides that the librarian of congress and the register of copyrights determine exemptions through a "rulemaking proceeding. .

the dmca's legislative history specifies that this rulemaking proceeding is to be conducted through "notice - and - comment. .

accordingly , the librarian and the register provided notice of the rulemaking , solicited initial and reply comments from the public , and conducted hearings in granting the 2000 , 2003 , and 2006 exemptions .

on october 6 , 2008 , the copyright office initiated a fourth ยง 1201 rulemaking , in order to determine the 2009 exemptions .

content users who are presently affected , or likely to be affected within the next three years , may propose exemptions to the dmca's prohibition on circumvention .

once the proposals for exempted classes of works are received , the copyright office will publish a notice of proposed rulemaking and then hold a series of hearings in the spring of 2009 in which proponents and opponents of the proposed exemptions may present their views .

the new exemptions are expected to be published by the fall of 2009 .

proponents of exemptions bear the burden of proof .

based upon its reading of the dmca statute and legislative history , the copyright office has determined that to meet this burden of proof , proponents must ( 1 ) identify the specific technological measures causing the alleged problems and show that these measures effectively control access to copyrighted works ; ( 2 ) explain the non - infringing activities that the prohibition adversely affects ; and ( 3 ) establish that the prevented activities are , in fact , non - infringing under current law .

only technological measures that restrict access are considered ; non - technological measures that restrict access ( eg , contracts or usage agreements ) are not considered , nor are technological measures that control things other than access ( eg , reproduction or distribution ) .

the technological measure must directly lead to the problems of which the exemption's proponent complains: "[a]dverse impacts that flow from other sources ... are outside the scope of the rulemaking. .

the problems complained of must be more than "isolated harm or mere inconveniences," and the adverse effects must be substantial .

claims of present problems and adverse effects should be supported by first - hand knowledge of "verifiable problems occurring in the marketplace" and , preferably , documented by factual and quantitative data .

claims of future problems and adverse effects should be especially well documented , because the legislative history of the dmca provides that future harm should only be recognized "in extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood is highly specific , strong and persuasive. .

non - infringing activities must be recognized under the current law and must not be possible by alternative means .

proponents arguing for the renewal of existing exemptions must make their case de novo .

the existence of an exemption that was granted in previous rulemaking proceedings does not create a presumption in its favor ; rather , it must be justified as if it were a new exemption .

even when proponents demonstrate that access control devices adversely affect their abilities to make non - infringing uses of copyrighted works , their exemptions are not automatically granted .

rather , the librarian of congress and the register of copyrights weigh the proven harm against other factors prescribed by statute in determining whether to grant an exemption .

these factors include the availability of copyrighted works generally ; the availability of copyrighted works for nonprofit archival , preservation , and educational purposes ; the impact of access control devices on criticism , comment , news reporting , teaching , scholarship , and research ; the effect that circumvention of access control devices would have on the market for or value of copyrighted works ; and any other factors the librarian deems appropriate .

these factors are intended to ensure that the librarian and the register balance the adverse and positive effects of access control devices , which not only limit access but also promote copyright owners' willingness to disseminate their works in new ways .

the register also must consult with the assistant secretary for communications and information of the department of commerce , who heads the national telecommunications and information administration , before recommending exemptions to the librarian in order to ensure that the market benefits of both access control devices and potential exemptions are fully considered .

representative rick boucher introduced h.r .

1201 , the freedom and innovation revitalizing u.s .

entrepreneurship act of 2007 ( fair use act of 2007 ) , in the 110 th congress ; the bill was later referred to the house subcommittee on courts , the internet , and intellectual property .

section 3 ( a ) of h.r .

1201 would have codified the librarian of congress's 2006 exemptions and made them permanent ( rather than have them be subject to renewal , revision , or rejection in 2009 ) .

in addition , section 3 ( b ) of the bill would have authorized six additional exemptions , for the following circumstances in which technological protection measures may be circumvented: ( 1 ) instructors wishing to make a compilation of portions of audiovisual works for educational use in a classroom ( and therefore not limited solely to college - level media studies courses , as in the librarian's first exemption ) ; ( 2 ) consumers wanting to skip past or avoid commercials or personally objectionable content in an audiovisual work ( however , the sponsor of the bill cautions that this provision "does not authorize consumers to make back up dvds for archival or any other purpose" ) ; ( 3 ) consumers interested in transmitting a work over a home or personal network , but not in order to upload that work to the internet for mass , indiscriminate redistribution ; ( 4 ) individuals wishing to gain access to one or more public domain works that are included in a compilation consisting primarily of works in the public domain ; ( 5 ) reporters , teachers , and others wanting to gain access to a work of substantial public interest solely for purposes of criticism , comment , news reporting , scholarship , or research ; and ( 6 ) a library or an archive satisfying the requirements of 17 u.s.c .

ยง 108 ( a ) ( 2 ) , needing to preserve or secure a copy or to replace a copy in its collections that is damaged , deteriorating , lost , or stolen .

the 2006 exemptions to the dmca's prohibition on circumvention of technological measures controlling access to copyrighted works allows users , under certain circumstances , to circumvent those access controls in order to ( 1 ) make compilations of video clips for film and media studies courses ; ( 2 ) archive obsolete computer programs or games ; ( 3 ) bypass "dongles," or hardware locks , that are obsolete ; ( 4 ) use read - aloud functions or screen readers with e - books ; ( 5 ) connect wireless telephone handsets to communication networks ; and ( 6 ) test for or correct security flaws in works distributed on cd .

these exemptions are effective until october 27 , 2009 , at which time they will be superseded by new exemptions issued by the librarian of congress , on the recommendation of the register of copyrights , following a notice - and - comment rulemaking proceeding conducted pursuant to 17 u.s.c .

ยง 1201 ( a ) ( 1 ) .

h.r .

1201 , introduced in the 110 th congress , would not have altered the triennial rulemaking proceeding , but rather would have codified the 2006 exemptions and statutorily authorize six new exemptions to section 1201 of the dmca .

the outcome of the fourth ยง 1201 rulemaking proceeding , currently underway and scheduled for completion by fall of 2009 , will likely influence whether the 111 th congress considers similar or other legislation relating to dmca exemptions .

