mandatory spending is composed of budget outlays controlled by laws other than appropriation acts , including federal spending on entitlement programs .

entitlement programs such as social security and medicare make up the bulk of mandatory spending .

other mandatory spending programs include supplemental security income ( ssi ) , unemployment insurance , certain veterans' benefits , federal employee retirement and disability , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , and various tax credits .

 ( see list in table 1 . ) .

mandatory spending also includes many smaller budgetary items , such as salaries of members of congress and the president .

congress sets eligibility requirements and benefits for entitlement programs .

if the eligibility requirements are met for a specific mandatory program , outlays are made automatically .

in fy2014 , mandatory spending — totaling 12.2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) — exceeded discretionary spending's 6.8% share of gdp .

in addition , federal net interest payments accounted for 1.3% of gdp .

together , total federal spending represented 20.3% of gdp .

mandatory spending composed nearly 60% of all federal spending in fy2014 .

social security , medicare , and the federal share of medicaid alone composed nearly 50% of all federal spending .

mandatory spending plays a major role in larger fiscal trends .

during economic downturns , government revenues fall and expenditures rise as more people become eligible for mandatory programs such as unemployment insurance and income security programs , causing deficits to increase or surpluses to shrink .

these effects , known as "automatic stabilizers," provide a countercyclical fiscal stimulus in the short run without the need for new legislative action .

as a result of the recent economic downturn and federal actions taken in response to it , mandatory spending was higher than its historical levels ( as a percentage of gdp ) between fy2009 and fy2011 .

since then , mandatory spending has remained relatively constant around 12% of gdp .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects mandatory spending will increase slightly from its current levels and then will remain relatively constant , as a share of gdp , through fy2020 ( around 13% of gdp ) .

after fy2021 , mandatory spending is projected to account for nearly 14% of gdp between 2022 and 2024 before topping 14% in 2025 .

mandatory spending , according to cbo current - law projections , will be about 14.2% of gdp in fy2025 .

however , cbo baseline projections , which extend 10 years forward , do not reflect the full force of the pressures the aging population and increasing health care costs are expected to exert on the federal budget over the longer term .

this report looks at mandatory spending and its growth over time relative to total federal spending and the size of the u.s. economy .

it also analyzes future mandatory spending levels and how they are projected to impact the federal budget .

mandatory spending is controlled by laws other than appropriations acts .

such laws generally take the form of authorizing legislation .

authorizing legislation establishes or continues the operation of a federal program or agency , either indefinitely or for a specified period .

mandatory spending typically is provided in permanent or multi - year appropriations contained in the authorizing law , and therefore , the funding becomes available automatically each year , without further legislative action by congress .

in most cases , the authorizing law requires payment , based on a benefit formula , to an individual or entity ( eg , a state ) if eligibility criteria are met .

in contrast , discretionary spending is provided and controlled through the annual appropriations process .

net interest payments , the final category of federal spending , are automatically authorized and are the government's interest payments on debt held by the public offset by interest income that the government receives .

entitlement spending , such as for medicaid and certain veterans' programs , is funded in annual appropriations acts .

such entitlement spending is referred to as appropriated entitlements .

the level of spending for appropriated entitlements , like other entitlements , is based on the benefit and eligibility criteria established in law .

the amount of budget authority provided in appropriations acts for these specific programs is based on meeting projected spending levels .

since the authorizing legislation effectively determines the amount of budget authority required , the budget enforcement act ( bea ) of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) classified appropriated entitlement spending as mandatory .

not all mandatory spending funds entitlement programs .

for example , the forest service makes some payments to states that are mandatory , but are not entitlements .

some agencies gained authority to sign contracts or create obligations in other ways , which gao has termed "backdoor" spending authority .

those obligations become part of mandatory spending unless limited by the bea or other budget legislation .

as noted above , salaries of members of congress and the president are also deemed mandatory but are not entitlements .

table 1 , below , shows cbo baseline projections for mandatory spending from fy2014 ( actual ) to fy2025 .

mandatory spending is partially offset by certain fees and payments , known as offsetting receipts , which are generally counted as negative budget authority .

market - like charges , such as medicare part a deductibles and medicare part b premiums , are considered offsetting receipts .

payments by medicare beneficiaries and the federal government's tax and pension contributions in its role as an employer comprise the largest component of offsetting receipts .

most mandatory spending is accounted for in the budget based on the dollar amount spent in each fiscal year .

however , some mandatory programs are recorded differently .

for example , federal student loan programs , like other federal loan and loan guarantee programs , are scored under terms of the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ; p.l .

101-508 ) .

rather than being accounted for on a cash basis , fcra programs are accounted for on a net subsidy basis .

fcra required that the reported budgetary cost of a credit or loan program equal the estimated subsidy costs at the time the credit is provided .

in other words , the subsidy cost is the estimated long - term cost to the government of a direct loan or a loan guarantee , calculated on a net present value basis , excluding administrative costs .

this places the cost of federal credit programs on a budgetary basis equivalent to other federal outlays .

mandatory spending has taken up a larger and larger share of the federal budget over time .

mandatory spending grew over time with enactment of the social security act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-271 ) and the medicare act of 1965 ( p.l .

89-97 ) .

in fy1962 , three years before the creation of medicare and medicaid , less than 30% of all federal spending was mandatory .

at that time , social security accounted for about 13% of total federal spending or about half of all mandatory spending .

in the mid - 1970s , growth of mandatory spending as a share of total federal spending slowed .

during part of the 1980s , mandatory spending declined as a share of total federal spending .

since then , mandatory spending has increased its share of federal spending at a gradual pace .

figure 1 shows historical trends in mandatory spending between fy1962 and fy2014 and cbo's baseline projections for these components to fy2025 , expressed as a percentage of total federal spending .

mandatory spending was about a quarter of total federal spending in fy1962 ( nearly a third if offsetting receipts are excluded ) .

in fy1968 , mandatory spending began growing relative to total federal spending and by fy1975 accounted for about 45% of total spending ( about half before offsetting receipts ) .

from the mid - 1980s through 1990 , mandatory spending's share in total spending remained relatively steady , before starting to grow again after fy1990 .

in fy2014 , mandatory spending accounted for nearly 60% of total spending and 12.2% of gdp ( or just under 14% of gdp before offsetting receipts ) .

mandatory spending spiked between fy2008 and fy2009 largely due to increases in outlays related to federal financial interventions and the economic downturn .

after falling in fy2010 ( 12.9% of gdp ) relative to fy2009 levels ( 14.5% of gdp ) , mandatory spending rose again in fy2011 ( 13.2% of gdp ) .

it began to fall again in fy2012 ( 12.6% of gdp ) and remained constant between fy2013 and fy2014 ( 12.2% of gdp ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects mandatory spending will increase slightly before remaining relatively constant , as a share of gdp through fy2020 .

after fy2021 , mandatory spending is projected to account for nearly 14% of gdp between 2022 and 2024 before topping 14% in 2025 .

mandatory spending , according to cbo current - law projections , will be about 14.2% of gdp in fy2025 .

table 2 , below , presents components of mandatory spending in fy2014 and fy2015 ( estimated ) and cbo baseline projections in fy2025 ( projected ) in dollar terms , as a percentage of total mandatory spending , and as a percentage of gdp .

in fy2009 , total mandatory spending increased by 31% in dollar terms over fy2008 , primarily due to the economic downturn and federal financial interventions , including assistance provided in the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) and to the gses ( fannie mae and freddie mac ) .

the majority of the impact of the enacted federal financial intervention programs on mandatory spending occurred in fy2009 for tarp and between fy2009 and fy2012 for gse assistance .

outlays for income security programs , like unemployment compensation and snap , also increased in fy2009 and continued at elevated levels through fy2013 .

by fy2014 , outlays for these programs returned to their fy2008 levels ( as a percentage of gdp ) as the economic recovery continued , lessening the reliance on these "automatic stabilizers. .

however , mandatory spending as a whole is projected to remain on an upward trajectory primarily due to higher levels of federal health spending .

while the share of mandatory spending has increased as a portion of total federal spending , discretionary spending has fallen .

discretionary spending , defined as spending provided and controlled through appropriations acts , generally made up a larger share of total federal spending through the late 1980s .

mandatory spending now counts for the majority of total federal spending .

as a share of gdp , discretionary spending has fallen from 10% of gdp in fy1983 to a low of 6.0% in fy1999 to 6.8% in fy2014 .

over the last four decades , mandatory spending has risen from roughly 7.5% of gdp to more than 10% in the mid - 2000s to 12.2% in fy2014 .

over the next decade , mandatory spending is projected to reach 14.2% of gdp .

discretionary spending is projected to continue to fall further to 5.1% of gdp , its lowest level ever .

by fy2022 discretionary spending's share of the economy is projected to be equal to or less than spending in each of the two largest categories of mandatory programs , social security and major health programs .

in that year , discretionary spending is projected to total 5.4% of gdp , social security spending is projected to total 5.4% of gdp and spending on major health programs is projected to total 6.7% of gdp .

at the same time , spending on other mandatory programs ( income security , federal civilian and military retirement , veterans' programs , agriculture , merhcf – the department of defense medicare - eligible retiree health fund , deposit insurance , fannie mae and freddie mac , higher education , and other mandatory spending ) is projected to be less than projected spending on net interest payments beginning in fy2024 .

these trends in spending are shown in figure 5 below .

cbo baseline projections , which extend 10 years forward , do not reflect the full force of the pressures the impending retirement of the large baby boom generation are expected to exert on the federal budget .

though the first baby boomers reached age 65 in 2011 , most will not reach age 65 until after 2015 .

extended baseline projections suggest that social security spending could amount to 6.8% of gdp by fy2085 — an increase of 1.9 percentage points of gdp from its fy2014 level .

according to cbo extended baseline projections , federal mandatory spending on health care , in large part due to rising costs , is projected to reach 13.4% of gdp by fy2085 .

by contrast , total federal spending on these health programs in fy2014 was 5.4% of gdp .

it is important to note that numerous uncertainties exist when trying to project future levels of spending , particularly for large mandatory programs .

most fiscal experts assert that avoiding the accumulation of large , unsustainable debts will require cuts in entitlement benefits , large increases in federal revenues , a significant reduction in discretionary spending , or some mix of those policies .

because federal deficits and debts have adverse economic consequences , including lower economic growth , the longer such adjustments are delayed , the more difficult it will be to make adjustments .

mandatory spending has taken up an increasingly large share of federal spending over the past half century .

by the end of the decade , according to cbo baseline projections , mandatory spending will account for more than three out of every five dollars of federal spending .

mandatory spending has grown relative to the economy , even as the size of total federal spending relative to the overall economy has remained roughly constant .

major entitlement programs play a larger and larger part within the category of mandatory spending .

in 1962 , before medicare and medicaid were created , social security accounted for just over half of all mandatory spending .

today , social security accounts for roughly 40% of mandatory spending .

medicare and medicaid , since their inception , have taken up an increasingly large share of mandatory spending .

together , outlays for these two programs now exceed social security spending .

cbo current - law projections indicate that federal health spending , including medicare , medicaid , and outlays for new health care exchanges and subsidies , could make up nearly 50% of mandatory spending in fy2025 .

reducing the federal deficit significantly by cutting spending without reducing mandatory spending , and in particular entitlements , would be difficult .

focusing budget cuts on mandatory spending , particularly social security , medicare , and medicaid , however , could adversely affect the elderly or the poor .

limiting budget reductions to smaller mandatory programs , like temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , ssi , and snap , would not reduce the federal deficit by as much because most of the increases in federal spending have been occurring in medicare and medicaid .

further reform of the health programs may be needed to eliminate long - term fiscal strains while preserving the goals of these programs .

