on march 27 , 2014 , the u.n. general assembly approved a resolution by the vote of 100-11 , with 58 abstentions , affirming ukraine's territorial integrity and terming the march 16 referendum in crimea illegitimate and not a basis for a change in the status of the region .

russia's u.n. ambassador vitaly churkin argued that russia could not ignore the right of crimeans to self - determination and that crimea had been "re - unified" with russia .

armenia and belarus joined russia in voting against the resolution , while azerbaijan , georgia , and moldova voted for it .

among other soviet successor states that attended the session , kazakhstan and uzbekistan abstained .

china , afghanistan , and pakistan also abstained .

kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and turkmenistan did not participate in the vote .

the first u.s. visit by a georgian prime minister who belongs to the georgia dream coalition , irakli garibashvili , took place on february 22-march 1 , 2014 .

meeting with president obama and vice president biden on february 24 , 2014 , the president and vice president urged georgia to continue to advance the rule of law .

they thanked georgia for supporting the united states in international affairs , expressed appreciation for georgia's contribution to nato operations in afghanistan , reaffirmed u.s. support for georgia's territorial integrity , expressed "unwavering support" for georgia's euro - atlantic aspirations , and discussed opportunities to increase trade and investment in georgia .

the u.s. - georgia strategic partnership commission and its working groups met on february 26 to discuss cooperation goals for 2014 .

secretary kerry , chairing the u.s. side , expressed appreciation to prime minister garibashvili for georgia's initialing of an association agreement with the european union .

the united states congratulated georgia on a plan to enhance human rights , including those of minority populations .

the two sides highlighted "solid achievements" in georgia's defense reforms , including nato interoperability and self - defense capabilities .

the two sides discussed the potential of transforming the northern distribution network for sending supplies into and out of afghanistan into a post - 2014 commercial trade network .

the united states expressed support for georgia's efforts to engage peacefully with the residents of the breakaway south ossetia and abkhazia .

both sides looked forward to the implementation of new projects funded by the u.s. millennium challenge corporation .

on economic issues , the united states praised georgia's growing regional economic role , including its potential to become a regional trade and transportation hub .

the two sides raised the hope of progress toward concluding a u.s. - georgia free trade agreement .

in remarks at a press conference , secretary kerry stated that "we stand by the bucharest decision [by nato] that georgia will become a member of nato .

the united states will work to make sure that georgia's progress is acknowledged by all members at this year's nato summit. .

prime minister garibashvili stated that georgia considers the united states as its "foremost partner.... we are united first and foremost by the shared values between the two nations .

and i do believe that our existing and prospective avenues of partnership are destined to succeed. .

armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia are located south of the caucasus mountains that form part of russia's borders ( see figure 1 ) .

the south caucasus states served historically as a north - south and east - west trade and transport "land bridge" linking europe to the middle east and asia , over which the russian empire and others at various times endeavored to gain control .

in ancient as well as more recent times , oil and natural gas resources in azerbaijan attracted outside interest .

the regional peoples can point to periods of past autonomy or self - government .

after the russian empire collapsed in 1917 , all three states declared independence , but by early 1921 all had been re - conquered by russia's red ( communist ) army .

they regained independence when the soviet union collapsed at the end of 1991 .

by the end of 1991 , the united states had recognized the independence of all the former soviet republics .

the united states pursued close ties with armenia , because of its profession of democratic principles , and concerns by armenian americans and others over its fate .

the united states pursued close ties with georgia after eduard shevardnadze ( formerly a pro - western soviet foreign minister ) assumed power there in early 1992 .

faced with calls in congress and elsewhere for a u.s. aid policy for the eurasian states , then - president george h. w. bush sent the freedom support act to congress ; it was signed with amendments into law in october 1992 ( p.l .

102-511 ) .

appropriations under the authority of the freedom support act are currently included in the state department's economic support funds ( esf ) , global health programs ( ghp ) , and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) accounts .

u.s. policy toward the south caucasus states has included promoting the resolution of conflicts between armenia and azerbaijan over azerbaijan's breakaway nagorno karabakh ( nk ) region and between georgia and its breakaway regions of abkhazia and south ossetia ( resolving these latter conflicts became much more difficult following the august 2008 conflict ; see " the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict ," below ) .

since 1993 , u.s. emissaries have been detailed to try to settle these conflicts .

congressional concerns about the nk conflict led to the inclusion of section 907 in the freedom support act , which prohibits u.s. government - to - government assistance to azerbaijan , except for non - proliferation and disarmament activities , until the president determines that azerbaijan has taken "demonstrable steps to cease all blockades and other offensive uses of force against armenia and nk. .

provisions in fy1996 , fy1998 , and fy1999 legislation eased the prohibition by providing for humanitarian , democratization , and business aid exemptions .

in 2002 , waiver authority was enacted ( see below , " regional responses after the september 11 " ) .

some observers argue that developments in the south caucasus are largely marginal to u.s. strategic interests .

they urge great caution in adopting policies that will heavily involve the united states in a region beset by ethnic and civil conflicts , and some argue that , since the european union has recognized the region as part of its "neighborhood," it rightfully should play a major role .

some observers argue that the u.s. interest in democratization and human rights should not be subordinated to interests in energy and anti - terrorism .

other observers believe that the united states should be more actively engaged in the region .

they urge greater u.s. aid and conflict resolution efforts to contain warfare , crime , smuggling , and islamic extremism and to bolster the independence of the states .

some argue that such enhanced u.s. relations also would serve to "contain" russian and iranian influence and that close u.s. ties with azerbaijan could benefit u.s. relations with other islamic countries .

they also point to the prompt support offered to the united states by the regional states in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks by al qaeda on the united states .

some argue that energy resources in the caspian region are a central u.s. strategic interest , because azerbaijani and central asian oil and natural gas deliveries could somewhat lessen western energy dependency on russia and the middle east ( see below , " economic interests " ) .

in his annual worldwide threat assessment , director of national intelligence james clapper testified in late january 2014 that georgia's new president and prime minister face challenges from a declining economy .

also , the prosecution of former government officials threatens to further polarize politics .

while tensions with russia have eased , reducing the threat of conflict , core disputes , including the status of georgia's breakaway south ossetia and abkhazia , remain unlikely to be resolved .

he assessed the chance of renewed armenian - azerbaijani conflict over the breakaway nk as low , but also viewed the prospects for a peace settlement as dim .

azerbaijan is continuing to build up its military forces to give it a decisive advantage , and armenia has a strong interest in maintaining the status quo , since ethnic armenians control nk and surrounding territories .

he cautioned , however , that a miscalculation could occur ( perhaps implying renewed conflict ) , given the close proximity of military forces and the frequency of ceasefire violations .

the united states has endeavored to reassure azerbaijan that it continues to be a "strategic partner" in counter - terrorism cooperation and energy security and has appeared to balance these u.s. interests against its concerns about democratization in azerbaijan .

according to some observers , relations between the united states and azerbaijan had cooled after the administration supported efforts in 2009-2010 by armenia and turkey to improve relations that azerbaijan opposed ( see below , " the armenia - turkey protocols of 2009 " ) and after president aliyev was not invited to the u.s. nuclear security summit in april 2010 .

also , according to this view , azerbaijan may have pursued closer working relations with russia in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , which showed that russia remained a major power in the region .

while azerbaijan may have followed such policies , it continued troop support for nato operations in afghanistan ( see below , " regional support for military operations in iraq and afghanistan " ) and played a significant role as part of the northern distribution network for the transit of u.s. and nato supplies to and from afghanistan .

also , azerbaijan continued to plan to step up gas supplies to europe .

to reassure azerbaijan that the administration viewed u.s. - azerbaijan relations as strategically significant , then - secretary of defense robert gates visited azerbaijan in june 2010 and then - secretary of state hillary clinton visited in july 2010 , and president obama met with president aliyev on the sidelines of the u.n. general assembly in september 2010 .

in april 2012 , the obama administration "re - launched" meetings of the u.s. - azerbaijan intergovernmental commission on economic cooperation , which had last convened in 2008 .

during her june 6 , 2012 , visit to azerbaijan , then - secretary clinton thanked azerbaijan for its "essential" role in the transit of personnel and supplies to afghanistan , and its "central role" in europe's efforts to diversify sources of energy and transport routes .

however , she also called for further democratization and for the release of individuals detained for expressing their views in print or on the streets .

the senate foreign relations committee held a confirmation hearing for ambassador - designate to azerbaijan richard morningstar on june 13 , 2012 .

he testified that the "wide range of shared interests" between the united states and azerbaijan "intersects with many of the united states' highest foreign policy priorities. .

he outlined "three core areas of importance to the relationship: security , energy , and democratic and economic reform," and stressed that "the administration believes we must intensify our cooperation in these areas. .

he also warned that security and prosperity in the south caucasus could only be assured by the peaceful settlement of the nk conflict , and he pledged to , if confirmed , support the efforts of the minsk group .

he was confirmed by the senate at the end of june 2012 and presented his credentials to president aliyev in september 2012 .

meeting with visiting azerbaijani foreign minister elmar mammadyarov in june 2013 , secretary kerry praised azerbaijan as an "important partner" in afghanistan , in facilitating shipments along the northern distribution network , and in backing the southern corridor for gas transit to europe .

he and foreign minister mammadyarov indicated that the two sides would discuss the nk conflict , and secretary kerry voiced the hope that movement toward a peace settlement could be revitalized .

secretary kerry also urged azerbaijan to continue democratization as one component of regional peace .

foreign minister mammadyarov also termed the u.s. - azerbaijani relationship a "strategic partnership," and voiced the hope that although his country was "far from the united states" geographically , the two nations would continue to cooperate on these issues .

there were some azerbaijani media reports that u.s. - azerbaijani relations were somewhat strained during the period before the azerbaijani presidential election , allegedly linked to u.s. concerns voiced about campaign problems .

after president aliyev's inauguration on october 19 , 2013 , to a third presidential term , ambassador morningstar called for expanding and deepening u.s. - azerbaijani cooperation on "many shared critical interests," including efforts to resolve the nk conflict and to bolster regional security , counter - terrorism , energy security , and economic diversification .

he also stated that the united states would "continue to work with the government and civil society to promote democratic values and principles in azerbaijan. .

the united states is the largest bilateral aid donor by far to armenia and georgia ; see table 2 , table 3 , and table 4 ) .

u.s. assistance to the region since fy1992 has amounted to about one - fifth of all aid to eurasia and has included freedom support act ( fsa ) - authorized programs , food aid ( u.s. department of agriculture ) , peace corps , and security assistance .

armenia and georgia have regularly ranked among the top world states in terms of per capita u.s. aid , indicating the high level of concern within the administration and congress .

in foreign operations appropriations for fy1998 ( p.l .

105-118 ) , congress created a new south caucasian funding category to emphasize regional peace and development , and since then upheld this funding category in yearly appropriations .

the administration indicated in its fy2012 budget request that the reduced amount for that year for europe and eurasia ( including the south caucasian countries ) reflected progress made by many countries in the region and other more pressing global priorities .

fy2013 estimated spending further declined .

the administration's estimated spending for fy2014 further declined from the previous year , a trend that seemingly follows with the budget request for fy2015 .

the administration planned to target fy2014 aid: to georgia to support its euro - atlantic orientation and to encourage further democratization ; to armenia to support civil society , local governance , and the business environment and global competiveness ; and to azerbaijan to support civil society , political parties , independent media , open markets , informed citizen participation , energy security and integration with european energy markets , and government accountability .

the administration also planned to continue assistance for participation by the regional states in nato activities and deployments ( see table 2 ) .

congress also has directed that humanitarian aid be provided to displaced persons and needy civilians in nk out of concern that otherwise the region might not get aid .

such budgeted aid has amounted to about $41 million from fy1998 through fy2012 .

see table 5 .

in the omnibus appropriations act for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) and the consolidated appropriations act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) up to $8 million was made available for nk .

actual aid to nk has been about $2 million per year since fy2002 .

aid has been provided to ngos to rehabilitate homes , renovate health clinics and train personnel , repair water systems , provide micro - loans for agriculture , and clear landmines .

in fy2012 , aid to nk was provided for demining ( $1 million to the halo trust ngo ) and for rehabilitating the water system in stepanakert / khankendi ( $1 million to the cesco ngo ) ( both of these are multi - year projects ) .

besides bilateral aid , the united states contributes to multilateral organizations such as the international monetary fund and the world bank that aid the south caucasus region .

successive u.s .

administrations have maintained that u.s. support for privatization and the creation of free markets directly serve u.s. national interests by opening markets for u.s. goods and services and sources of energy and minerals .

bilateral trade agreements providing for normal trade relations for products have been signed and entered into force with all three states .

bilateral investment treaties providing national treatment guarantees also have entered into force .

u.s. investment is highest in azerbaijan's energy sector , but corruption in the three regional states and regional instability have appeared to discourage investors .

with u.s. support , in june 2000 georgia became the second eurasian state ( after kyrgyzstan ) to be admitted to the wto .

the application of title iv of the trade act of 1974 , including the jackson - vanik amendment , was terminated with respect to georgia in december 2000 , so its products receive permanent nondiscriminatory ( normal trade relations or ntr ) treatment .

armenia was admitted into wto in december 2002 .

the application of title iv was terminated with respect to armenia in january 2005 .

among other u.s. economic links with the region , a u.s. - armenia joint economic task force has held annual meetings since 1992 .

at the 22 nd meeting in november 2013 , visiting armenian minister of finance davit sargsyan met with deputy assistant secretary of state eric rubin .

the two sides hailed a $180 million purchase by u.s. firm contour global of three hydro - electric power plants and its plans to invest $70 million in modernizing them , the largest u.s. private investment in armenia and the first energy investment .

the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) offered partial financing .

a u.s. - azerbaijan intergovernmental commission on economic cooperation was founded in early 2007 , and reportedly has held three meetings ( no meeting has been reported since april 2012 ) .

an economic , energy , and trade working group meets regularly as part of the u.s. - georgia strategic partnership commission .

at a working group meeting in december 2013 , the two sides reportedly discussed how a ustr - led high - level dialogue on trade and investment might make further progress toward a free trade agreement .

s.res .

317 ( sessions ) expressing the sense of the senate on the continuing relationship between the united states and georgia .

introduced on december 11 , 2013 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

declares u.s. support for georgia's territorial integrity and concern over the occupation of abkhazia and south ossetia ; encourages enhanced defense cooperation with georgia ; reaffirms support for georgia's nato membership aspirations ; commends georgia's ongoing support in afghanistan ; commends georgia for holding a peaceful and democratic presidential election ; and encourages georgia to protect the rights of the political opposition and to refrain from politically motivated arrests .

p.l .

113-76 h.r .

3547 ( lamar ) , consolidated appropriations act , 2014 .

introduced on november 20 , 2013 .

passed the house on december 2 , 2013 .

passed the senate on december 12 , 2013 .

house agreed to the senate amendment on january 15 , 2014 .

senate concurred in the house amendment on january 16 , 2014 .

signed into law on january 17 , 2014 .

section 7071 states that funds appropriated to armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia ( and others designated by the european union to be eastern partnership countries ) shall be made available to advance the signing and implementation of association agreements , trade agreements , and visa liberalization agreements with the european union ( eu ) , and to reduce the vulnerability of the states to external pressure not to enter into such accords with the eu .

also calls for a report assessing whether russia is erecting non - tariff barriers against imports of goods from armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia ( and other eastern partnership countries ) , and a description of actions by the u.s. government to ensure that the countries maintain full sovereignty in their foreign policy decision - making .

also calls for funds to be made available for democracy and rule of law programs in armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia ( and other soviet successor states ) , and for a report to be submitted on a multi - year strategy for such programs .

also calls for a description of steps taken to assist in the restoration of the territorial integrity of georgia .

h.res .

402 ( engel ) supporting the european aspirations of the peoples of the european union's eastern partnership countries .

introduced on november 12 , 2013 .

ordered to be reported by the committee on foreign affairs , november 20 , 2013 .

the bill supports the european aspirations of the peoples of the eastern partnership countries , calls on russia to respect the rights of the states to sign association agreements with the european union , applauds the significant progress of ukraine , moldova , and georgia in adopting democratic norms , and urges the state department to continue to support the rights of ukraine , moldova , and georgia to enter into voluntary partnerships , to support reforms in eastern partnership countries which will enable them to meet the conditions for closer ties with the eu , and to support reforms making them more democratic , prosperous , and secure .

h.res .

284 ( turner ) expressing the sense of the house of representatives with respect to promoting energy security of european allies through opening up the southern gas corridor .

h.res .

284 was introduced on june 27 , 2013 , and was forwarded by the subcommittee on europe , eurasia , and emerging threats to the committee on foreign affairs ( amended ) by unanimous consent on september 19 , 2013 .

h.res .

227 ( valadao ) calling on the president to work toward equitable , constructive , stable , and durable armenian - turkish relations based upon the republic of turkey's full acknowledgment of the facts and ongoing consequences of the armenian genocide , and a fair , just , and comprehensive international resolution of this crime against humanity .

introduced on may 20 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on foreign affairs .

referred to the subcommittee on europe , eurasia , and emerging threats on june 7 , 2013 .

s. 1548 ( durbin ) haiti and armenia reforestation act of 2013 .

introduced on september 25 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on foreign relations .

to provide assistance to the government of haiti and the government of armenia to develop and implement , or improve , nationally appropriate policies and actions to reduce deforestation and forest degradation and improve forest management and natural regeneration .

h.r .

1960 ( mckeon ) national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 .

introduced on may 14 , 2013 .

passed the house on june 14 , 2013 ( h.rept .

113-102 ) .

placed on the senate legislative calendar on june 14 , 2013 .

section 1244 , a statement of congress on defense cooperation with georgia , raises concerns that problems of democratization in georgia could harm bilateral political , economic , and security cooperation .

