newspapers and journals carry reports of efforts by local , state , and national governments to privatize government agencies or services .

privatization initiatives are being considered and carried out in nation - states around the world .

privatization is an idea that has attracted both strong adherents and vociferous critics .

privatization reached the federal policy agenda in the united states more than two decades ago , and each congress features new bills proposing to either expand or halt the movement of federal governmental activities to the private sector .

in recent years , president george w. bush has advocated the privatization of military housing and the expansion of opportunities for private organizations to provide social and community services as part of his government management agenda .

moreover , the president supported the provision of housing and schooling vouchers to persons displaced by hurricane katrina , and the creation of a medicare prescription drug benefit provided by private firms .

congress , however , has been of mixed mind regarding privatization , enacting policies that both limit and expand the private sector's access to federal funds to provide governmental services .

congress has enacted statutes ( eg , p.l .

104-193 , sec .

104 ; p.l .

106-554 , sec .

1 ) that permit private groups — including not - for - profits and religious organizations — to apply for grants to provide social services , such as substance abuse counseling and employment training , previously offered by government agencies .

during the 110 th congress , the house approved a bill that would impose a one year "moratorium on conversion to contractor performance of department of defense functions at military medical facilities" ( h.r .

1538 , section 301 ) .

privatization , however , is not a recent phenomenon .

since the founding of the republic , the federal government has hired or contracted with private firms to provide public goods and services .

for example , congress enacted a statute in 1789 that declared that it shall be the duty of the secretary of the treasury to provide by contracts , which shall be approved by the president , for building a lighthouse near the entrance of the chesapeake bay , and for rebuilding when necessary , and keeping in good repair , the lighthouses , beacons , buoys , and public piers in the several states...." ( 1 stat .

54 ) hence , privatization has been of perennial interest to congress and likely will continue to be so .

economists , political leaders , and government officials tend to define "privatization" differently .

the breadth of activities covered by the term "privatization" varies greatly .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , for example , has defined "privatization" narrowly to refer to activities that "involve a genuine sale of assets and termination of a federal activity. .

the oxford english dictionary , meanwhile , defines the term more broadly to mean "the policy or process of making private as opposed to public. .

perhaps most commonly , "privatization" is used to refer to "any shift of activities or functions from the state to the private sector. .

all three of these definitions have value .

arguably , though , it may be possible to define privatization more precisely .

privatization might be defined as the use of the private sector in the provision of a good or service , the components of which include financing , operations ( supplying , production , delivery ) , and quality control .

this definition is useful to policymakers for three reasons .

first , it enables policymakers who wish to improve the provision of a good or service to see that privatization is not an either / or proposition .

rather , privatization is a matter of degrees and there are myriad means , as this report explicates , through which the private sector may be brought into the process of the provision of a good or service .

at minimum , an agency might purchase office supplies , such as printer paper , pens , and folders , from a private sector firm ( supplying ) .

alternatively , a government agency may more heavily utilize the private sector .

it might also hire a not - for - profit corporation to raise operating funds and contract with private firms to assist in the provision of a service ( supplying , financing , delivery ) .

taken furthest , an agency might be abolished and private firms allowed to provide a good or service ( financing , supplying , production , delivery , and quality control ) .

second , utilizing this definition also may enable policymakers to see that a fundamental values question lies beneath the issue of privatization .

whenever government must provide a good or service , the question arises , "which components of provision ought to be done by the government and which might be done by the private sector ? .

different approaches to privatization of the components of an agency's provision of goods and service may provoke more or less controversy .

for example , permitting an agency to hire a private firm to assess its performance ( quality control ) may elicit some concern ; permitting this same agency to acquire funds by charging citizens fees ( financing ) may provoke widespread criticism .

on the whole , then , the definition employed in this report may highlight for policymakers both the instrumental ( eg , "how" ) and normative ( eg , "ought" ) questions involved in privatization .

the sources of the salience of privatization are manifold , but likely include privatization's rhetorically potent rationales , purported benefits , and political attractiveness .

unlike "reinventing government," "performance - based organizations," or other recent government reform ideas , privatization remains much discussed in federal policy networks .

that said , proponents' acclamation of privatization as a tool for improving the performance of government has not gone without rebuttal .

observers and opponents have raised numerous questions and issued assorted criticisms of privatization .

views include the following: the shifting of government work from government employees to private sector contractors has been criticized as a union - busting strategy intended to weaken the political left by decreasing the number of unionized government employees .

contracting out may adversely affect women and minorities collectively , as they have "tended to find jobs in the civil service more readily than in the private sector. .

under the american theory of governance , political power originated with the people , who erected government and entrusted it to use this power in accordance with the law .

thus , the responsibility of those employed by government is to act in accordance with this fiduciary relationship .

accordingly , both the constitution and federal law include oaths to be taken by elected officials and civil servants .

bureaucracies are not merely passive entities that execute the law as enacted .

bureaucracies interpret the law and sculpt policies .

thus , any effort to shift bureaucratic functions to the private sector may risk transferring away some governing discretion into the hands of private parties who are not accountable to the public and may not have its interests at heart .

one of the objectives of creating a civil service was to provide government with a stable corps of committed employees .

federal workers were to be chosen on a rational basis , as opposed to the favor of an appointee , and provided with protections and good compensation and benefits that would encourage long tenures .

it was hoped that this arrangement would develop in employees the often peculiar expertise required to carry out governmental activities and instill in them a commitment to the law .

privatization may "hollow out" agencies' expertise , replacing them with short - term contract workers with little commitment to the public mission of the agency .

contracting out can promote iron triangles and other corrupt relationships between the federal government and the private sector .

for example , boeing company reached a $615 million settlement with the department of justice in may 2006 .

the company was investigated for its role in a contracting scandal .

the company fired its chief financial officer — who attempted to persuade an air force official , who was overseeing a large federal contract that boeing was bidding on — to take a job with the company .

this same official was jailed after she admitted that she had used the boeing executive to get a job for her daughter and future son - in - law with boeing and improperly favored the company in awarding the contract .

the premise of privatization is that the government will benefit when firms in a competitive market compete to provide it with products and services .

competitive markets , however , require a number of conditions to be met for them to function properly .

to cite just two of them , ( 1 ) firms must not face barriers to entry in this market and ( 2 ) the buyer of the goods and services must possess sufficient information to empower it to make a rational purchase .

if any of the conditions for competition are not met , the buyer — i.e. , an agency — may be exploited .

in short , markets can fail , especially if there are too few firms to compete for government contracts .

hiring private firms to carry out government work creates great management challenges for government administrators .

should an agency fail to have well - trained personnel and effective oversight procedures in place , its utilization of private providers can result in waste , fraud , and abuse .

government may benefit when private firms compete to provide a good or service ; however , should the firm providing the service go out of business there may be a time lag before it can be replaced .

the costs of this time lag can be formidable .

for example , when a company operating charter schools in california became defunct in august 2004 , the parents of 10,000 children had but a few weeks to locate new schools for their children .

privatization does not always lead to cost savings or better service .

in some instances , private firms have had significantly higher cost overruns than government agencies in the performance of services .

in other instances , private firms have performed work that has been criticized as being grossly inadequate .

privatization , then , has been criticized as ill - intentioned and inherently inimical to good government , and it has been faulted both in principle and in practice .

many means of privatization have been devised , and the classification and nomenclature used for these activities varies from study to study .

nevertheless , privatization , generally , is understood to include the following activities: divestiture / load - shedding , contracting for goods , contracting for services ( outsourcing ) , vouchers , quasi governmental entities ( including government - owned - contractor - operated facilities ( goco ) ) , third - party financing , grants to private parties , prize competitions , and the use of volunteers .

each of these activities is described below .

privatization , as already discussed , involves removing the federal government from one or more of the steps in the government provision of a good or service .

marketization , which is sometimes called "commercialization," is a management strategy that attempts to make a government agency perform better rather than replacing it with a private firm .

marketization , like privatization , is a term that has been used to mean different things in different contexts .

in former communist nations , for example , the sale of state - owned manufacturing enterprises to private parties has been called "marketization. .

commentators also have used "marketization" to refer to the practice of requiring government agencies to compete with the private sector for government work contracts .

 ( this report calls this practice "competitive sourcing." ) .

generally speaking , marketization denotes the adoption of the methods and values of the market to guide its operations and activities .

hence , this report uses the term "marketization" to refer to the redesign of a government agency in order to make it provide goods and services in the manner of a private firm .

typically , marketization involves altering the incentive structures facing a government agency in order to make it operate more efficiently .

an example may prove illustrative .

for much of its history , the u.s. government had a department that provided postal services .

the u.s. post office received large annual appropriations from congress , whose members were deeply involved with its operations , including the selection of management and the pricing of postal services .

under this configuration , the u.s. post office ran into operational difficulties and developed a reputation for incompetence and corruption .

in the 1960s , some critics called for the abolition of the post office and privatization of postal services .

in 1970 , congress chose a less dramatic means for reform .

it enacted a statute that marketized the u.s. post office ( p.l .

91-375 ; 84 stat 725 et seq. ) .

the new u.s .

postal service ( usps ) became an independent entity of the executive branch with greater freedom to run its operations .

critically , usps was statutorily required to earn sufficient revenue to cover its costs of operation ; it could no longer rely on annual appropriations .

since its marketization , usps has reported considerable productivity growth and is generally acknowledged to be better operated .

there are many ways that an agency may be marketized .

for example , congress might require an agency meet its costs of operations and deny it annual appropriations .

congress might also permit an agency to set up bonus programs , under which employees may be rewarded for reaching productivity targets .

in short , any reform that aims to alter an agency's incentives so that they are more like those facing private firms might be called marketization .

four often - employed means for marketization are franchising , user fees , government corporations , and competitive sourcing .

though quite different , all four approaches share a similar characteristic — they require an agency to compete for revenue .

ultimately , in considering whether to pursue privatization as a strategy to improve the provision of goods and services , the question arises , "what is the proper role of government ? .

few would dispute that some broad functions should be handled by government and its employees , while others should be left to the private sector .

but which ones ? .

definitive guidance is unavailable .

the constitution enumerates many of the broad functions that are to be carried out by the federal government .

however , the constitution does not enumerate which of the tasks required to carry out these broad functions must be performed by governmental employees and which may be performed by private persons .

for example , the constitution states that "the congress shall have power ... to establish post offices and post roads. .

 ( article i , sec .

8 , cl .

7 ) however , it does not declare whether the federal government must use government employees to build these roads or whether it may hire private contractors .

furthermore , the constitution is of limited utility because the federal government's activities extend far beyond those listed in the constitution .

federal statutory law provides some guidance .

fair requires "government personnel" to perform "inherently governmental activities. .

fair defines "inherently governmental activities" as those "so intimately related to the public interest as to mandate performance by government personnel. .

it further defines the term to include activities that require either the exercise of discretion in applying federal government authority or the making of value judgments in making decisions for the federal government , including judgments relating to monetary transactions and entitlements .

an inherently governmental function involves , among other things , the interpretation and execution of the laws of the united states so as — ( i ) to bind the united states to take or not to take some action by contract , policy , regulation , authorization , order , or otherwise ; ( ii ) to determine , protect , and advance united states economic , political , territorial , property , or other interests by military or diplomatic action , civil or criminal judicial proceedings , contract management , or otherwise ; ( iii ) to significantly affect the life , liberty , or property of private persons ; ( iv ) to commission , appoint , direct , or control officers or employees of the united states ; or ( v ) to exert ultimate control over the acquisition , use , or disposition of the property , real or personal , tangible or intangible , of the united states , including the collection , control , or disbursement of appropriated and other federal funds .

 ( 112 stat .

2382 ( b ) ) additionally , fair explicitly excludes some activities from this category .

the term does not normally include — ( i ) gathering information for or providing advice , opinions , recommendations , or ideas to federal government officials ; or ( ii ) any function that is primarily ministerial and internal in nature ( such as building security , mail operations , operation of cafeterias , housekeeping , facilities operations and maintenance , warehouse operations , motor vehicle fleet management operations , or other routine electrical or mechanical services ) .

 ( 112 stat .

2382 ( c ) ) yet , this statutory guidance leaves much unclear .

debates have and will erupt over the application of these terms to specific activities .

for example , currently , the federal government's national response plan for mass disasters charges a private organization , the american national red cross , with responsibility to lead and coordinate efforts to provide mass care , housing , and human services after disasters that require federal assistance .

under fair , do such activities constitute "the interpretation and execution of the laws of the united states so as ... to significantly affect the life , liberty , or property of private persons" ? .

if so , then ought these activities be carried out by the department of homeland security ? .

or , to take a second example — does the aforementioned portion of fair permit the federal government to outsource the housing of federal prisoners ? .

moreover , this statutory guidance is of limited utility in considering a fundamental question beneath the privatization debate .

fair provides guidance on the permissible extent of private sector participation in current federal activities .

it does not , nor was it intended to , provide answers as to which broad activities the federal government should be involved in and which should be left to the private sector: should the federal government be involved in commuter rail service , as it is with amtrak ? .

should the federal government operate energy - generating facilities , like the bonneville power authority and those of the tennessee valley authority ? .

should federally established entities provide liquidity to the secondary housing loan market ? .

should the federal government provide comprehensive long - term health insurance to the aged ? .

should the federal government use private contractors to provide security in iraq ? .

these questions and others have been debated at length in recent years without easy resolution .

"what ought government do ? .

is a question that is inherently value - laden and intimately bound up with individuals' varying perspectives on the role of government , the proper extent of its power vis - à - vis state and local governments , the fairness of free markets , and other political - philosophical issues .

in the past two decades , privatization emerged on the federal policy agenda .

surveying this policy movement , one social scientist has written , private and market - style mechanisms are increasingly employed to provide what government had taken as duties .

religious groups join secular nonprofit and for - profit providers of services paid for or sought by government .

decision makers in education , health care , social services , and law constantly cross the boundaries between public and private , religious and secular , profit and nonprofit .

the very newness of privatization as a policy idea likely helped cause some of the confusion over its definition .

this report defines privatization as the use of the private sector in the provision of a good or service , the components of which include financing , operations ( supplying , production , delivery ) , and quality control .

this definition , though imperfect , is useful insofar as it enables one to view privatization activities upon a spectrum ; that is , an agency may more or less privatize its provision of goods and services , depending on how many of the components of the provision process have been moved to private sector providers .

this report also differentiates privatization from marketization .

as described above , the ramifications of this difference are significant .

entities couched within the governmental and private sectors do not behave identically ; each has its strengths and weaknesses .

those uncomfortable with privatization may find marketization a more attractive option .

meanwhile , those favoring privatization may view marketization as a half measure that cannot be expected to produce goods and services as efficiently as privatization .

it can be expected that privatization will remain a controversial idea .

any attempt to improve the federal government's provision of goods and services through privatization likely may elicit concerns over the intentions and possible consequences of the proposal .

meanwhile , implicit in the debate about privatization lurks the old and nettlesome question — "which activities are essential to the state and should remain directly accountable to the elected representatives of the people and which may be carried out by the private sector ? .

