c hina's rise from a poor developing country to a major economic power in about four decades has been spectacular .

from 1979 ( when economic reforms began ) to 2017 , china's real gross domestic product ( gdp ) grew at an average annual rate of nearly 10% .

according to the world bank , china has "experienced the fastest sustained expansion by a major economy in history — and has lifted more th an 800 million people out of poverty. .

china has emerged as a major global economic power .

for example , it ranks first in terms of economic size on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis , value - added manufacturing , merchandise trade , and holder of foreign exchange reserves .

china's rapid economic growth has led to a substantial increase in bilateral commercial ties with the united states .

according to u.s. trade data , total trade between the two countries grew from $5 billion in 1980 to an estimated $634 billion in 2017 .

china is currently the united states' largest merchandise trading partner , its third - largest export market , and its largest source of imports .

many u.s. companies have extensive operations in china in order to sell their products in the booming chinese market and to take advantage of lower - cost labor for export - oriented manufacturing .

these operations have helped some u.s. firms to remain internationally competitive and have supplied u.s. consumers with a variety of low - cost goods .

china's large - scale purchases of u.s. treasury securities ( which totaled $1.2 trillion as of november 2017 ) have enabled the federal government to fund its budget deficits , which help keep u.s. interest rates relatively low .

however , the emergence of china as a major economic power has raised concern among many u.s. policymakers .

some claim that china uses unfair trade practices ( such as an undervalued currency and subsidies given to domestic producers ) to flood u.s. markets with low - cost goods , and that such practices threaten american jobs , wages , and living standards .

others contend that china's growing use of industrial policies to promote and protect certain domestic chinese industries or firms favored by the government , and its failure to take effective action against widespread infringement and theft of u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) in china , threaten to undermine the competitiveness of u.s. ip - intensive industries .

in addition , while china has become a large and growing market for u.s. exports , critics contend that numerous trade and investment barriers limit opportunities for u.s. firms to sell in china , or force them to set up production facilities in china as the price of doing business there .

the chinese government views a growing economy as vital to maintaining social stability .

however , china faces a number of major economic challenges which could dampen future growth , including distortive economic policies that have resulted in overreliance on fixed investment and exports for economic growth ( rather than on consumer demand ) , government support for state - owned firms , a weak banking system , widening income gaps , growing pollution , and the relative lack of the rule of law in china .

the chinese government has acknowledged these problems and has pledged to address them by implementing policies to increase the role of the market in the economy , boost innovation , make consumer spending the driving force of the economy , expand social safety net coverage , encourage the development of less - polluting industries ( such as services ) , and crack down on official government corruption .

the ability of the chinese government to implement such reforms will likely determine whether china can continue to maintain relatively rapid economic growth rates , or will instead begin to experience significantly lower growth rates .

china's growing economic power has led it to become increasingly involved in global economic policies and projects , especially in regard to infrastructure development .

china's belt and road initiative ( bri ) represents a grand strategy by china to finance infrastructure throughout asia , europe , africa , and beyond .

if successful , china's economic initiatives could significantly expand export and investment markets for china and increase its "soft power" globally .

china's growing global economic influence has raised a number of questions , and in some cases , concerns , as to how china's rise will affect u.s. economic interests and influence on global economic policies .

china's economic rise has become a factor in congressional debate over various aspects of u.s. trade policy ( even those that are not directly related to china ) , such as the renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which was reauthorized through legislation in june 2015 , and the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , which was signed by the united states and 11 other countries in february 2016 .

in january 2017 , president trump announced that the united states would withdraw from tpp , which , many contend , may diminish u.s. economic influence in asia while expanding china's .

this report provides background on china's economic rise ; describes its current economic structure ; identifies the challenges china faces to maintain economic growth ; and discusses the challenges , opportunities , and implications of china's economic rise for the united states .

the rapid growth of the chinese economy has led many analysts to speculate if and when china will overtake the united states as the "world's largest economic power. .

the "actual" size of china's economy has been a subject of extensive debate among economists .

measured in u.s. dollars using nominal exchange rates , china's gdp in 2017 in nominal u.s. dollars was $11.9 trillion , about 62% of the size of the u.s. economy , according to estimates made by the imf .

china's 2017 per capita gdp in nominal dollars was $8,583 , which was 14.4% of the u.s. level .

many economists contend that using nominal exchange rates to convert chinese data ( or those of other countries ) into u.s. dollars fails to reflect the true size of china's economy and living standards relative to the united states .

nominal exchange rates simply reflect the prices of foreign currencies vis - à - vis the u.s. dollar , and such measurements exclude differences in the prices for goods and services across countries .

to illustrate , one u.s. dollar exchanged for local currency in china would buy more goods and services there than it would in the united states .

this is because prices for goods and services in china are generally lower than they are in the united states .

conversely , prices for goods and services in japan are generally higher than they are in the united states ( and china ) .

thus , one dollar exchanged for local japanese currency would buy fewer goods and services there than it would in the united states .

economists attempt to develop estimates of exchange rates based on their actual purchasing power relative to the dollar in order to make more accurate comparisons of economic data across countries , usually referred to as purchasing power parity ( ppp ) .

the ppp exchange rate increases the ( estimated ) measurement of china's economy and its per capita gdp .

according to the imf ( which uses price surveys conducted by the world bank ) , prices for goods and services in china are about half the level they are in the united states .

adjusting for this price differential raises the value of china's 2017 gdp from $11.9 trillion ( nominal dollars ) to $23.1 trillion ( on a ppp basis ) ( see table 1 ) .

imf data indicate that china overtook the united states as the world's largest economy in 2014 on a ppp basis .

china's share of global gdp on a ppp basis rose from 2.3% in 1980 to an estimated 18.3% in 2017 , while the u.s. share of global gdp on a ppp basis fell from 24.3% to an estimated 15.3% .

this would not be the first time in history that china was the world's largest economy ( see text box ) .

china's economic ascendency has been impressive , especially considering that in 1980 , china's gdp on a ppp basis was only one - tenth that of the united states ( see figure 6 ) .

the imf predicts that by 2022 , china's economy will be 46.6% larger than the u.s. economy on a ppp basis .

the ppp measurement also raises china's 2016 nominal per capita gdp ( from $8,583 ) to $16,624 , which was 27.9% of the u.s. level .

even with continued rapid economic growth , it would likely take many years for chinese living standards to approach u.s. levels .

for example , the eiu projects that , even by the year 2050 , chinese living standards would be half of u.s. levels .

china's trade and investment reforms and incentives led to a surge in fdi beginning in the early 1990s .

such flows have been a major source of china's productivity gains and rapid economic and trade growth .

there were reportedly 445,244 foreign - invested enterprises ( fies ) registered in china in 2010 , employing 55.2 million workers or 15.9% of the urban workforce .

as indicated in figure 10 , fies account for a significant share of china's industrial output .

that level rose from 2.3% in 1990 to a high of 35.9% in 2003 , but fell to 25.9% in 2011 .

in addition , fies are responsible for a significant level of china's foreign trade .

at their peak , fies accounted for 58.3% of chinese exports in 2005 and 59.7% of imports , but these levels have subsequently fallen , reaching 43.2% and 46.8% , respectively , in 2017 ( see figure 11 ) .

t he united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) reports that china has become a both a major recipient of global fdi as well as a major provider of fdi outflows ( see figure 12 ) .

china 's fdi inflows in 2016 were estimated at $1 34 billion , making it the world's third - largest recipient of fdi ( after the united states and the u nited k ingdom ) .

china's fdi outflows in 2016 were $183 bill ion , making it the world 's second - largest source of fdi outflows ( after the united states ) .

china's fdi outflows exceeded inflows for the first time in 2016 .

the sharp increase in china's global fdi outflows in recent years appears to be largely driven by a number of factors , including chinese government policies and initiatives to encourage firms to "go global. .

the government wants to use fdi to gain access to ipr , technology , know - how , famous brands , etc. , in order to move chinese firms up the value - added chain in manufacturing and services , boost domestic innovation and development of chinese brands , and help chinese firms ( especially soes ) to become major global competitors .

china's slowing economy and rising labor costs have also encouraged greater chinese overseas fdi in order to help firms diversify risk and expand business opportunities beyond the china market , and , in some cases , to relocate less competitive firms from china to low - cost countries .

china's ministry of foreign trade ( mofcom ) reports that in 2016 , chinese nonfinancial fdi in bri countries totaled $14.5 billion , and that new contracts totaling $126 billion ( or 52% of total new contracted chinese overseas fdi in 2016 ) were signed with such countries .

additionally , increased fdi outflows may be the result of the chinese government attempting to diversify its foreign exchange reserve holdings ( which totaled $3.1 trillion as of december 2017 — by far the world's largest holder ) .

until recently , it appears that a large share of china's reserves have gone to portfolio investments , especially u.s. treasury securities , which are relatively safe and liquid , but earn relatively small returns .

according to chinese government data on nonfinancial fdi inflows , the largest sources of cumulative fdi in china for 1979-2016 were hong kong and macau ( by far the largest at 52.6% of total ) , the british virgin islands ( bvi ) , japan , singapore , and the united states ( see table 2 ) .

the largest sources of nonfinancial fdi inflows into china in 2016 were hong kong / macau ( 65.3% of total ) , bvi , singapore , south korea , the united states , and taiwan .

according to chinese data , annual u.s. nonfinancial fdi flows to china peaked at $5.4 billion in 2002 ( 10.2% of total fdi in china ) .

in 2016 , they were $2.4 billion or 1.9% of total fdi flows to china ( see figure 13 ) .

china estimates the stock of u.s. nonfinancial fdi in china at $80 billion through 2016 .

a key aspect of china's economic modernization and growth strategy during the 1980s and 1990s was to attract fdi into china to help boost the development of domestic firms .

investment by chinese firms abroad was sharply restricted .

however , in 2000 , china's leaders initiated a new "go global" strategy , which sought to encourage chinese firms ( primarily soes ) to invest overseas .

one key factor driving this investment is china's massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves .

traditionally , a significant level of those reserves has been invested in relatively safe but low - yielding assets , such as u.s. treasury securities .

on september 29 , 2007 , the chinese government officially launched the china investment corporation ( cic ) in an effort to seek more profitable returns on its foreign exchange reserves and diversify away from its u.s. dollar holdings .

the cic was originally funded at $200 billion , making it one of the world's largest sovereign wealth funds .

another factor behind the government's drive to encourage more outward fdi flows has been to obtain natural resources , such as oil and minerals , deemed by the government as necessary to sustain china's rapid economic growth .

finally , the chinese government has indicated its goal of developing globally competitive chinese firms with their own brands .

investing in foreign firms , or acquiring them , is viewed as a method for chinese firms to obtain technology , management skills , and often , internationally recognized brands , needed to help chinese firms become more globally competitive .

for example , in april 2005 , lenovo group limited , a chinese computer company , purchased ibm corporation's personal computer division for $1.75 billion .

similarly , overseas fdi in new plants and businesses is viewed as developing multinational chinese firms with production facilities and r&d operations around the world .

china's fdi outflows by destination for 2015 ( as reported by the chinese government ) are listed in table 3 .

the largest destinations of cumulative chinese fdi through 2015 were hong kong ( 59.8% of total ) , the cayman islands ( 5.7% ) , the bvi ( 4.7% ) , and the united states ( 3.7% ) .

in terms of annual chinese fdi outflows , the largest recipients of fdi flows in 2015 were hong kong ( 61.6% ) , singapore ( 7.2% ) , the cayman islands ( 7.0% ) , and the united states ( 5.5% ) .

a significant level of chinese fdi that goes to hong kong , the bvi , and the cayman islands likely is redirected elsewhere .

the american enterprise institute ( aei ) and the heritage foundation jointly maintain the china global investment tracker ( cgit ) , a database that has been developed to track the actual flows ( from the parent company to the final destination ) of chinese investment globally .

the cgit database tracks fdi valued at $100 million or more ( which it refers to as "china's outward nonbond investment" ) .

these data differ significantly from official chinese fdi outflow data .

the cgit data on the top destinations of total chinese outward nonbond outward investment from 2005 to 2017 included the united states ( $172.7 billion ) , australia ( $103.7 billion ) , the united kingdom ( $75 billion ) , brazil ( $61.2 billion ) , and russia ( $53.8 ) ( see figure 14 ) .

the cgit also puts chinese fdi in the united states in 2017 at $24.5 billion ( compared to $54.6 billion in 2016 ) , making the united states the largest destination of chinese outward fdi .

china's largest u.s. acquisition in 2017 was hna's purchase of cit group's aircraft leasing business for $10.4 billion .

economic reforms and trade and investment liberalization have helped transform china into a major trading power .

chinese merchandise exports rose from $14 billion in 1979 to $2.3 trillion in 2017 , while merchandise imports grew from $18 billion to $1.8 trillion ( see table 4 and figure 15 ) .

china's rapidly growing trade flows have made it an increasingly important ( and often the largest ) trading partner for many countries .

according to china , it was the largest trading partner for 130 countries in 2013 .

from 2000 to 2008 , the annual growth of china's merchandise exports and imports averaged 25.1% and 24.2% , respectively .

however , china's exports and imports fell by 15.9% and 11.2% , respectively , due to the impact of the global financial crisis .

china's trade recovered in 2010 and 2011 , with export growth averaging 25.8% and import growth averaging 31.9% .

however , since that time , china's trade flows have slowed sharply .

from 2012 to 2014 , china's exports and imports grew at an average annual rate of 7.2% and 4.1% , respectively .

from 2015 to 2016 exports and imports fell by an average rate of 4.7% and 11.6% , respectively ( see figure 16 ) , reflecting a sluggish global economy and a decline in commodity prices ( such as oil and ores ) .

however , in 2017 , china's exports and imports rose by 6.7% and 17.4% , respectively .

china's merchandise trade surplus grew sharply from 2004 to 2008 , rising from $32 billion to $297 billion .

that surplus fell each year over the next three years , dropping to $158 billion in 2011 .

however , it rose in each of the next four years , reaching a record $679 billion in 2015 before falling to $611 billion in 2016 and to $489 billion in 2017 .

in 2009 , china overtook germany to become both the world's largest merchandise exporter and the second - largest merchandise importer ( after the united states ) .

in 2012 , china overtook the united states as the world's largest merchandise trading economy ( exports plus imports ) .

as indicated in figure 17 , china's share of global merchandise exports grew from 2.0% in 1990 to 14.1% in 2015 , but fell to 13.4% in 2016 and to 13.2% in 2017 .

china is currently undergoing a major restructuring of its economic model .

policies that were employed in the past to essentially produce rapid economic growth at any cost were very successful .

however , such policies have entailed a number of costs ( such as heavy pollution , widening income inequality , overcapacity in many industries , an inefficient financial system , rising corporate debt , and numerous imbalances in the economy ) and therefore the old growth model is viewed by many economists as no longer sustainable .

china has sought to develop a new growth model ( "the new normal" ) that promotes more sustainable ( and less costly ) economic growth that puts greater emphasis on private consumption and innovation as the new drivers of the chinese economy .

implementing a new growth model that sustains healthy economic growth could prove challenging unless china is able to effectively implement new economic reforms .

many analysts warn that without such reforms , china could face a period of stagnant economic growth and living standards , a condition referred to by economists as the "middle - income trap" ( see text box ) .

several of these challenges are discussed below .

china's rapid economic growth and emergence as a major economic power have given china's leadership increased confidence in its economic model .

many believe the key challenges for the united states are to convince china that ( 1 ) it has a stake in maintaining the international trading system , which is largely responsible for its economic rise , and should take a more active leadership role in maintaining that system ; and ( 2 ) further economic and trade reforms are the surest way for china to grow and modernize its economy .

lowering trade and investment barriers would boost competition in china , lower costs for consumers , increase economic efficiency , and spur innovation .

however , many u.s. stakeholders are concerned that china's efforts to boost the development of indigenous innovation and technology could result in greater intervention by the state ( such as subsidies , trade and investment barriers , and discriminatory policies ) , which could negatively affect u.s. ip - intensive firms .

opinions differ as to the most effective way to deal with china on major economic issues .

some support a policy of engagement with china using various forums , such as the newly created u.s. - china comprehensive economic dialogue .

others support a somewhat mixed policy of using engagement when possible , coupled with a more aggressive use of the wto dispute settlement procedures to address china's unfair trade policies .

still others , who see china as a growing threat to the u.s. economy and the global trading system , advocate a policy of trying to contain china's economic power and using punitive measures ( such as trade sanctions ) to either counter the negative impact of china's industrial policies on u.s. firms or push china to modify distortive and discriminatory policies ( such as the made in china 2025 initiative ) .

responding to china's bri is viewed by some as a major challenge to u.s. global economic interests .

while china's financial support of infrastructure projects in numerous countries could produce positive economic results , u.s. policymakers have expressed concerns that china will use bri to mainly benefit its own firms , that the process of implementation of projects will not be transparent , that bri participation could saddle countries with large debts , and that china will use the bri to spread its economic system to other countries .

