this report examines the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi's ) intelligence program and its reform .

while the report serves as an update of the fbi's efforts in these areas , a substantial part of its focus is on the implementation on the fbi's intelligence reform in the field .

an important question is whether intelligence policy designed by senior level intelligence directorate personnel at fbi headquarters , with field input , has been accepted , adopted and implemented within the fbi's field structure .

the report covers a number of issues of interest to congress relating to how well the fbi is progressing with its reform efforts .

the report also outlines the advantages and disadvantages of several congressional options to make further changes to the fbi's intelligence program .

finally , a number of appendices concerning contextual issues surrounding fbi intelligence reform are provided .

the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states have been called a major intelligence failure , similar in magnitude to that associated with the japanese attack on pearl harbor .

in response to criticisms of its role , the fbi has introduced a series of reforms to transform the bureau from a largely reactive law enforcement agency focused on criminal investigations into a more mobile , agile , flexible , intelligence - driven agency that can prevent acts of terrorism .

fbi director robert s. mueller iii has vowed to assert headquarters' control over the fbi's historically fragmented and much - criticized intelligence program .

he also has signaled his intention to improve the fbi's intelligence program by , among other measures , consolidating and centralizing control over fragmented intelligence capabilities , both at fbi headquarters and in the fbi's largely autonomous field offices .

finally , he has contended that intelligence has always been one of the fbi's core competencies and organic to the fbi's investigative mission , and asserted that the organization's intelligence efforts have and will continue to be disciplined by the intelligence cycle ( i.e. , the development and conduct of intelligence collection requirements , collection , analysis , and dissemination ) .

since the september 11 , 2001 attacks , mr. mueller has attempted to restructure the bureau's intelligence program .

he has created a new directorate of intelligence ( di ) at headquarters and established field intelligence groups ( figs ) at each of the fbi's 56 field offices to improve the bureau's intelligence capacity .

a number of reports has examined the fbi's intelligence reform efforts in the wake of the 2001 attacks , and congress passed far - reaching legislation reforming the intelligence community , including providing the fbi additional authorities .

the administration has also responded by directing the fbi to implement changes .

in response to the 9 / 11 attacks , director mueller vowed that the fbi would refocus its efforts , and concentrate on counterterrorism , counterintelligence and cyber crime as the bureau's three priorities .

he also committed to improving the fbi's intelligence program by consolidating and centralizing control over the bureau's historically fragmented intelligence capabilities , both at fbi headquarters and in the fbi's field offices .

he also reaffirmed his belief that intelligence had always been one of the fbi's core competencies and central to the fbi's investigative mission , and asserted that the organization's intelligence efforts had and would continue to be disciplined by the intelligence cycle of intelligence requirements , collection , analysis , and dissemination .

in 2005 , the fbi says its also plans to ( 1 ) establish a dedicated funded staffing level for agents within the intelligence program and assign those agents to work as collectors , target developers and reporters ; ( 2 ) incorporate a strategic intelligence unit into the di ; ( 3 ) incorporate strategic analysis into each fig ; ( 4 ) integrate intelligence and law enforcement community partners fully into the figs ; and , ( 5 ) incorporate the review element "intelligence" into the performance plans of each fbi special agent and supervisory agent , measuring them on the number of sources developed and intelligence produced .

the fbi also will add an assistant special agent in charge ( asac ) for each of the 21 field offices that currently are served by only one asac .

this individual will be responsible for guiding that office's national security mission and will undergo training in intelligence processes and procedures before assuming the post .

since 9 / 11 , the fbi has initiated , or been encouraged to initiate , numerous organizational , business practices , and resource allocation changes in an attempt to strengthen its intelligence program .

organizationally , the bureau first established an office of intelligence — now redesignated as the di as a result of p.l .

108-458 , in an effort to focus its intelligence efforts .

the bureau also established field intelligence groups ( figs ) in each of its 56 field offices .

other changes include hiring additional intelligence analysts and special agents dedicated to intelligence collection ; developing a new intelligence training curriculum ; and , establishing new information systems to manage the intelligence flow .

the following sections detail some of these changes .

whether the newly appointed ead for national security and deputy head of the national security branch will alter these changes remains an open question .

in approving the most sweeping reform of the intelligence community ( ic ) since its establishment in 1947 , congress fundamentally altered the community's chain of command by establishing the new position of director of national intelligence ( dni ) as part of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 .

among the many issues confronting the dni , one of the most important is his assessment of the fbi's efforts to reform its intelligence program .

congress could confront a number of issues in measuring fbi performance in this critical area .

they include the following: the fbi's new focus on centralized headquarters decision - making ; implementation challenges , including those in each area of the intelligence cycle ; congressional oversight ; and the adequacy of resources to support reforms .

numerous policy and budgetary options are available to congress with respect to the fbi's intelligence program .

these options range from the far - reaching — creating a new domestic intelligence agency — to more narrowly tailored adjustments to the fbi's budget to encourage more rapid implementation of the existing fbi vision for intelligence reform .

the white house approval of the wmd commission's recommendation to establish a national security service within the fbi leads to additional questions about the fbi's organization for intelligence .

first and foremost , will the creation of a new structure tangibly affect the cultural changes that , arguably , need to made at the fbi ? .

for example , will the figs now become empowered and more capable of managing and directing intelligence activities in the field because they now have at least an indirect reporting chain to the dni ? .

second , as the national security service will be led by an ead , or other senior fbi official , what will be the status of the fbi's existing ead positions for counterterrorism / counterintelligence and intelligence ? .

third , what exactly is the relationship between the dni and the leader of the national security service ? .

for example , to what extent , if at all , will the dni be able to re - direct fbi counterterrorism and counterintelligence operational and analytical resources at headquarters and in the field ? .

how will any disputes between the fbi director and the dni over resources within the national security service be resolved ? .

finally , how will the national security service relate to and interact with the fbi's criminal and cyber divisions ? .

the legislative options depend , to some extent , on which school of thought one finds most compelling .

not surprisingly , skeptics will advocate more far - reaching options , and optimists will favor more narrowly targeted changes focused on implementation .

adherents to the skeptics school of thought find problematic the argument that there is strong synergy between the intelligence and law enforcement disciplines .

moreover , they believe the civil liberties argument for the fbi maintaining the domestic intelligence mission may have been weakened by p.l .

108-458 , as it provided the dni with substantially enhanced authority over domestic intelligence through personnel and budgetary means .

if one is in the optimist / "synergist" camp , one of the greatest threats to the fbi's intelligence program may be undue turnover in leadership at the senior most levels of the fbi , which could undermine the institutionalization of change .

a close second in terms of threats to the reform efforts is attrition rates among intelligence professionals , and the potential to lose substantial numbers of newly hired analysts .

the sheer magnitude of intelligence analyst hiring , from 1,023 on - board in fy2001 , to a requested level of 2,700 in fy2006 is of considerable concern given certain attrition factors and the apparent lack of well - developed internal training infrastructure to support such an increase .

while congress has passed human resource retention measures to retain senior leadership and intelligence professionals , it is not certain how successfully the fbi is implementing these measures .

possible legislative options fall into at least two broad categories — structural / organizational and budgetary .

there are two broad options in this area .

the pro and con arguments for this option have been outlined in numerous reports and testimony before congressional committees and national commissions .

this option was rejected by both the 9 / 11 commission and the wmd commission .

however , the wmd commission stated that "we recommend that policymakers re - evaluate the wisdom of creating a separate agency — an equivalent to the british mi - 5 — dedicated to intelligence collection in the united states should there be a continued failure to institute reforms necessary to transform the fbi into the intelligence organization it must become. .

supporters argue that the establishment of a separate agency could provide a focus on the intelligence mission that a "hybrid" agency such as the fbi , with its dual law enforcement and intelligence missions cannot .

however , according to skeptics , establishing a new agency would present organizational challenges and unwisely de - couple what they see as mutually reinforcing disciplines of law enforcement and intelligence .

while the white house has approved a key recommendation of the wmd commission to establish such a service , this acceptance was achieved through the issuance of a white house memorandum .

the june 29 , 2005 white house fact sheet accompanying the memorandum of the same date stated that the white house: "... will work with congress on recommendations that require legislation. .

it then states that one of the issues that requires legislation is the creation of a new assistant attorney general for national security at the department of justice .

it does not state that it would be working with congress on legislation requiring the creation of the national security service within the fbi .

as a result of being created via a presidential memorandum , the new service and its functions are not codified in law and , therefore , are subject to unilateral change in the future .

congress may consider codification of the new organization within the fbi to ensure its functions , relationships , and activities , are explicitly specified in law .

because the fbi's directorate of intelligence has now become part of the national security service under the new white house plan , if congress agrees with the executive branch memorandum , section 2002 , of title ii , of p.l .

108-458 may need to be amended to update its functions and reporting relationships within the national security service .

important factors in determining the breadth and efficacy of the position of director of the national security service include what the specific authorities of the ead for national security and his deputy are ; the relationships of the ead for national security and his deputy to the dni , director , fbi and attorney general ; and the extent to which the ead for national security and his deputy can engage constructively the 56 special agents in charge and empower the 56 figs .

three areas of potential interest to congress are fbi - cia cooperation , terrorist funding and financial analysts , and special agents in charge and figs , as described below .

with regard to reported continuing turf battles between the fbi and cia , one approach would be to conduct aggressive oversight to ensure that the fbi and cia are cooperating in collecting intelligence overseas and domestically .

specially , congress could review whether the memorandum of understanding reportedly negotiated between the fbi and cia includes effective "rules of the road" that clearly outline each agency's intelligence collection responsibilities .

if congress determined the mou to be appropriate , it might then monitor its implementation through the use of various oversight mechanisms including hearings and audits .

at a time when increasing attention arguably should be focused on terrorist financing , congress could assess whether the fbi is focusing adequate intelligence resources in this area .

among other issues , it might review whether the fbi's figs possess an appropriate level of terrorist financial analytic capability .

financial analysts interviewed by crs at various field offices raised concerns about perceived career path inequities between the fbi's financial analysts and intelligence analysts .

congress , through its various oversight mechanisms , could consider whether the special agents in charge of fbi's field offices are devoting an appropriate level of management attention to the figs .

it might also inquire whether the fbi has provided an appropriate level of management attention at the assistant agent in charge level , and consider whether the fbi should appoint an assistant special agent in charge ( asacs ) in each field office whose sole responsibility is intelligence activities within each field office .

with respect to the budget , there are both strategic and tactical options .

the strategic options center on the harmonization of the national intelligence program budget with the internal budgetary authorities of the di .

the tactical options concern budgetary tradeoffs within the existing fbi intelligence program .

some options are .

according to the wmd commission , the ead - i controlled only 4% of fbi's spending on intelligence .

the wmd commission also concluded that if the fbi's ead - i does not directly control the national intelligence program resources within the fbi , then the dni's influence over the fbi's national intelligence program is tenuous , which may be inconsistent with his stated budgetary authorities outlined in p.l .

108-458 .

the bulk of the bureau's spending on intelligence lies outside the ead - i's control , residing principally in the counterterrorism and counterintelligence divisions .

the june 29 , 2005 white house memorandum stipulates that the attorney general shall ".. .

ensure that the fbi's national security service's intelligence activities , both at headquarters and in the field , are funded through the national intelligence program...." this appears to be consistent with the more specific language outlined in title i , section 102a ( 2 ) ( c ) of p.l .

108-458 which provides the dni's authority to "provide ... guidance," "develop and determine," and "present" a national intelligence program budget .

in a related matter , the internal structure of the fbi's budget might also be more clearly delineated to specify the sum total of its intelligence spending .

currently , the bottom line figure in the fbi budget's "intelligence decision unit" does not represent the total of fbi spending on intelligence related matters .

another possible strategic issue for the congress may be whether the fbi's portion of the nip continues to be appropriated through existing subcommittees or , in a manner more consistent with the other elements of the ic budget , which are funded by the defense appropriations subcommittees .

the bureau's intelligence program is authorized by the house and senate intelligence committees .

its intelligence budget , however , is appropriated by the house appropriations subcommittee on science , department of state , justice , and commerce , and related agencies and the senate appropriations subcommittee on commerce , justice and science .

an estimated one - third of the fbi's fy2006 budget request of $5.7 billion is for intelligence - related activities .

consistency in congressional procedures for funding elements of the intelligence community , however , may not necessarily be a compelling argument for change , particularly if congressional oversight and support of the fbi's intelligence program is determined to be best served by existing arrangements .

given the substantial increases in the fbi budget outlined above , one central question that may be asked of experts is the extent to which additional resources are essential to the implementation of the fbi's vision .

it may be universally true that any executive agency can do more with more resources .

however , it is also true that there are competing uses for existing resources .

given the steady fbi increases allocated to intelligence , some may question whether an additional 500 intelligence analysts are truly necessary .

certain tradeoffs , between more analytical staff and infrastructure , such as training and information technology to support those bodies , may be debated .

since not all observers fit neatly into the two "schools of thought" discussed above , crs explores a number of options .

at $5.7 billion , this request represents an 11% increase over fy2005 and would support 2,945 counterterrorism agents and 2,746 intelligence analysts ( an increase of 500 intelligence analysts to assist in the war on terrorism ) .

in order to allow the fbi maximum flexibility in allocating these resources to areas of greatest threat , the appropriation would not be conditioned or tied to any intelligence reform milestones .

condition additional funding to measurable and concrete personnel achievements in intelligence reform , particularly those measures dedicated to implementation of career paths , intelligence professional performance appraisals , and staff retention .

for example , one could fully fund salaries and expenses for additional special agents working , yet tie the appropriation for 500 intelligence analysts to one or more of the following: ( 1 ) ensuring that all analysts hired during the last three years at hq and in the field , have taken the analytical cadre education strategy - 1 course ; ( 2 ) the development of regional training programs modeled on those provided to other intelligence analysts in the intelligence community ; ( 3 ) the provision of all intelligence analysts with internet terminals on their desks ; ( 4 ) the demonstrated implementation of the expanded human resource authorities ( including exemptions from title 5 ) , including the implementation of a senior analytic service or senior intelligence service within the di for regional and functional intelligence and / or terrorism threats , ( yet not policy advisers ) ; ( 5 ) the implementation of new performance evaluation systems for special agents and intelligence analysts that focus on qualitative versus quantitative output , and ( 6 ) the development of formal mechanisms to ensure that field intelligence collectors are responsive to filling intelligence gaps assigned to them by the figs .

if it chose conditional appropriation of funds , the subcommittee might establish reporting requirements for the fbi in whichever areas it adopted .

appropriate some funding level under the requested 500 intelligence analysts and require the remainder of the resources be dedicated to new personnel who would serve as ( 1 ) administrative assistants responsible for the non - analytical functions many field intelligence analysts are asked to perform periodically , and ( 2 ) qualified , full - time instructors who would be dedicated to providing both new and experienced intelligence analysts with access to enhanced in - house training , as well as continued exposure to intelligence community and academic training programs .

while there may be an existing human resources formula for how many "support" personnel are necessary to support each newly hired special agent , this formula likely preceded the current intelligence reform efforts .

in short , congress could require that analysts not be diverted to non - analytical tasks .

appendix a. definitions of intelligence there are three formal categories of intelligence defined under statute or regulation .

they are foreign intelligence .

information relating to the capabilities , intentions , or activities of foreign governments or elements thereof , foreign organizations , or foreign persons .

counterintelligence .

information gathered , and activities conducted , to protect against espionage , other intelligence activities , sabotage , or assassinations conducted by or on behalf of foreign governments or elements thereof , foreign organizations , or foreign persons , or international terrorist activities .

criminal intelligence .

data which has been evaluated to determine that it is relevant to the identification of and the criminal activity engaged in by an individual who or organization which is reasonably suspected of involvement in criminal activity .

[certain criminal activities including but not limited to loan sharking , drug trafficking , trafficking in stolen property , gambling , extortion , smuggling , bribery , and corruption of public officials often involve some degree of regular coordination and permanent organization involving a large number of participants over a broad geographical area] .

appendix b .

the fbi's traditional role in intelligence according to executive order 12333 , united states intelligence activities , signed december 4 , 1981 , and the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s. code §401 ) , the fbi is a statutory member of the u.s. intelligence community .

specifically , and in accordance with section 1.14 of executive order 12333 , united states intelligence activities , the intelligence roles of the fbi are outlined as follows: under the supervision of the attorney general and pursuant to such regulations as the attorney general may establish , the director of the fbi shall ( a ) within the united states conduct counterintelligence and coordinate counterintelligence activities of other agencies within the ic .

when a counterintelligence activity of the military involves military or civilian personnel of the department of defense , the fbi shall coordinate with the department of defense ; ( b ) conduct counterintelligence activities outside the united states in coordination with the central intelligence agency as required by procedures agreed upon by the director of central intelligence and the attorney general ; ( c ) conduct within the united states , when requested by officials of the ic designated by the president , activities undertaken to collect foreign intelligence or support foreign intelligence collection requirements of other agencies within the ic , or , when requested by the director of the national security agency , to support the communications security activities of the united states government ; ( d ) produce and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence ; and ( e ) carry out or contract for research , development , and procurement of technical systems and devices relating to the functions authorized above .

appendix c. the fbi's intelligence programs — a brief history the fbi is responsible for deterring , detecting and preventing domestic activities that may threaten the national security , and , at the same time , respecting constitutional safeguards .

the fbi , a statutory member of the ic , is able to collect foreign intelligence within the united states when authorized by ic officials .

the fbi and its predecessor , the bureau of intelligence , have collected intelligence — foreign intelligence , counterintelligence and criminal intelligence — in the united states since 1908 , and , at times , effectively .

during the cold war , the fbi successfully penetrated the soviet leadership through a recruited u.s. communist party asset .

the fbi also battled the kremlin on the counterintelligence front .

in 1985 — dubbed the year of the spy , the fbi arrested 11 u.s. citizens for espionage — including former united states warrant officer john walker , who provided the soviets highly classified cryptography codes during a spying career that began in the 1960s .

the fbi also arrested larry wu - tai chin , a cia employee , a spy for the people's republic of china ; jonathan pollard , a naval investigative service intelligence analyst who stole secrets for israel ; and ronald pelton , a former national security agency communications specialist who provided the soviet union classified material .

more recently convicted spies include fbi special agent robert p. hanssen , who spied on behalf of soviet union and , subsequently , russia , and pleaded guilty to 15 espionage - related charges in 2001 ; and former defense intelligence agency analyst ana belen montes , arrested in 2001 and subsequently convicted for spying for cuba .

fbi excesses the fbi has been applauded for its historical successes , but also criticized for overstepping constitutional bounds by targeting u.s. citizens who were found to be exercising their constitutional rights .

for example , during the 1919-1920 "palmer raids," the fbi's so - called radical division ( later renamed the general intelligence division ) arrested individuals allegedly working to overthrow the u.s. government , but who were later judged to be innocent .

between 1956 and 1970 , the fbi investigated individuals it believed were engaging in "subversive" activities as part of the fbi's so - called cointelpro program .

in the mid - 1960s , the fbi surveilled such prominent americans as martin luther king , jr. , collecting "racial intelligence. .

and in the 1980s , the fbi was found to have violated the constitutional rights of members of the committee in solidarity with the people of el salvador ( cispes ) who the fbi believed violated the foreign agent registration act .

although congressional investigators concluded that the fbi's investigation did not reflect "significant fbi political or ideological bias ...," its activities "resulted in the investigation of domestic political activities protected by the first amendment that should not have come under governmental scrutiny. .

oversight and regulation: the pendulum swings in response to these fbi abuses , the department of justice imposed domestic intelligence collection standards on the ic , including the fbi .

for example , in 1976 , attorney general edward h. levi issued specific guidelines governing fbi domestic security investigations .

congress also established house and senate intelligence oversight committees to monitor the ic .

and president carter signed into law the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 , which established legal procedures and standards governing the use of electronic surveillance within the united states .

critics argue that until congress approved the u.s.a. patriot act granting the fbi additional authority to investigate suspected terrorists , increased oversight and over - regulation had seriously weakened the fbi's intelligence capabilities .

some thought that not only had regulations curtailed the fbi's surveillance authorities , but that they had undermined the risk - taking culture thought to be essential to successful intelligence work .

the levi guidelines were singled out as being particularly onerous .

some observers blamed the restrictions for discouraging domestic intelligence collection unless the fbi could clearly show that its collection was tied to a specific alleged crime .

they also said the restrictions led the fbi to transfer responsibility for parts of its counterterrorism program from the fbi's former intelligence division to its criminal division .

the result , they contend , was an anemic intelligence program that contributed to the failure to prevent the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks .

appendix d. past efforts to reform fbi intelligence the fbi's current intelligence reform is not its first .

twice before — in 1998 , and then again in 1999 — the fbi embarked on almost identical efforts to establish intelligence as a priority , and to strengthen its intelligence program .

both attempts are considered by some to have been failures .

both previous attempts were driven by concerns that fbi's intelligence effectiveness was being undercut by the fbi's historically fragmented intelligence program .

the fbi's three operational divisions , at the time — criminal , counterterrorism and counterintelligence — each controlled its own intelligence program .

as a result , the fbi had trouble integrating its intelligence effort horizontally between its divisions .

in intelligence world parlance , the programs were "stove - piped. .

in 1998 , the fbi attempted to address the stove pipe problem by consolidating control over intelligence under the authority of a newly established office of intelligence .

it also took steps to improve the quality of its intelligence analysis , particularly in the criminal area , which was viewed as particularly weak .

dissatisfied with the results , the fbi launched a second round of reforms the following year aimed at more thoroughly integrating fbi intelligence analysis in support of investigations .

a new investigative services division ( isd ) was established to replace the office of intelligence , and to house in one location all fbi analysts that until then had been "owned" by fbi's operational divisions .

although the isd was intended to provide each of the divisions "one - stop shopping" for their intelligence needs , it was never accepted by the operational divisions , which wanted to control their own intelligence analysis programs .

in the wake of 9 / 11 , the fbi concluded that analysts would be more effective if they were controlled by the operational divisions .

isd was abolished , and analysts were dispersed back to the divisions in which they originally served .

although observers blame the failure of both prior reform efforts on several complex factors , they put the fbi's deeply - ingrained law enforcement mentality at the top of the list .

as one observer described it , efforts to integrate intelligence at the fbi were substantially hampered because resources dedicated to intelligence were gradually siphoned back to the fbi's traditional counter crime programs .

moreover , there was also little sustained senior level support for an intelligence function that was integrated with the ic .

as alluded to above , the 9 / 11 commission detected through its staff visits to fbi field offices a gap between policy goals and the implementation of that policy .

reasonable individuals can differ with respect to the status of implementation of particular policies .

for example , what is a reasonable expectation for where the fbi ought to be in implementing its stated intelligence reforms given that the nation is now over 3½ ( or 2½ years — depending on when one chooses as a start date for fbi reforms ) years out from the attacks of september 11 , 2001 ? .

numerous analogies of the fbi as an "aircraft carrier ... that takes a long time to stop going in one direction and turn around and go in another ..." have been made , which speak to the difficulties inherent in changing any large organization with a strong and deeply ingrained culture .

these challenges notwithstanding , as many have argued and are aware , the national security imperative demands results in a timely manner .

