on may 1 , 2007 , president george w. bush vetoed the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , h.r .

1591 , in part because of measures designed to limit the u.s. military role in iraq .

he called the bill "unconstitutional because it purports to direct the conduct of operations of war in a way that infringes upon the powers vested in the presidency by the constitution , including as commander in chief of the armed forces. .

the next day , the house of representatives voted to approve the bill by a vote of 222 to 203 , failing to muster the two - thirds majority necessary to override the veto .

congress then passed a new version of the supplemental appropriations bill , h.r .

2206 ( p.l .

110-28 ) , without providing timetables for withdrawal from iraq , but conditioning the release of reconstruction assistance to iraq on achievement of certain benchmarks by the iraqi government , unless the president waives the requirements .

the house of representatives agreed to vote on a withdrawal deadline when it takes up fy2008 supplemental appropriations , which is expected in september .

as congress considers defense authorization and appropriations bills for fy2008 , there may be a renewed focus on whether or to what extent congress has the constitutional authority to legislate limits on the president's authority to conduct military operations in iraq .

congress may consider measures , for example , to repeal the authorization to use force in iraq , to set deadlines for the withdrawal of most troops from iraq , to set requirements for unit rotations into iraq , or to make other requirements that could affect the deployment of armed forces to iraq .

it has been suggested that the president's role as commander in chief of the armed forces provides sufficient authority for his deployment of additional troops , and any efforts on the part of congress to intervene could represent an unconstitutional violation of separation - of - powers principles .

while even proponents of strong executive prerogative in matters of war appear to concede that it is within congress's authority to cut off funding entirely for a military operation , it has been suggested that spending measures that restrict but do not end financial support for the war in iraq would amount to an "unconstitutional condition. .

the question may turn on whether the president's decisions on troop deployment and mission assignment are purely operational decisions committed to the president in his role as commander in chief , or whether congressional action to limit the availability of troops and the missions they may perform is a valid exercise of congress's authority to allocate resources using its war powers and power of the purse .

on october 16 , 2002 , congress passed and president bush signed the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution of 2002 .

while the president noted he had sought a "resolution of support" from congress to use force against iraq , and appreciated receiving that support , he also stated that: ... my request for it did not , and my signing this resolution does not , constitute any change in the long - standing positions of the executive branch on either the president's constitutional authority to use force to deter , prevent , or respond to aggression or other threats to u.s. interests or on the constitutionality of the war powers resolution .

the president indicated he would continue to consult with congress and to submit written reports to congress every 60 days on matters relevant to the resolution to use force , which authorizes the president to use the armed forces of the united states as he determines to be necessary and appropriate in order to ( 1 ) defend the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq ; and ( 2 ) enforce all relevant united nations security council resolutions regarding iraq .

the statute required certain conditions to be met prior to the initiation of military operations and made periodic reports to congress mandatory , but did not set a timetable or any criteria for determining when to withdraw troops from iraq .

it appears to incorporate future un security council resolutions concerning iraq that may be adopted by the security council as well as those adopted prior to its enactment , effectively authorizing military force not only to compel disarmament but to carry out other functions necessary for achieving the goals adopted or that may be adopted by the security council .

thus , it appears that the resolution authorizes force deemed necessary by the president for so long as iraq poses a continuing threat to the united states and the u.s. military presence is not inconsistent with relevant u.n. resolutions .

the resolution does not itself stipulate limitations with respect to the amount of force that may be used or the resources that may be expended to accomplish the authorized objectives ; however , congress may set limits by means of legislation or the budgeting process .

the department of defense has some latitude regarding how it allocates funds for various operations , and may have additional statutory authority to obligate funds without additional prior express authorization from congress .

at least two arguments support the constitutionality of congress's authority to limit the president's ability to increase or maintain troop levels in iraq .

first , congress's constitutional power over the nation's armed forces provides ample authority to legislate with respect to how they may be employed .

under article i , § 8 , congress has the power "to lay and collect taxes ... to ... pay the debts and provide for the common defence," "to raise and support armies," "to provide and maintain a navy," "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces," and "to declare war , grant letters of marque and reprisal , and make rules concerning captures on land and water," as well as "to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union , suppress insurrections and repel invasions" and "to provide for organizing , arming , and disciplining , the militia , and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united states. .

further , congress is empowered "to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers ..." as well as "all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states , or in any department or officer thereof. .

secondly , congress has virtually plenary constitutional power over appropriations , one that is not qualified with reference to its powers in section 8 .

article i , § 9 provides that "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law. .

it is well established , as a consequence of these provisions , that "no money can be paid out of the treasury unless it has been appropriated by an act of congress" and that congress can specify the terms and conditions under which an appropriation may be used , so long as it does not impose an unconstitutional condition on the use of the funds .

on the executive side , the constitution vests the president with the "executive power," article ii , § 1 , cl .

1 , and appoints him "commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states," id . , § 2 , cl .

1 .

the president is empowered , "by and with the advice and consent of the senate , to make treaties," authorized "from time to time [to] give to the congress information on the state of the union , and [to] recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient," and bound to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed. .

id . , § 3 .

he is bound by oath to "faithfully execute the office of president of the united states," and , to the best of his "ability , preserve , protect and defend the constitution of the united states. .

id . , § 1 , cl .

8 .

it is clear that the constitution allocates powers necessary to conduct war between the president and congress .

while the ratification record of the constitution reveals little about the meaning of the specific war powers clauses , the importance of preventing all of those powers from accumulating in one branch appears to have been well understood , and vesting the powers of the sword and the purse in separate hands appears to have been part of a careful design .

it is generally agreed that some aspects of the exercise of those powers are reserved to the commander in chief , and that congress could conceivably legislate beyond its authority in such a way as to intrude impermissibly into presidential power .

the precise boundaries separating legislative from executive functions , however , remain elusive .

there can be little doubt that congress would exceed its bounds if it were to confer exclusive power to direct military operations on an officer not subordinate to the president , or to purport to issue military orders directly to subordinate officers .

at the same time , congress's power to make rules for the government and regulation of the armed forces provides it wide latitude for restricting the nature of orders the president may give .

congress's power of appropriations gives it ample power to supply or withhold resources , even if the president deems them necessary to carry out planned military operations .

while it is well - established that congress and the president each possess authority on ending a military conflict , issues may arise if the political branches are in disagreement as to whether or how to end a military conflict .

inter - branch disagreement regarding the cessation of hostilities has been a rare occurrence , but it is not unprecedented .

in the 110 th congress , a number of proposals have been introduced that would repeal or establish an expiration date for the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution of 2002 .

the following sections discuss the constitutional authority implicated by a repeal of military authorization , procedural , and other considerations involved in rescinding prior military authorization as compared to limiting appropriations , and the legal effect that a repeal would have on continuing hostilities .

congress has used its spending power to restrict the deployment and use of the armed forces in the past .

in 1973 , for instance , after other legislative efforts failed to draw down u.s. participation in combat operations in indochina , congress effectively ended it by means of appropriations riders prohibiting use of funds .

section 307 of the second supplemental appropriations act for fiscal year 1973 , p.l .

93-50 ( 1973 ) , stated that , "none of the funds herein appropriated under this act may be expended to support directly or indirectly combat activities in or over cambodia , laos , north vietnam , and south vietnam , and after august 15 , 1973 , no other funds heretofore appropriated under any other act may be expended for such purpose. .

section 108 of the continuing appropriations resolution for fiscal year 1974 , p.l .

93-52 ( 1973 ) , provided that , "notwithstanding any other provision of law , on or after august 15 , 1973 , no funds herein or heretofore appropriated may be obligated or expended to finance directly or indirectly combat activities by united states military forces in or over or from off the shores of north vietnam , south vietnam , laos or cambodia. .

a year later , congress passed an authorizing statute , section 38 ( f ) ( 1 ) of the foreign assistance act of 1974 , p.l .

93-559 ( 1974 ) , which set a total ceiling of u.s. civilian and military personnel in vietnam of 4,000 six months after enactment and a total ceiling of 3,000 within one year of enactment .

a provision of an authorization act , section 404 of the international security assistance and arms export control act of 1976 , p.l .

94-329 ( 1976 ) , comprehensively prohibited using funds for military and paramilitary operations in angola .

it stated that: notwithstanding any other provision of law , no assistance of any kind may be provided for the purpose , or which would have the effect , of promoting , augmenting , directly or indirectly , the capacity of any nation , group , organization , movement , or individual to conduct military or paramilitary operations in angola , unless and until congress expressly authorizes such assistance by law enacted after the date of enactment of this section .

this section added that if the president determined that the prohibited assistance to angola should be furnished , he should submit to the speaker of the house and the senate committee on foreign relations a report describing recommended amounts and categories of assistance to be provided and identities of proposed aid recipients .

this report also was to include a certification of his determination that furnishing such assistance was important to u.s. national security interests and an unclassified detailed statement of reasons supporting it .

section 109 of the foreign assistance and related programs appropriations act for fiscal year 1976 , p.l .

94-330 ( 1976 ) , signed the same day as p.l .

94-329 , provided that , "none of the funds appropriated or made available pursuant to this act shall be obligated to finance directly or indirectly any type of military assistance to angola. .

in the 1980s , various versions of the boland amendment were enacted to prohibit using funds for various military activities in or around nicaragua .

for example , section 8066 of the department of defense appropriations act included in the continuing appropriations resolution for fiscal year , 1985 , p.l .

98-473 , 98 stat .

1935 ( 1984 ) , for example , stated that "during fiscal year 1985 , no funds available to the central intelligence agency , the department of defense , or any other agency or entity of the united states involved in intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose , or which would have the effect of supporting , indirectly or indirectly , military or paramilitary operation in nicaragua by any nation , group , organization , movement or individual. .

this provision stated that after february 28 , 1985 , the president could expend $14 million in funds if the president made a report to congress which specified certain criteria , including the need to provide further assistance for military or paramilitary operations prohibited by the boland amendment , and if congress passed a joint resolution approving such action .

in the 1990s , congress enacted section 8151 of the dod appropriations act for fiscal year 1994 , p.l .

103-139 ( 1993 ) , which approved using armed forces for certain purposes including combat in a security role to protect united nations units in somalia , but cut off funding after march 31 , 1994 , except for a limited number of military troops to protect american diplomatic personnel and american citizens unless further authorized by congress .

section 8135 of the dod appropriations act for fiscal year 1995 , p.l .

103-335 ( 1994 ) , provided that , "none of the funds appropriated in this act may be used for the continuous presence in somalia of united states military personnel , except for the protection of united states personnel , after september 30 , 1994. .

in title ix of the dod appropriations act for fiscal year 1995 , p.l .

103-335 ( 1994 ) , congress provided that , "no funds provided in this act are available for united states military participation to continue operation support hope in or around rwanda after october 7 , 1994 , except for any action that is necessary to protect the lives of united states citizens. .

these examples reveal the approaches that congress has employed to prohibit or restrict using military force .

they have ranged from the least comprehensive "none of the funds appropriated in this act may be used" to the most comprehensive "notwithstanding any other provision of law , no funds may be used. .

the phrase "none of the funds appropriated in this act" limits only funds appropriated and made available in the act that carries the restriction , but not funds , if any , that may be available pursuant to other appropriations acts or authorizing statutes .

to restrict funds appropriated and made available not only in the act that carries the restriction , but also pursuant to other appropriations acts , congress has used the phrase "none of the funds appropriated in this act or any other act may be used. .

the most comprehensive restriction is "notwithstanding any other provision of law , no funds may be used. .

this language precludes using funds that have been appropriated in any appropriations acts as well as any funds that may be made available pursuant to any authorizing statutes including laws that authorize transfers of appropriated or nonappropriated funds .

the constitution accords congress with ample authority to regulate the use of military personnel .

among other things , congress is designated with the power "to raise and support armies ; " "to provide and maintain a navy ; " "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces ; " and "to provide for organizing , arming , and disciplining , the militia , and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united states. .

in the 110 th congress , several legislative proposals have been introduced that would limit the deployment of certain military personnel to iraq .

some have argued that congressional action limiting the use of particular troops during wartime would , at least in certain circumstances , infringe upon the president's authority as commander in chief to conduct a military campaign in a manner that he deems appropriate .

as a matter of historical practice , congress has occasionally imposed limitations and other requirements on the deployment of u.s. troops , including during wartime .

these limitations have been effectuated either through the statutory prohibition on the use of military personnel for a particular purpose , or via the denial of appropriations in support of a particular operation .

the following are examples in which congress has limited the president's ability to use particular military personnel for certain purposes: 1915 — the army appropriations act restricted army tours of duty in the philippines to two years and tours in the canal zone to three years , unless the servicemember requested otherwise or in cases of insurrection or actual or threatened hostilities .

the restriction was amended in 1934 to provide for two - year tours and in both areas as well as certain other foreign duty stations .

the restriction was repealed in 1945 , and replaced with a requirement for the secretary of defense to report twice annually to the armed services committees regarding regulations governing the lengths of tours of duty for the army and air force outside the continental united states .

1933 — the treasury and post office appropriation act for fy1934 , provided that "assignments of officers of the army , navy , or marine corps to permanent duty in the philippines , on the asiatic station , or in china , hawaii , puerto rico , or the panama canal zone shall be for not less than three years .

no such officer shall be transferred to duty in the continental united states before the expiration of such period unless the health of such officer or the public interest requires such transfer , and the reason for the transfer shall be stated in the order directing such transfer. .

1940 — the selective training and service act of 1940 provided that "persons inducted into the land forces of the united states under this act shall not be employed beyond the limits of the western hemisphere except in the territories and possessions of the united states , including the philippine islands. .

1945 — in an act extending the selective training and service act until the end of world war ii , as determined by the earlier of dates proclaimed by the president or by concurrent resolution by both houses of congress , provided that no inductee under the age of nineteen "shall be ordered into actual combat service until after he has been given at least six months of [appropriate] military training...." 1948 — the selective service act of 1948 provided that eighteen - and nineteen - year old enlistees for one - year tours could not be assigned to land bases outside the continental united states .

1951 — the universal military training and service act of 1951 required inductees , enlistees , and other persons called to active duty to receive at least four months' "full and adequate" training prior to deployment overseas , and prohibited the expenditure of funds to transport or maintain a servicemember overseas in violation of the provision .

1956 — 10 u.s.c .

§ 6015 prohibited assignment of female servicemembers to duty on combat aircraft and all vessels of the navy .

10 u.s.c .

§ 6018 prohibited the assignment of navy officers to shore duty not explicitly authorized by law .

1985 — the national defense authorization act , 1985 prohibited the expenditure of funds to support an end strength of u.s. armed forces personnel stationed in nato countries above a level of 326,414 .

the measure was later modified to reduce the level further but to provide waiver authority to the president to increase the force level to up to 311,855 , upon notification to congress , if he determined the national security interests required exceeding the ceiling .

1992 — the national defense authorization act for fy1992 prohibited the use of appropriated funds to support an end strength level of members of the armed forces of the united states assigned to permanent duty ashore in nations outside the united states at any level in excess of 60 percent of the end strength level of such members on september 30 , 1992 , with exceptions in the event of declarations of war or emergency .

the precise scope of congress's ability to limit the deployment of u.s. military forces has not been ruled upon by the courts , and it is therefore unclear whether legislative measures limiting the use of particular military personnel during wartime would ever be deemed to be an unconstitutional infringement upon the president's authority as commander in chief .

nonetheless , historical practice suggests that , at least in some circumstances , congress may oblige the president to comply with certain requirements on the deployment of particular military personnel , including during periods of armed conflict .

much of the historical debate over war powers has taken place in the context where a president has initiated the use of military force with ambiguous or no congressional authorization , which is not the case here .

there is no obvious reason , however , to suppose that congress's constitutional power to limit hostilities depends on whether the hostilities were initiated with congress's express approval at the outset .

likewise , it does not seem consistent to suggest that congress's authority to limit the scope of hostilities may be exercised validly only at the initiation of hostilities , without opportunity for changing course once troops are engaged .

in modern times , federal courts have been reticent to decide cases involving war powers on the merits , including those involving appropriations measures .

however , in discussing whether a particular challenge raises non - justiciable political questions involving matters textually committed to the political branches by the constitution , courts have generally reiterated the understanding of a shared allocation of war powers .

that is , it is generally agreed that congress cannot "direct campaigns," but that congress can regulate the conduct of hostilities , at least to some degree , and that congress can limit military operations without the risk of a presidential veto by refusing to appropriate funds .

in 1970 , in response to a challenge related to the vietnam conflict , a federal district court expounded on the theme of congressional authority , with particular reference to congress's appropriations power: the power to commit american military forces under various sets of circumstances is shared by congress and the executive... .

the constitutional expression of this arrangement was not agreed upon by the framers without considerable debate and compromise .

a desire to facilitate the independent functioning of the executive in foreign affairs and as commander - in - chief was tempered by a widely shared sentiment opposing the concentration of unchecked military power in the hands of the president .

thus , while the president was designated commander - in - chief of the armed forces , congress was given the power to declare war .

however , it would be shortsighted to view art .

i , § 8 , cl .

11 as the only limitation upon the executive's military powers.... [i]t is evident that the founding fathers envisioned congressional power to raise and support military forces as providing that body with an effective means of controlling presidential use thereof .

specifically , the house of representatives ... was viewed by the framers as the bulwark against encroachment by the other branches .

in the federalist no .

58 ( hamilton or madison ) , we find: the house of representatives cannot only refuse , but they alone can propose , the supplies requisite for the support of government .

they , in a word , hold the purse — that powerful instrument by which we behold in the history of the british constitution , an infant and humble representation of the people gradually enlarging the sphere of its activity and importance , and finally reducing , as far as it seems to have wished , all the overgrown prerogatives of the other branches of the government .

this power over the purse may , in fact , be regarded as the most complete and effectual weapon with which any constitution can arm the immediate representatives of the people , for obtaining a redress of every grievance , and for carrying into effect every just and salutary measure .

despite congress's well - established authority over appropriations , it has been argued that the power of the purse cannot be wielded in such a way as to fetter the discretion of the commander in chief .

congress's power of the purse is subject to the same constitutional restrictions as any other legislative enactment , including those that affect allocation of powers among the three branches .

that is , congress cannot use appropriations measures to achieve unconstitutional results , although it might , in some circumstances , achieve a similar result simply by failing to appropriate money .

the doctrine of "unconstitutional conditions," most frequently applicable to laws conditioning benefits for states or private citizens on their relinquishment of constitutional rights , is said to apply as well to legislation authorizing presidential action .

this notion , however , adds little to the analysis .

congress has ample constitutional authority to enact legislation that restricts the scope of military operations .

if congress can enact a limitation on the conduct of military operations directly , it can do so through appropriations .

the larger question remains whether the limitation enacted amounts to an unconstitutional usurpation of the actual conduct of war .

some commentators agree that congress has the authority to cut off funds for military operations entirely , but assert that a partial cut - off or limitation on the use of funds would amount to an unconstitutional condition by interfering with the president's authority to conduct battlefield operations .

there has been some suggestion in the past that the president's responsibility to provide for troops in the field justifies further deployments without prior authorization from congress , with some arguing that the president has an independent implied spending power to carry out these responsibilities .

these arguments do not easily square with congress's established prerogative to limit the scope of wars through its war powers , and do not conform with congress's absolute authority to appropriate funds .

congress has frequently , although not invariably , acceded to presidential initiatives involving the use of military force .

while a history of congressional acquiescence may create a gloss on the constitutional allocation of powers , such a gloss will not necessarily withstand an express statutory mandate to the contrary .

it does not appear that congress has developed a sufficiently consistent or lengthy historical practice to have abandoned either its war power or its authority over appropriations .

the executive branch has objected to legislative proposals it views as intrusive into presidential power , including conditions found in appropriations measures .

and it remains possible to construe the function of "conducting military operations" broadly to find impermissible congressional interference in even the most mundane statutes regulating the armed forces .

to date , however , no court has invalidated a statute passed by congress on the basis that it impinges the constitutional authority of the commander in chief , whether directly or indirectly through appropriations .

in contrast , presidential assertions of authority based on the commander - in - chief clause , in excess of or contrary to congressional authority , have been struck down by the courts .

on the other hand , presidents have sometimes deemed such limitations to be unconstitutional or merely precatory , and have at times not given them the force of law .

in other words , administrations have relied on an argument based on the doctrine of "unconstitutional conditions" to justify the president's authority to reject a limitation on national security spending while continuing to spend the funds .

whether or not the president is constitutionally entitled to spend funds without adhering to relevant legislative conditions appears to be an issue unlikely to be resolved by the courts .

in sum , it seems that under the constitutional allocation of powers congress has the prerogative of placing a legally binding condition on the use of appropriations to regulate or end the deployment of u.s. armed forces to iraq .

such a prohibition seems directly related to the allocation of resources at the president's disposal , and would therefore not appear to interfere impermissibly with the president's ability to exercise command and control over the u.s. armed forces .

although not beyond question , such a prohibition would arguably survive challenge as an incident both of congress's war power and of its power over appropriations .

