the failed attempt by dubai ports world ( dp world ) to operate marine terminals at some u.s. ports raises the issue of whether foreign marine terminal operators pose a threat to u.s. homeland security .

dp world is a terminal operating company that operates as a commercial entity , but is owned by the government of dubai in the united arab emirates .

in march 2006 , dp world purchased a competitor , the british - owned peninsular & oriental steam navigation company ( p&o ) .

p&o leased marine terminals around the world , including at five u.s. ports – new york and new jersey , philadelphia , baltimore , miami , and new orleans , and was involved in other cargo handling operations at other east and gulf coast ports , as well as a cruise terminal in new york city .

as part of dp world's purchase of p&o , dp world acquired p&o's terminal leases or concessions at these u.s. ports .

however , as a result of congressional opposition , dp world announced on march 9 , 2006 that it would sell its stake in the u.s. portion of p&o's operations to a u.s. entity and on march 16 , 2007 , dp world sold its stake to aig global investment group .

notwithstanding the sale of u.s. terminal operations by dp world to a u.s. entity , the underlying issues remain: is the ownership of a terminal operating company relevant to the security of a u.s. port ? .

does foreign takeover of terminal operating leases potentially pose a threat to u.s. security ? .

should companies owned by foreign governments be precluded from operating u.s. port terminals ? .

these policy questions remain an issue because ( 1 ) many u.s. marine terminals are operated by foreign - based companies , and ( 2 ) given the global nature of the shipping business , similar transactions may occur in the future .

the purpose of this report is to provide information relevant in answering these questions .

it begins by explaining how ports work and what marine terminal operators do .

it then reviews the extent of foreign involvement that already exists in u.s. ports .

the next section describes the responsibility of terminal operators in providing security at u.s. ports and how their role fits in with the larger task of securing the entire maritime supply chain .

the report concludes by examining port security issues for congress .

the debate over the dp world transaction often confused the terms "port," "port authority," and "terminal. .

most major u.s. ports are publicly owned by a "port authority," which is a public or quasi - public organization associated with a city , county , regional , or state government .

a port authority is responsible for the overall administration of the property , terminals , and other facilities on the port complex .

a marine terminal is an assigned area with equipment for loading and unloading ships , and space for staging cargo until it is loaded on the ship or transferred to overland modes of transport .

some port authorities operate all or some of their marine terminals themselves , but most ports are "landlord" ports because they lease their facilities to terminal operating companies ( the tenants ) .

these leases are typically long - term – in the range of 10 to 30 years .

either the port authority or the terminal operator will supply the cranes and other cargo handling equipment .

it depends on the lease agreement between the port authority and each terminal operator .

as one port authority suggests , one can think of a public port like a shopping mall .

the port authority owns the entire mall property while the stores are leased to individual retail companies .

a large port could contain 15 to 20 marine terminals of various types .

some of the terminals could handle containers ( which are truck - trailers without the wheels ) , others may handle dry bulk cargo ( such as coal , grain , or sugar ) , liquid bulk cargo ( such as petroleum or chemicals ) , breakbulk cargo ( such as steel coils , pipes , or large machinery ) , or automobiles and trucks .

a typical container terminal may be 100 to 300 acres in size , while the entire port complex of a major port may be 2,000 to over 3,000 acres in size .

while the above model applies to the marine terminals involved in the dp world transaction , it does not apply to all marine terminals .

public port authorities only own approximately one - third of the deep - draft marine terminal facilities in the united states .

many of the privately owned marine terminals are associated with the oil , gas , and chemical industries .

in these cases , the waterside terminal may be a component of a larger industrial complex on land .

for instance , at the port of houston , the port of houston authority only owns or leases 12 marine terminals while there are 138 private terminals that are owned by either u.s. - based , foreign - based , or multi - national corporations that handle approximately 85% of the cargo that moves through the port of houston .

terminal operators ( a.k.a .

stevedores ) contract with longshoremen unions to provide cargo handling services on the docks .

longshoremen are hired by and report directly to a union hiring hall .

terminal operators also employ a management team who are hired by and report directly to the terminal operating company .

longshoremen , called "dockworkers," operate cranes that physically move the cargo from ship to dock and vice versa .

longshoremen , called "checkers," perform clerk functions in an office in or near the port .

at a container terminal , the checkers are responsible for directing the container traffic within the terminal area – they tell the dockworkers where containers need to be moved .

the ocean carrier provides a stowage plan which tells the terminal operator where the containers need to be loaded on the ship .

in the case of inbound shipments , the terminal operator separates those containers to be picked up by truck from those that will move by rail ( if there is an "on - dock" railroad at the terminal ) .

longshoremen also staff the gates where trucks enter to pick - up and drop - off containers .

longshoremen do not know the contents of containers except for containers carrying hazardous material , which require special handling and storage requirements .

the terminal operator is not concerned with the origin and final destination of the shipment .

the only cargo information relevant to the terminal operator in performing its function is the weight of the container ( for ship loading purposes ) , whether or not it has been released by customs ( for imported cargo ) , the bill of lading number ( or booking number for export cargo ) , seal number , and container number .

terminal operators are responsible for maintaining security on the property they rent from the port authority .

coast guard regulations and customs and border protection ( cbp ) security guidelines require terminal operators to provide basic security infrastructure and follow certain security practices when handling cargo .

these requirements are reviewed in some detail below because they indicate the specific responsibilities of a terminal operator in providing security at a port .

port security involves much more than the measures put in place within the immediate vicinity of a u.s. port complex .

securing the cargo and ships in transit to u.s. ports is arguably more critical and consequently the bulk of security activity takes place before cargo is unloaded at u.s. ports .

while u.s. ports are an acceptable place to interdict illegal drugs and enforce trade laws , not finding a terrorist weapon until after it reaches a u.s. port could be too late to prevent a potentially catastrophic event .

in response to this reality , the coast guard and cbp have adopted a strategy of "pushing the borders out" with a layered system of security measures .

key elements in this layered strategy are cbp's scrutiny of u.s. bound cargo at the overseas port of loading and the coast guard's scrutiny of ships before they enter u.s. harbors .

thus , with respect to anti - terrorism measures , u.s. ports are viewed as the last line of defense rather than the first .

the port security debate surrounding the dp world purchase of p&o has raised a number of issues for congress .

among them are the degree to which ownership is relevant to security and what potential threats to security may stem from such ownership ; the federal presence on port grounds that is necessary to insure the security of a port ; and the identification and mitigation of vulnerabilities in the maritime supply chain .

at issue for policymakers is how to ensure and verify compliance with agreed - upon security standards in an environment in which terminal ownership is subject to change and frequently is foreign - based .

dhs seeks a security regime which requires terminal operating companies to comply with federal security measures regardless of ownership .

the coast guard checks for compliance with physical security requirements at the terminal .

cbp , through its c - tpat program , requires terminal operators to adhere to similar security measures .

cbp is also in charge of deciding which cargo to physically inspect , with the terminal operator's role merely to set that cargo aside as cbp directs .

tsa will be in charge of screening terminal workers when the twic card is implemented .

one could argue that these measures apply equally to all terminal operators and that therefore the ownership of the terminal operating company is irrelevant to the security of a port .

however , the credibility of these federal security requirements also depends on how much of an actual presence port businesses perceive federal authorities have in the port .

in exercising its oversight role , congress is likely to consider whether the coast guard and cbp have enough inspectors to verify compliance with agreed upon security measures .

if one believes that stevedore ownership is relevant to security , then a subsequent question is whether foreign ownership poses more of a security risk than domestic ownership .

in evaluating whether foreign terminal operators should be excluded from u.s. ports , more information as to how many u.s. marine facilities are actually operated or owned by foreign - based companies would be useful .

as indicated above , most container terminals in the united states are operated by foreign companies but container terminals account for only one type of marine facility .

it is probable that in some cases , other types of marine terminals are not only operated but also owned by foreign interests .

while the maritime administration has compiled information on the ownership of container terminals at the largest u.s. container ports , similar information regarding other types of marine terminals is not readily available .

it is important to pinpoint exactly what advantage a terrorist group would have if it had some kind of connection with a terminal operator .

foreign terminal operators would gain intimate knowledge of the day - to - day security procedures at the u.s. terminals they operate and theoretically could pass this knowledge on to a terrorist group .

however , u.s. - based terminal operators would have the same knowledge and a terrorist group could infiltrate them also .

because foreign terminal operators hire mostly americans to work in their terminals , they may pose no more security risk than a u.s. - based company .

one could view foreign companies like dp world as mostly the financiers behind the terminal operation with little or no involvement in the day - to - day running of the terminals .

defining the potential threat posed by foreign terminal operators is important because there are also drawbacks to banning them from u.s. ports .

cargo security policy is about striking an appropriate balance between security and commerce .

it also involves balancing security and capital investment .

port facilities depend on large capital investments .

the piers , wharfs , cranes , and elevators needed to load and unload ships ; the storage yards , warehouses , or tank farms needed to store cargo ; the dredging of shipping channels and berths ; and landside connections to interstate highways and transcontinental railroads are all expensive infrastructure .

thus , the issue of foreign terminal operators involves guaranteeing security while remaining attractive to sources of capital .

because it could be too late if a terrorist weapon is discovered after it arrives at a u.s. port , the security of u.s. ports necessarily relies on the cooperation of shippers , carriers , ports , terminal operators , and border agencies in the country of origin to begin the screening process .

key policy questions are: should the united states trust these foreign entities ? .

should they be treated as partners and allies in securing maritime commerce ? .

because there are two ends to america's supply line , the answer to both may be a qualified "yes. .

for instance , although dp world will not be handling any u.s. cargo in u.s. ports , it will be handling u.s. cargo at ports of origin in china , hong kong , europe , southeast asia , the middle east , and elsewhere .

in evaluating the dp world transaction or others like it , it is appropriate to consider the extent to which the united states depends on foreign entities to secure its supply chain .

csi depends on the cooperation of the host government of the overseas port of loading to inspect u.s. bound cargo .

c - tpat depends on the cooperation of overseas manufacturers and overland carriers to protect u.s. bound shipments from terrorist infiltration .

isps relies on the cooperation of foreign governments and foreign - flag carriers to enforce port and vessel security codes .

as one maritime industry spokesperson stated: this is an international business with an international problem .

the only way it's going to be addressed effectively is through international efforts , which means the u.s. isn't going to do it all , nor can it do it all .

while the dp world issue spotlighted the role of terminal operators in port security , the initial debate about who should be operating u.s. ports quickly broadened into a debate about whether u.s. ports are secure .

the dp world controversy refueled debate about whether the nation is doing enough , doing it with enough urgency , and spending enough on u.s. port and maritime security .

members of congress have referred to ports as the "soft underbelly" in u.s. homeland security , to the shipping container as a modern day "trojan horse," and have argued that there are still "massive blind spots" in the maritime security regime .

while no one asserts that enough has already been done to strengthen security , post - 9 / 11 initiatives like csi , ats , c - tpat , mtsa , and isps have , most acknowledge , created a framework for building a maritime security regime .

an issue of likely interest to congress is the effectiveness of these maritime security initiatives .

gao has issued a number of reports addressing post - 9 / 11 security initiatives .

gao has reported several factors limiting csi , including staffing imbalances and lack of technical requirements for nii equipment used at foreign ports .

a number of concerns have also been raised by gao regarding the c - tpat program including the scope of effort and level of rigor applied to the validation process ; how many and the types of validations that are necessary to manage security risk ; and various staffing issues .

the ats system and cbp's targeting strategy more generally have been scrutinized by gao in reports that criticize the strategy for not incorporating all the key elements of a risk management framework , and not being entirely consistent with recognized modeling practices .

also , the dhs inspector general published the results of an audit of cbp's targeting procedures , and concluded that improvements were needed regarding the data used by ats , examination results should be used to refine ats targeting rules , and physical controls over containers could be improved .

the dhs inspector general has also raised concerns about the effectiveness of port security grants .

the gao has also identified difficulties in deploying radiation scanners at u.s. ports and it has reviewed the coast guard's ability to use risk management to guide its port security mission .

the cbp and coast guard have begun implementing many of the gao's and oig's recommendations .

a major concern for policymakers is assessing what is most at risk in the maritime domain and allocating the nation's resources accordingly .

three significant security issues in the container supply chain have been identified: ( 1 ) the integrity of the container packing process at the overseas factory or warehouse , ( 2 ) the integrity of the subsequent truck movement from the factory or warehouse to the overseas port of loading , and ( 3 ) the integrity of the manifest information that cbp uses , in part , to target high risk shipments for inspection .

because there is no fool - proof way to address these vulnerabilities , some security experts call for greatly increasing the percentage of containers that are physically inspected .

others question whether a determined terrorist would not be able to find an inexpensive solution to circumvent screening technology .

while the threat of a shipping container being used as a "trojan horse" by terrorists has received much attention , debate persists about the likelihood that terrorists would use them for such purpose .

the gao reports that while shipping containers are vulnerable , an extensive body of work by the fbi , academic , think tank , and business organizations concluded that the likelihood of such use to smuggle a weapon is considered low .

some contend that a more likely tactic is that terrorists would attempt to smuggle a weapon using private watercraft and land at a public marina because they could remain in control of the weapon and avoid the scrutiny that occurs at official ports of entry .

terrorists could also smuggle a weapon in other types of cargo , such as motor vehicles or breakbulk cargo .

they could repeat the attack method used against the uss cole or the limberg in which terrorists rammed a small boat packed with explosives into the hulls of these ships .

they could employ this tactic against a cruise ship , a ferry , or a ship carrying hazardous cargo .

the issue for congress is how to protect u.s. ports and the supply chains on which the u.s. economy depends .

congress faces pressing questions about the overall security of ports and maritime commerce ; the amount of funding that will be required to secure the maritime transportation system ; and the amount of federal presence in ports that is necessary to prevent or deter terrorist use of ports as a destination or transit point for attacks on the united states .

