a "lame duck" session of congress is one that takes place after the election for the next congress has been held , but before the current congress has reached the end of its constitutional term .

under contemporary conditions , the constitutional term of a congress begins on january 3 of each odd - numbered year and ends on january 3 of the next odd - numbered year .

as a result , any meeting of congress that occurs between the congressional election in november of an even - numbered year and the following january 3 is a lame duck session .

the significant characteristic of a lame duck session is that its participants are the sitting members of the existing congress , not those who will be entitled to sit in the new congress .

under the twentieth amendment , lame duck sessions can still occur , but only as a result of specific actions undertaken either by the congress already sitting or by the president .

the possible means by which a lame duck session may occur are ( 1 ) pursuant to a previously enacted law prescribing an additional session of congress ; ( 2 ) following a recess within a session , but spanning the election ; ( 3 ) under authority granted to the leadership at the time of a contingent adjournment or recess of the session ; ( 4 ) by continuing to meet , perhaps in pro forma sessions , throughout the period spanning the election ; and ( 5 ) in response to a presidential proclamation calling an extraordinary session .

although some of these methods have been used rarely and others not at all , each helps to illuminate the constitutional arrangements that make lame duck sessions possible and the conditions in which they may operate .

the following sections describe each method and indicate its implications .

following are summaries of the 19 lame duck sessions held since 1935 .

primary sources , including the congressional record and congressional directory , and secondary sources , including the congressional quarterly weekly report , cq almanac , and , for the earlier years , the new york times , constituted the basis for these descriptions .

internet - based sources were also used .

after the first session of the 76 th congress adjourned in august 1939 , president franklin d. roosevelt called congress into extraordinary session in september to deal with the threat of war in europe , and this session lasted into november .

thus , the annual session that began on january 3 , 1940 , was the third session of the 76 th congress .

it , too , was dominated by the international situation .

the president requested the largest peacetime defense program to that point in american history , and , by the end of the summer , congress had enacted $13 billion in defense authorizations and appropriations , a military draft , income tax revisions , an excess profits tax , and related measures .

in june , july , and again in september 1940 , the president offered the view that congress need not remain in session any longer .

some congressional leaders , however , held that congress should "stand by" in session , in case of emergency .

congress met regularly through mid - october , then limited itself to two or three meetings per week until january 3 , 1941 ; there was no extended recess for the november 1940 elections .

the session thus became the longest in history to that point .

during the lame duck period following the election , little was undertaken ; the congressional record from november 4 , 1940 , through january 3 , 1941 , covers fewer than 500 pages , and quorums were often hard to raise .

the administration declined to send major new proposals ( such as a defense production board , aid to britain , new taxes , and an increase in the debt limit ) to capitol hill until the 77 th congress would convene in january .

work also was impeded because both the house and senate had to meet in substitute quarters while their chambers in the capitol underwent repairs .

among the more notable actions of this lame duck period were the decision to sustain the veto of a measure to limit regulatory agency powers , and the publication of a committee report on sabotage of the defense effort .

in the wartime year of 1942 , congress again remained in session continuously through the election , adjourning sine die on december 16 .

congress generally followed a regular schedule of daily meetings throughout the period , except near the election , when it met every third day .

activities in the lame duck portion of the 77 th congress were affected by the knowledge that the 78 th congress , to begin in january , would contain a much narrowed democratic majority .

congress declined to take final action to approve the third war powers bill or a bill to expand the reconstruction finance corporation , including an agricultural parity rider attached to the latter .

other questions left to the next congress included comprehensive national service legislation , placing a ceiling on net personal income through the tax code , curbing the powers of regulatory agencies , and planning for censorship of communications with u.s. territories .

a measure to abolish poll taxes passed the house , but came to no resolution because of a filibuster in the senate .

congress did pass legislation to adjust overtime pay for government workers , and to provide for the military draft of 18- and 19-year - old men ( although congress deferred deciding whether to require a full year's training before sending them into combat ) .

by mid - december , quorums became difficult to obtain and leaders of both parties agreed that nothing further could be brought up before the start of the 78 th congress in january 1943 .

two years later , with world war ii still in progress , congress recessed for the national party conventions and recessed again for the elections .

the latter recess began on september 21 , 1944 .

congress returned on november 14 and remained in session until december 19 .

accordingly , 1944 marks the first instance after ratification of the twentieth amendment of a separate and distinct meeting of congress during its lame duck period .

among the issues facing the post - election session were questions of peacetime universal military training ; extension of the war powers act and the reciprocal trade system ; a scheduled increase in social security taxes ; and a rivers and harbors appropriations bill .

congress also debated congressional reform issues , including restructuring the committee system and increasing congressional pay .

postwar reconstruction and a renewal of domestic programs were also mentioned as possible subjects for action .

ultimately , congress deferred several issues until the start of the 79 th congress , including universal military training , the bretton woods monetary agreements , the reciprocal trade act , and changes to the social security system .

several other measures could not be completed , including a rivers and harbors bill , a senate - passed bill making major changes in congressional procedures , and a pay increase for postal workers .

a bill delaying the social security tax increase was enacted , however , as were a renewal of the war powers act and a bill increasing the congressional clerk - hire allowance .

in addition , the senate confirmed the nomination of edward r. stettinius as secretary of state .

congress recessed in august 1948 , before the national party conventions , with the intention of returning only on december 31 to bring the 80 th congress to a formal conclusion , unless earlier called back by congressional leaders .

during the convention recess , however , president harry s. truman called congress back in extraordinary session to deal with a series of legislative priorities he considered urgent .

this occurrence represents the only time since the adoption of the twentieth amendment that the president has convened congress in an extraordinary session .

congress met pursuant to this call from july 27 to august 7 , but then recessed again under the same terms as before .

the leadership did not exercise its option to reconvene congress during this new recess , and congress met again only on december 31 .

this session , the shortest lame duck session under the twentieth amendment , met for just under an hour and a half , then adjourned sine die .

during the brief session , both chambers approved a measure extending for 60 days the life of the commission on organization of the executive branch of government ( hoover commission ) .

the senate also extended for 30 days the life of the special small business committee , and both houses swore in new members elected or appointed to full unexpired terms .

with the korean war at a critical juncture in the fall of 1950 , congressional leaders announced in late september that after the election congress would reconvene in late november .

until november , congress would be available to meet should the president call an emergency session .

congress recessed on september 23 and convened for the lame duck session on november 27 .

as the lame duck session met , chinese troops crossed into korea , and general douglas a. macarthur warned congress that the united nations faced "an entirely new" war in the region .

the korean war and the possible use of atomic weapons dominated congressional attention through the session .

nevertheless , president truman presented congressional leaders with a list of 18 proposals , including five he described as of "greatest urgency. .

the five included several measures favored by congressional leaders: aid to yugoslavia and supplemental appropriations for defense and atomic energy .

the president also asked congress to act on an excess profits tax , an extension of federal rent controls , and statehood for hawaii and alaska .

congress stayed in session through the new year .

it approved the rent control extension and a $38 million famine relief bill for yugoslavia .

in the week before the christmas holidays , it completed work on an $18 billion defense supplemental appropriations bill , the excess profits tax , and a civil defense program .

efforts to obtain a vote on statehood for alaska were abandoned after a week of intermittent senate debate on a motion to take up the measure .

the 81 st congress adjourned sine die on january 2 , 1951 , and the 82 nd congress convened the next day .

prior to the 1954 congressional election , the house adjourned sine die on august 20 , but the senate recessed on that date and then reconvened on november 8 .

the senate met for the sole purpose of considering the recommendation of a select committee to censure senator joseph r. mccarthy for improprieties committed in the course of his investigations into allegations of communist influence in the federal government .

made over a period of more than five years , senator mccarthy's allegations had eventually led to investigations of mccarthy himself , and the senate had assigned the issue to a select committee chaired by senator arthur v. watkins .

this lame duck session was the first time since passage of the twentieth amendment that only one chamber returned to session after an election .

the senate select committee submitted its censure resolution on november 9 , 1954 .

the first count of the two - count resolution was approved on december 1 , and final action was completed the following day .

press reports speculated that the senate might consider matters other than the mccarthy censure resolution , including a number of pending treaties and nominations , but the senate took action only on the mccarthy censure resolution and adjourned finally on december 2 .

congressional leaders called a post - election session in 1970 for the first time in more than 16 years to complete action on a list of pending legislation , including electoral reform , the family assistance plan ( the nixon administration's principal welfare reform proposal ) , occupational safety and health , equal rights for women , manpower training , and funds for the supersonic transport plane ( sst ) .

seven regular appropriations bills also remained to be enacted .

congress convened the lame duck session on november 16 , 1970 .

congress stayed in session until january 2 , 1971 , less than 24 hours before the constitutional deadline of noon on january 3 , when the 92 nd congress convened .

it kept largely to the agenda the congressional leadership had set before the recess in october , but failed to approve many administration proposals , including the family assistance plan .

that bill , with other controversial measures , had been attached to a social security bill in the senate .

the sst received only interim funding .

president richard m. nixon strongly criticized what he termed "major failures" of the lame duck session .

congress did complete work on two of the seven regular appropriations bills and a measure dealing with foreign aid and foreign military sales .

it also passed the clean air act amendments of 1970 , which established deadlines for the reduction of certain pollutants from new automobiles , and a major housing bill , which included a new program of federal crime insurance and created the community development corporation .

president nixon vetoed four measures during the lame duck session , including a $9.5 billion federal manpower training and public service employment bill .

congress did not override any of these vetoes .

delayed in the consideration of major legislation by the extraordinary events of 1973 and 1974 — the watergate investigations , the resignation of vice president spiro t. agnew , the nomination and confirmation of gerald r. ford to be vice president , and the resignation of president nixon and succession of president ford — congress reconvened on november 18 , 1974 , in an effort to clear a long list of important items .

although congressional leaders had indicated that only the most critical bills would be considered , including approval of the nomination of nelson a. rockefeller to be vice president , president ford greeted the returning congress with a 10-page list of legislation he wanted passed before the session expired .

in the end , congress did consider a wide range of issues before it adjourned on december 20 , 1974 , but its actions were not always to president ford's liking .

the rockefeller nomination was approved by mid - december , but congress overrode presidential vetoes of both a vocational rehabilitation bill and a measure amending the freedom of information act .

congress also approved , and the president signed , a bill that nullified a prior agreement giving former president nixon control over the tapes and papers of his administration .

in other actions , congress approved a long - delayed trade reform bill giving the president broad authority to negotiate trade agreements , act on trade barriers , and provide import relief to workers , industries , and communities ; established a federal policy for research on development of non - nuclear sources of energy ; and cleared legislation making continuing appropriations for federal agencies whose regular appropriations had not been enacted .

in 1980 , some observers contended that postponing final congressional action on a lengthy agenda of major issues until a post - election session would accomplish two goals: first , it would delay potentially difficult pre - election votes on budget matters , and second , it would allow incumbents extra time to campaign .

the large republican gains on election day were thought to complicate the prospects for a productive lame duck program , however , especially with such important issues as budget reconciliation , several major appropriations bills , and landmark environmental legislation still left for consideration .

in fact , during the lame duck session , from november 12 to december 16 , 1980 , congress completed action on many of the issues that had been left unfinished in the regular session , including the following: a budget resolution and a budget reconciliation measure ; five regular appropriations bills , although one was subsequently vetoed ; a second continuing resolution was approved to continue funding for other parts of the government ; an alaska lands bill and a "superfund" bill to help clean up chemical contamination ; a measure extending general revenue sharing for three years ; a measure that made disposal of low - level nuclear waste a state responsibility ; and changes to military pay and benefits , and authority for the president to call 100,000 military reservists to active duty without declaring a national emergency .

in 1982 , with urging from president ronald w. reagan , congressional leaders called for the second session of the 97 th congress to reconvene after the congressional election .

the senate met from november 30 to december 23 , 1982 , and the house from november 30 to december 21 .

congress recessed for the election on october 1 .

in calling for congress to return , president reagan expressed concern that only 3 of 13 appropriations bills had been cleared for his signature at the time congress recessed .

dominated by economic concerns — particularly those related to budget and deficit issues — the second session of the 97 th congress was notable for the political tension between the republican president and senate , on the one hand , and the democratic house , on the other .

congressional leaders indicated they would finish 9 of 10 outstanding money bills .

but by the end of december , congress had completed only four , and needed to enact a large continuing resolution to fund remaining government operations for fy1983 .

concerned about recession and rising unemployment , house democrats added a $5.4 billion jobs program to the continuing resolution , but agreed to remove it when the president threatened a veto .

the lame duck session was acrimonious in both chambers , but especially in the senate , where frequent filibusters caused some all night sessions .

the senate voted on eight cloture motions in december .

the most contentious filibuster came late in the month over a measure to increase the gasoline tax .

the measure was approved just two days before christmas .

in addition to completing work on some appropriations bills and the continuing resolution , the house approved a controversial 15% pay raise for itself .

an immigration reform bill , favored by the white house and the congressional leadership , stalled when opponents filed hundreds of amendments designed to slow chamber action .

the leadership was eventually forced to pull the bill from the floor .

in other decisions , congress refused to fund production and procurement of the first five mx intercontinental missiles , the first time in recent history that either house of congress had denied a president's request to fund production of a strategic weapon .

congress also passed a long - sought nuclear waste disposal bill .

in 1994 , congress recessed on october 8 and then reconvened on november 28 for the sole purpose of passing a bill implementing a new general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

although the bill received strong support in both chambers during the regular session , opponents in the senate had kept the measure from reaching a vote on the floor .

in the short lame duck session , the house passed the bill on november 29 and the senate on december 1 .

both chambers then adjourned sine die .

in 1998 , both the house and senate adjourned sine die on october 21 , 1998 .

the adjournment resolution ( h.con.res .

353 ) gave contingent authority not only to the bicameral leadership to reconvene congress , but also to the speaker to reconvene the house alone .

this last authority was granted in anticipation of action to impeach president william j. clinton .

pursuant to this authority , the house convened on december 17 , 1998 , to consider a resolution of impeachment ( h.res .

611 ) .

on december 19 , the house adopted articles i and iii of the resolution by votes of 228-206 and 221-212 .

it then , by a vote of 228-190 , adopted a resolution appointing and authorizing house managers for the senate impeachment trial .

the house then adjourned sine die .

on december 17 , 1998 , the house agreed , as well , to a resolution expressing support for the men and women engaged in a military action in the persian gulf .

because final action on several appropriations bills had not been completed , congress remained in session into the first days of november , the closest to an election that it had worked since 1942 .

on november 3 , congress adopted s.con.res .

160 , authorizing recesses of the house until november 13 and the senate until november 14 .

when the two houses returned , with the presidential election undecided , they approved a short - term continuing resolution and the district of columbia appropriations act , and then agreed to a further recess until december 5 .

after reconvening on december 5 , congress agreed to a series of five short - term continuing resolutions while final decisions on the remaining appropriations were being negotiated .

during this sequence of events , the senate recessed on december 11 after providing , by unanimous consent , that when the fourth in this series of continuing resolutions was received from the house , it would automatically be deemed passed in the senate .

finally , on december 15 , both chambers completed action on fy2001 appropriations measures by agreeing to the conference report on the omnibus appropriations bill .

congress then adjourned sine die pursuant to h.con.res .

446 .

during the lame duck session , congress also cleared the presidential threat protection act , the striped bass conservation act , and the intelligence authorization act .

it also sent president clinton a bankruptcy reform measure , which the president subsequently pocket vetoed .

congress met intermittently in pro forma sessions during the pre - election period in 2002 , but returned to a full schedule of business on november 12 with two priorities: finish work on 11 appropriations bills and consider creation of a department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the latter being a measure at the top of president george w. bush's legislative agenda .

a bill to create the dhs had passed the house in late july 2002 , but the senate did not act until after the election .

the senate passed a similar version of the measure on november 19 , and the house agreed to the senate amendment on november 22 .

president george w. bush signed the bill into law on november 25 .

congress , however , was unable to resolve its appropriations differences .

the house passed the fifth in a series of continuing resolutions on november 13 , and the senate agreed to the measure on november 19 .

this measure funded the government at fy2002 levels through january 11 , 2003 .

the defense appropriations bill and military construction appropriations bill were the only appropriations measures completed by congress in 2002 .

in addition to the dhs , congress completed action on , and the president signed into law , several other significant measures , including the defense authorization act , the intelligence authorization act , and measures regulating terrorism insurance and seaport security .

the senate adjourned sine die on november 20 and the house on november 22 , 2002 .

a lame duck session was considered necessary in 2004 because many appropriation bills had not yet even received senate action and congress had not cleared an increase in the debt limit .

conferees also had reached no agreement over legislation to consolidate intelligence activities under a new national director , as recommended by the 9 / 11 commission .

the post - election environment was viewed as favorable to action on an omnibus appropriations measure , inasmuch as it would facilitate adherence to caps on domestic discretionary spending , on which the administration insisted .

the administration also sought the elimination of many authorizing provisions .

congress initially cleared the omnibus measure on november 20 , but , because it subsequently had to direct corrections in the enrollment of the bill , president bush was able to sign it only on december 8 , the day of the sine die adjournment .

similarly , although congress could reach no final agreement on a congressional budget resolution , which would have advanced action to increase the debt limit , post - election conditions enabled the increase to be enacted as a freestanding measure .

during the lame duck period , the administration intensified efforts to persuade house conferees on the intelligence bill to accept modifications in provisions to ( 1 ) maintain military control over its own intelligence , ( 2 ) keep intelligence funding confidential , and ( 3 ) control immigration .

the conference report cleared congress on december 8 and was signed into law on december 17 .

post - election conditions also permitted the resolution of conference deadlocks over several other reauthorizations , including the individuals with disabilities education act , a moratorium on internet taxation , and authority for satellite television systems to carry network programming .

the last of these was enacted as one of the few legislative riders to be included in the omnibus appropriation bill .

failure to resolve policy disagreements , however , doomed several other reauthorizations , including the 1996 welfare reform and a highway bill , although the latter had been delayed also by demands in the senate for assurances about the role to be played by minority conferees .

finally , a ban on assault weapons expired when the house declined to act on a measure renewing it .

the 109 th congress reconvened on november 13 , 2006 , largely because it had only cleared two fy2007 appropriations bills prior to the election , funding the department of defense and the department of homeland security .

a continuing resolution funding the rest of the government was set to expire on november 17 .

another top priority for the session was addressing a number of expiring tax benefits .

democrats had gained control of both houses in the november election , and the president and democratic party leaders expressed hopes of cooperation and bi - partisanship leading into the lame duck session .

despite this optimism and several instances of cooperation , the congress ultimately did not achieve its primary goal of passing further appropriations measures .

congress opted to fund the government through two successive extensions of the continuing resolution , with h.j.res .

100 continuing funding through december 8 and h.j.res .

102 continuing funding through february 15 , 2007 .

congress also cleared a package of tax benefit extensions , including those for research and development and for education , which was paired with a trade package that included benefits for undeveloped countries and agreements with vietnam .

other notable legislation included a bill that allowed president george w. bush to negotiate an agreement with india permitting cooperation on its development of nuclear power for the first time in 30 years .

in addition , congress passed a bill to overhaul the united states postal service and a veterans' affairs package authorizing funds for major medical projects and information technology upgrades .

finally , the senate confirmed robert m. gates as secretary of defense to replace donald rumsfeld , who stepped down the day following the elections .

the 110 th congress reconvened on november 6 , 2008 , just two days after the election that gave democrats wider majorities in both the house and senate , and ushered in a new democratic president .

the november 6 session , however , along with 14 other sessions from then through january 2 , 2009 , continued a series of pro forma sessions of the senate that began in october and were intended to foreclose opportunities for outgoing president george w. bush to make recess appointments to federal offices .

the senate met for substantive business on only seven days during the post - election period .

the house , which had adjourned sine die , reconvened on november 19 , pursuant to authority granted to its leadership in the adjournment resolution , but met on only five days during the post - election period .

the main legislative business of the lame duck session involved further responses to spreading disruptions of the financial system that had become evident during the campaign period .

before the election , congress had enacted p.l .

110-343 , establishing a $700 billion package of aid to the financial services industry .

in the lame duck session , congress considered legislation to assist america's three largest auto - making companies which were in danger of bankruptcy .

on december 10 , the house passed h.r .

7321 , which provided $14 billion in loans to automakers by using funds from an existing program .

however , opposition in the senate effectively prevented a vote on the measure .

the president subsequently provided $13.4 billion in loans to the automakers out of funds from the financial industry aid package .

among the few other major measures that came up for a vote was a pension bill that postponed employee pension funding rules for companies and granted a moratorium on the annual distributions for retirement accounts as part of an effort to stave off lay - offs and assist retirees .

prior to november 15 , 2010 , which was the first day of the 2010 lame duck session on which business was transacted , the house recessed for a total of 45 days beginning on september 30 .

during this same period , the senate engaged in a total of 14 pro forma sessions , both to prevent president obama from making recess appointments and to prevent pending nominations from being returned to the white house .

between november 15 and december 22 , the house and senate met for a total of 19 and 15 days of session , respectively .

on all of those days of session , the house and senate transacted business .

relative to the lame duck session for the 110 th congress , there was a much larger agenda for the lame duck session for the 111 th congress that resulted in the enactment of a number of pieces of significant legislation , such as the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( h.r .

6523 ) , the fda food safety modernization act ( h.r .

2751 ) , and the don't ask , don't tell repeal act of 2010 ( h.r .

2965 ) .

also during the lame duck session , the senate confirmed a total of 19 federal judges .

perhaps the most significant issue that was negotiated throughout the lame duck session was the extension of certain revenue provisions , including the 2001 and 2003 income tax cuts ( p.l .

107-16 and p.l .

108-27 ) , that were set to expire at the end of 2010 .

in the final week of the session , a compromise was enacted ( h.r .

4853 ) that extended these revenue provisions for two years , instituted a temporary payroll tax reduction , and provided jobless benefits for 13 additional months .

a related issue , the completion of fy2011 appropriations , was not resolved during the lame duck session .

instead , a series of three continuing resolutions ( p.l .

111-290 , p.l .

111-317 , and p.l .

111-322 ) was enacted to provide funding through march 4 , 2011 .

on december 22 , 2010 , the final day of the lame duck session , the senate and house passed h.r .

847 , the james zadroga 9 / 11 health and compensation act of 2010 , to provide health benefits to certain first responders who were exposed to toxic materials as a result of the september 11 , 2011 , terrorist attacks on the world trade center .

in addition , the senate voted 71-26 to approve ratification of new start ( h.r .

4853 ) , an arms control treaty with russia .

the house and senate both used pro forma sessions to provide for the break spanning the election on november 6 , 2012 .

the dates on which congress began this break — september 21 in the house and september 22 in the senate — were the earliest since 1954 .

this break ended on november 13 , when both chambers reconvened for the lame duck period .

between november 13 and january 3 , when the 112 th congress adjourned sine die , the house transacted business on 19 of the 28 days it was in session ; the senate transacted business on 27 of the 30 days it was in session .

the lame duck session saw the completion of some major pieces of legislation that had been considered earlier in the congress .

these included the fisa amendments act reauthorization act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-238 ) , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) , and the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-277 ) .

the senate also confirmed a total of 66 civilian nominations , 16 of which were federal judges .

much of the lame duck session was devoted to negotiations over expiring tax and spending policies , as well as the sequestration that was scheduled to occur pursuant to the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) on january 2 , 2013 .

this so - called fiscal cliff was addressed by the enactment of the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) on january 2 .

the expiring revenue provisions that were addressed by atra included the 2001 and 2003 income tax cuts ( p.l .

107-16 and p.l .

108-27 ) , provisions related to the estate tax , certain tax provisions enacted or expanded as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , the alternative minimum tax , and a number of temporary tax provisions ( also known as "tax extenders" ) .

the spending provisions in atra included an extension of certain unemployment benefits through 2013 , a postponement in the reduction in medicare payments to physicians under the sustainable growth rate system through the same period , and extension of the 2008 farm bill through 2013 .

atra also postponed the scheduled bca sequestration until march 1 , 2013 .

none of the fy2013 regular appropriations bills were enacted prior to the lame duck session .

however , because the first continuing resolution of the fiscal year ( p.l .

112-175 ) did not expire until march 27 , 2013 , the enactment of such appropriations was not addressed during that session .

there was , however , significant congressional debate and action with regard to supplemental appropriations to assist with hurricane sandy recovery efforts .

although the senate passed such supplemental appropriations on december 28 ( h.r .

1 ) , the house declined to take it up during the remainder of the session , opting to postpone consideration of those appropriations until the beginning of the 113 th congress .

