canada and the united states have open borders for waste shipments , and waste has flowed across the border in both directions for years .

the federal government does not report data regarding such shipments , but information is available from environment canada , the ontario ministry of the environment , and from some u.s. states .

according to these sources , the united states appears to be a net exporter to canada of hazardous waste ; but , because of plentiful landfill capacity , low - cost disposal options , and existing contractual arrangements , the united states is a much larger net importer from canada of non - hazardous solid waste .

the latter category can include municipal solid waste ( msw ) , construction and demolition ( c&d ) waste , medical waste , and non - hazardous industrial waste .

providing congressional consent is the goal of numerous bills that have been introduced in congress .

issues remaining to be addressed include some posed by the exchange of letters and others posed by h.r .

518 .

the agreement reached by the two michigan senators in their exchange of letters with ontario's minister of the environment would address a portion of the waste shipped from ontario to michigan , but it would not eliminate the majority of it .

the letters refer to "municipally managed waste," and specifically use a 2005 baseline amount of 1.34 million tonnes of municipal waste shipped .

accompanying materials from the ministry of the environment , however , note that in 2005 , "4 million tonnes of waste were exported to the u.s. , with 90% of this waste being sent to michigan landfills. .

thus , ontario's commitment appears to cover only one - third of the waste shipped from the province to the united states , or 37% of the waste it shipped to michigan .

the reason for excluding the majority of the waste is that it is not "municipally managed" — it is waste collected by private haulers and shipped to michigan landfills under private contracts .

these wastes are shipped to michigan either because it provides lower cost disposal options or because the landfills in michigan are controlled by the same company that collects the waste in canada .

the provincial government and the local governments within the province have no authority to prevent these private waste shipments from leaving ontario .

thus , the province has committed to eliminate what it can , i.e. , that portion of the waste that is municipally managed .

second , the exchange of letters addresses the shipment of these wastes to michigan , but not to other u.s. states .

given the subsequent action by the toronto city council , it would appear that when the waste is diverted from michigan , it will be shipped to a site in ontario ; but nothing in the letters would prevent the waste being shipped to other u.s. landfills instead of those in michigan .

third , the exchange of letters represents voluntary , good faith commitments by the parties .

it is not a treaty or an international agreement and does not provide the enforcement provisions or penalties that legislation might offer .

to summarize , those who continue to be concerned about canadian waste shipments are likely to note that the exchange of letters does not address two - thirds of the waste being shipped , does not protect states other than michigan , and contains no enforcement provisions .

addressing these issues would require congressional action .

h.r .

518 , by contrast , would apply to private contracts , would apply to all 50 states , and would provide for enforcement .

the bill would clarify that actions taken under its authority shall not be considered to impose an undue burden on interstate or foreign commerce , and thus would be immune to challenge under the commerce clause of the constitution .

but the effect of the bill might still be uncertain .

in section 4011 ( a ) ( 3 ) , it states , "nothing in this section affects , replaces , or amends prior law relating to the need for consistency with international trade obligations. .

the bill , thus , appears to recognize that u.s. trade agreements would have a role to play in defining the scope of the states' authority to act pursuant to the legislation .

it is not clear how these obligations and the bill's grant of authority to the states to restrict waste imports would ultimately be reconciled .

opponents of the bill , including the national solid wastes management association ( which represents the u.s. waste management industry ) , have already made clear their intention to challenge its provisions in court if it is enacted ; this issue would presumably be among the provisions litigated .

