antitrust doctrine holds that robust competition will best protect consumers ; it is concerned with the viability of individual competitors only insofar as their fates affect marketplace competitiveness .

there is neither an arbitrary antitrust directive concerning the requisite amount of competition deemed acceptable in any given market , nor any predetermination of the point beyond which a market participant may grow ; nor is there any absolute number of competitors a market participant must face .

although there are general prohibitions against monopolization and attempted monopolization in the sherman and clayton acts , and a prohibition against "unfair acts" in commerce in section 5 of the federal trade commission act , "monopoly" and "monopolist" are merely descriptive terms , used to illustrate a situation in which a single entity possesses effective control of the market in which it operates .

neither term implies anything about the lawfulness of the monopoly possessed: there is no concept of "no fault" monopolization in united states antitrust law .

absent a finding by a court of "guilty behavior" by a monopolist , therefore , there can be no finding of "monopolization. .

further , the antitrust rule of reason has modified the concept of competition by recognizing that in certain situations the anticompetitiveness of some actions must be balanced against any procompetitive effects that might be produced by those actions .

accordingly , any assessment of whether any of the prohibitions against monopolization have been violated requires two inquiries .

first , it must be determined whether an entity is in fact a monopolist ; and second , whether that monopolist has unlawfully monopolized the market ( s ) within which it operates ( the applicable , "relevant market," which may be either product - or geographically based , or both ) .

assuming that a market participant has been legally determined to be a monopolist ( as opposed to being so determined by reference to the popular definition — i.e. , one who possesses at least a 51% market share ) , the question arises , "does that monopoly entity have a legal obligation to deal with any or all of its actual or potential competitors ? .

the courts have generally answered , "no," but the situation long thought to create such an obligation — monopolist ownership or control of an "essential facility" — is , currently , not as settled as was once thought .

in 2004 , the supreme court opined that "we have never recognized such a doctrine ... and we find no need either to recognize it or to repudiate it here. .

the recent prosecutions by the antitrust division of the department of justice ( microsoft ) and the federal trade commission ( intel ) ( both discussed below ) are particularly illustrative of the monopoly / monopolization dichotomy .

although monopoly and monopolization are fundamental , and related , concepts in antitrust law , they are not synonymous .

a shorthand definition of "monopoly" is "the power to control prices or exclude competition. .

the significance of the ability to exclude competition or control prices , however , lies in the supposed deleterious effect of the lack of competition on , consumers , who are presumed to benefit from the existence of largely competitive markets .

the impact on excluded competitors is relevant only insofar as it affects the fate of competition : '[t]he antitrust injury requirement obligates [complainants] to demonstrate , as a threshold matter , "that the challenged conduct has had an actual adverse effect on competition as a whole in the relevant market ; to prove it has been harmed as an individual competitor will not suffice." .

"... it is axiomatic that the antitrust laws were passed for 'the protection of competition , not competitors .' .

there is no concept of "no fault" monopolization in united states antitrust law , and courts have differed over the years since the passage of the sherman act in 1890 , as to the size of the market share that must be attributable to a given market participant in order to accurately label the participant a "monopolist. .

absent a finding by a court of "guilty behavior,"therefore , there can be no automatic finding of "monopolization" based merely on a finding of monopoly power: a finding of " monopoly power " does not , by itself , necessarily equate to a finding of the monopolization prohibited by either section 7 of the clayton act or section 2 of the sherman act , or the "unfair practices" prohibited by section 5 of the ftc act .

the point that "monopoly" ( or size ) does not equate to unlawful "monopolization" was made in 1998 by the assistant attorney general , antitrust division: sometimes people complain about a merger solely based on its size .

.. .

i want to make clear[ , however,] that antitrust analysis focuses on the specific competitive harms that may be associated with a particular merger , not on its size in the abstract .

thus , for example , a big merger may not be challenged because the merging parties are not competitors or potential competitors of one another and the merger does not raise any vertical antitrust issues .

at the same time , we may challenge a smaller merger that involves the only two firms that make a particular product .

the key for our review is whether the merger will harm consumers , not the sheer size of the corporate entities involved .

judicial determination of "monopoly" status for a market participant says nothing concerning the lawfulness of the monopoly enjoyed .

at most , monopoly status indicates that the monopolist possesses sufficient market power to "control prices or exclude competition. .

but such a determination does not automatically create an obligation on the part of the monopolist to deal — at all , or "fairly" — with other entities in the market , or with consumers .

that obligation may be created only by a further finding either that the monopolist has achieved his monopoly position in violation of the prohibitions against monopolization or attempted monopolization in the sherman or clayton antitrust acts or the prohibition against unfair practices in the federal trade commission act ( i.e. , possesses an unlawful monopoly ) ; or that he has unlawfully exploited even a lawfully obtained monopoly position ; or both .

in other words , a monopolist's "guilty behavior" is what creates a monopolization violation of the antitrust laws , not his status as a monopolist .

the duty to deal with actual or potential competitors of a lawful monopolist who has not been found to have engaged in some "guilty behavior" is generally governed by the colgate doctrine , which gives market participants the right to choose their commercial relationships .

that "right," however , has been thought to have been circumscribed by what has become known as the "essential facilities" doctrine ; it stands for the proposition that a monopolist who possesses or controls a necessary component of an actual or potential competitor's business must make it available to his competitor ( s ) if it cannot reasonable be obtained — at all , or only at prohibitive expense .

in verizon communications , inc. v. trinko , however , the supreme court questioned the validity of the "essential facilities" doctrine in antitrust law — at least in the context of regulated entities .

when a regulated entity violates a regulatory statute that compels the sharing of specifically named facilities , the court said , there is not also an automatic antitrust violation without a finding that that behavior would have violated something in the antitrust laws — with or without the existence of the statutory requirement .

