firefighting and the provision of fire protection services to the public is traditionally a local responsibility , funded primarily by state , county , and municipal governments .

during the 1990s , however , shortfalls in state and local budgets — coupled with increased responsibilities ( i.e. , counterterrorism ) of local fire departments — led many in the fire community to call for additional financial support from the federal government .

since enactment of the fire act in the 106 th congress , the assistance to firefighters grants ( afg ) program ( also known as "fire grants" and "fire act grants" ) has provided funding for equipment and training directly from the federal government to local fire departments .

since the fire grant program commenced in fy2001 , funding has been used by fire departments to purchase firefighting equipment , personal protective equipment , and firefighting vehicles .

many in the fire - service community argued that notwithstanding the fire grant program , there remained a pressing need for an additional federal grant program to assist fire departments in the hiring of firefighters and the recruitment and retention of volunteer firefighters .

they asserted that without federal assistance , many local fire departments would continue to be unable to meet national consensus standards for minimum staffing levels , which specify at least four firefighters per responding fire vehicle ( or five or six firefighters in hazardous or high - risk areas ) .

fire - service advocates also pointed to the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program as a compelling precedent of federal assistance for the hiring of local public safety personnel .

in support of safer , fire - service advocates cited studies performed by the u.s. fire administration and the national fire protection association , the boston globe , and the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) which concluded that many fire departments fall below minimum standards for personnel levels .

according to these studies , the result of this shortfall can lead to inadequate response to different types of emergency incidents , substandard response times , and an increased risk of firefighter fatalities .

on the other hand , those opposed to safer grants have contended that funding for basic local government functions — such as paying for firefighter salaries — should not be assumed by the federal government , particularly at a time of high budget deficits .

also , some safer opponents disagree that below - standard levels in firefighting personnel are necessarily problematic , and point to statistics indicating that the number of structural fires in the united states has continued to decline over the past 20 years .

in response to concerns over the adequacy of firefighter staffing , the staffing for adequate fire and emergency response act — popularly called the "safer act" — was introduced into the 107 th and 108 th congresses .

the 108 th congress enacted the safer act as section 1057 of the fy2004 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

108-136 ; signed into law november 24 , 2003 ) .

the safer provision was added as an amendment to s. 1050 on the senate floor ( s.amdt .

785 , sponsored by senator dodd ) and modified in the fy2004 defense authorization conference report ( h.rept .

108-354 ) .

the safer grant program is codified as section 34 of the federal fire prevention and control act of 1974 ( 15 u.s.c .

2229a ) .

the safer act authorizes grants to career , volunteer , and combination fire departments for the purpose of increasing the number of firefighters to help communities meet industry - minimum standards and attain 24-hour staffing to provide adequate protection from fire and fire - related hazards .

also authorized are grants to volunteer fire departments for activities related to the recruitment and retention of volunteers .

on january 2 , 2013 , the president signed p.l .

112-239 , the fy2013 national defense authorization act .

title xviii , subtitle a is the fire grants reauthorization act of 2012 , which significantly amended the safer statute ( 15 u.s.c .

2229a ) and authorized the safer program through fy2017 .

table 1 provides a summary of key safer provisions in the 2012 reauthorization , and provides a comparison with the previous version of the safer statute .

two types of grants are authorized by the safer act: hiring grants and recruitment and retention grants .

hiring grants cover a three - year term and are cost shared with the local jurisdiction .

according to the amended statute , the federal share shall not exceed 75% in the first year of the grant , 75% in the second year , and 35% in the third year .

while the majority of hiring grants will be awarded to career and combination fire departments , the safer act specifies that 10% of the total safer appropriation be awarded to volunteer or majority - volunteer departments for the hiring of personnel .

additionally , at least 10% of the total safer appropriation is set aside for recruitment and retention grants , which are available to volunteer and combination fire departments for activities related to the recruitment and retention of volunteer firefighters .

also eligible for recruitment and retention grants are local and statewide organizations that represent the interests of volunteer firefighters .

no local cost sharing is required for recruitment and retention grants .

with the authorizations of both the afg and safer programs expiring on september 30 , 2017 , and with sunset dates for both programs of january 2 , 2018 , the 115 th congress considered reauthorization legislation .

the safer grant program receives its annual appropriation through the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on homeland security .

within the appropriations bills , safer is listed under the line item , "firefighter assistance grants," which is located in title iii — protection , preparedness , response , and recovery .

"firefighter assistance grants" also includes the assistance to firefighters grant program .

although authorized for fy2004 , safer did not receive an appropriation in fy2004 .

table 2 shows the appropriations history for firefighter assistance , including safer , afg , and the fire station construction grants ( scg ) grants provided in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

table 3 shows recent and proposed appropriated funding for the safer and afg grant programs .

in 2009 , with the economic turndown adversely affecting budgets of local governments , concerns arose that modifications to the safer statute may be necessary to enable fire departments to more effectively participate in the program .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) included a provision ( §603 ) that waived the matching requirements for safer grants awarded in fy2009 and fy2010 .

subsequently , the fy2009 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

111-32 ) included a provision ( §605 ) giving the secretary of homeland security authority to waive certain limitations and restrictions in the safer statute .

for grants awarded in fy2009 and fy2010 , waivers permitted grantees to use safer funds to rehire laid - off firefighters and fill positions eliminated through attrition , allow grants to extend longer than the five - year duration , and permit the amount of funding per position at levels exceeding the limit of $100,000 .

the department of defense and continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

112-10 ) contained language that removed cost - share requirements and allowed safer grants to be used to rehire laid - off firefighters and fill positions eliminated through attrition .

however , the law did not remove the requirement that safer grants fund a firefighter position for four years , with the fifth year funded wholly by the grant recipient .

p.l .

112-10 also did not waive the cap of $100,000 per firefighter hired by a safer grant .

according to fire service advocates , these unwaived safer requirements ( the mandatory five - year position duration , the $100,000 cap ) would be a disincentive for many communities to apply for safer grants , because localities would be reluctant to apply for grants that would require future expenditure of local funds .

p.l .

112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , fy2012 , included language ( §561 ) prohibiting using any funds to enforce all of the safer restrictions that have been lifted since fy2009 .

additionally , section 562 of p.l .

112-74 reinstated dhs waiver authority for the restrictions that were not lifted in the fy2011 appropriations bill ( p.l .

112-10 ) .

meanwhile , the safer reauthorization language in the fire grants reauthorization act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-239 ) removed the $100,000 cap per firefighter hired , shortened the grant period from four to three years , removed the requirement to retain safer - hired firefighters for one year past the termination of federal grant support , and provided economic hardship waivers that will give dhs the authority to waive matching requirements and prohibitions on using safer funds for rehiring laid - off firefighters and filling positions eliminated through attrition .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) and the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) continued to grant dhs waiver authority from safer requirements .

specifically , dhs was allowed to waive cost sharing requirements , the three - year grant term , cost limits per firefighter hired , and the prohibition on using safer funds for rehiring laid - off firefighters and filling positions eliminated through attrition .

the same safer waiver authority was included in the administration's fy2015 budget proposal and in the fy2015 house and senate department of homeland security appropriations bills .

in the bill report accompanying h.r .

4903 ( h.rept .

113-481 ) , the house appropriations committee noted that this annual waiver authority has been available since fy2009 , and that the reauthorization of the safer program by the 112 th congress ( p.l .

112-239 ) provided fema with permanent authority to waive certain matching and nonsupplantation requirements for grantees based on a determination that a grantee meets economic hardship criteria .

given that fema had been working with stakeholders to develop these criteria and that the agency hoped to soon be able to implement its new waiver authority , the committee expected that fy2015 would be the last instance in which annual waiver authority would be provided , and that any waivers in future fiscal years would be limited to the authorization provided in p.l .

112-239 .

the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

114-4 ) was signed by the president on march 4 , 2015 .

section 557 of p.l .

114-4 provided safer waiver authority for fy2015 .

the administration's fy2016 budget would have maintained safer waiver authority for fy2016 .

s. 1619 , the department of homeland security act , 2016 , would also have continued waiver authority .

the accompanying bill report ( s.rept .

114-68 ) directed fema to work with stakeholders and present a recommendation to the senate appropriations committee on the feasibility of removing these waivers in future appropriations .

however , neither the house bill ( h.r .

3128 ) , nor the final consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) contained the safer waiver provision for fy2016 .

the administration's fy2017 , fy2018 , and fy2019 budgets did not request safer waiver authority , and neither the house nor senate appropriations committee bills contained safer waiver provisions .

however , section 307 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) again contained the previous waiver authority provision , stating that fema "may" grant safer waiver authority to allow safer funds for retaining and rehiring firefighters .

however , for the 2018 round of safer awards , fema chose not to exercise that authority , and thus will not provide safer hiring grants for retaining or rehiring firefighters .

the house fy2019 homeland security appropriations bill would have continued the waiver authority in fy2019 , while the senate fy2019 homeland security appropriations bill did not include the safer waiver authority provision .

ultimately , the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) included safer waiver authority for the fy2019 round of safer awards .

the administration's fy2020 budget proposal does not request safer waiver authority .

for the latest information and updates on the application for and awarding of safer grants , see the official safer grant program website at https: / / www.fema.gov / staffing - adequate - fire - emergency - response - grants .

table 4 shows the state - by - state distribution of safer grant funds , from fy2005 through fy2017 .

table 5 shows the percentage distribution of safer grant funds by type of department ( career , combination , volunteer ) for fy2009 through fy2014 , while table 6 shows the percentage distribution of safer grant funds by community service area ( urban , suburban , rural ) for fy2009 through fy2014 .

of the fy2014 safer awards , grants for hiring accounted for 90% of the total federal share of dollars awarded , while recruitment and retention accounted for 10% .

during 2014 and 2015 , the dhs office of the inspector general ( oig ) conducted an audit of safer grants for fiscal years 2010 through 2012 .

on june 8 , 2016 , the dhs oig released its report finding that 63% of safer grant recipients over that period did not comply with grant guidance and requirements to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse of grant funds .

the report recommended that fema's grant programs directorate develop and implement an organizational framework to manage the risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement .

according to the report , fema has concurred with the oig findings and has taken corrective actions to resolve the recommendations .

meanwhile , the fire grants reauthorization act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-239 ) directed gao to prepare a report to congress that includes an assessment of the effect of the changes made by p.l .

112-239 on the effectiveness , relative allocation , accountability , and administration of the fire grants .

gao was also directed to evaluate the extent to which those changes have enabled grant recipients to mitigate fire and fire - related and other hazards more effectively .

in september 2016 , gao released its report , entitled fire grants: fema could enhance program administration and performance assessment .

the report concluded that fema's fire grant policies and the awards made in fy2013 and fy2014 generally reflected the changes to the fire grant statute made by p.l .

112-239 , and that fema enhanced its assessment of program performance by establishing and reporting on measures of effectiveness of the grants .

however , gao also concluded that those performance measures do not include measurable performance targets linked to safer and afg program goals , and that "aligning the fire grants programs' use of data on , and definitions of , critical infrastructure to award fire grants and assess program performance with the more objective , quantitative approach used by dhs and gpd [the grants program directorate] for other programs and non - fire preparedness grants could enhance gpd's efforts to integrate the fire grants program into larger national preparedness efforts and more objectively assess the impact of fire grants. .

firefighter assistance grants were impacted by the partial government shutdown .

fema personnel who administer the grants were furloughed .

for all three grant programs ( afg , safer , and fp&s ) the application and awards process was delayed .

for the 2018 awards round , the application windows for afg and fp&s closed in october and december 2018 , respectively , but the processing of those applications could not move forward .

the opening of the 2018 round application window for safer grants was also delayed .

for grants already awarded ( in the 2017 and previous rounds ) , grant recipients periodically draw down funds , either to reimburse expenditures already incurred , or in immediate advance of those expenditures .

grant recipients were unable to draw down funds during the shutdown , which may have disrupted the ability of the grantees to continue grant - funded activities , including personnel costs covered by safer grant awards , which extend for three years .

this disruption may continue after the government shutdown has resolved due to a backlog of payment requests that need to be processed once furloughed fema grant personnel return to work .

safer grants are distributed to career , volunteer , combination , and paid - on - call fire departments serving urban , suburban , and rural areas .

a continuing issue is how equitably and effectively grants are being distributed and used to protect the health and safety of the public and firefighting personnel against fire and fire - related hazards .

another continuing issue is budget appropriations for safer and afg .

as is the case with many federal programs , concerns over the federal budget deficit could impact budget levels for safer and afg .

at the same time , firefighter assistance budgets will likely receive heightened scrutiny from the fire service community , given the local budgetary shortfalls that many fire departments may face .

