the united states has made great strides in secondary school participation during the last century .

yet more than one - quarter of first - year high school students do not receive their diploma in four years .

by age 24 , more than one in 10 still do not have a high school degree or its equivalent .

during the 2003-2004 school year alone , nearly 5% of students dropped out of high school .

in addition , rates of graduation , completion , and dropping out vary significantly by race / ethnicity and immigration status with very high rates among hispanics and new immigrants .

the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba , p.l .

107-110 ) , contains several provisions pertaining to the issue of high school graduation , completion , and dropping out .

the law authorizes several programs and activities intended to prevent students from dropping out or to encourage non - completers to reenter school or enroll in a high school equivalency program .

the law also contains requirements for state and local education agencies that stipulate how graduation , completion , and dropout rates are to be calculated and to whom they must be reported .

two of the three federal programs whose purpose is primarily intended to prevent students from dropping out of high school are authorized in esea , title i , parts d and h. both part d , the neglected and delinquent program ( n&d ) , and part h , the dropout prevention program ( dpp ) have dropout prevention as their primary purpose .

the third federal program with dropout prevention as its primary purpose is the migrant high school equivalency program , authorized in title iv , part a of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) , as amended by the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

the federal government supports additional programs that have dropout prevention as one of several purposes .

these include some of the trio programs and the gear up program ( authorized in title iv of the hea ) as well as several programs authorized in the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) .

support for dropout prevention is also part of the broad array of programmatic purposes covered by large federal programs such as the esea , title i - a , program of education for the disadvantaged .

each of the act's authorizing the major federal dropout prevention programs is likely to be considered for reauthorization in the 110 th congress .

passage of the nclba authorized the esea programs through fy2007 .

a one - year automatic extension , through fy2008 , is provided under the general education provisions act ( title iv of p.l .

90-247 , as amended ) .

authorization for the hea programs is extended through june 30 , 2007 , under the third higher education extension act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-292 ) .

authorization for wia programs expired on september 30 , 2003 , although annual appropriations have continued funding for wia through fy2007 .

it is likely that the 110 th congress will consider reauthorizing some , and perhaps all , of the federal programs and provisions pertaining to high school graduation , completion , and dropouts .

this report will provide background on high school graduation , completion , and dropout rates in the united states .

first , it will discuss the nclba provisions related to the calculation and reporting of these indicators .

second , the report will present the latest data on high school outcomes .

the third section of the report will describe the federal programs designed to improve these outcomes .

and finally , the report will discuss and analyze issues that may arise as congress considers the reauthorization of these programs and provisions .

the nclba contains a handful of provisions that require the calculation and reporting of high school outcomes .

graduation rates are among the indicators states must report under the nclba adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) provisions .

dropout rates must be reported by states as a condition of their participation in the n&d and dpp programs .

in addition to these esea provisions , the education sciences reform act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-279 ) charged the national center for education statistics ( nces ) with compiling rates of high school completion .

a fourth measure of high school outcomes discussed in this section ( although not statutorily mandated ) is what nces calls the "average freshman graduation rate. .

a number of programs are administered by ed and other federal agencies to help dropouts ( and students at risk of dropping out ) complete their secondary education .

the major federal dropout prevention programs are briefly described below , along with each program's fy2008 appropriations level .

generally , federal programs for high school dropout prevention may be categorized as follows: programs with the primary purpose of preventing students from dropping out and / or helping dropouts re - enter and complete high school or an equivalency program , programs having multiple purposes , at least one of which is targeted to dropout recovery or dropout prevention , and programs with broad purposes not explicitly encompassing dropouts but whose funds may be used to help individuals complete high school .

the extent of dropout and potential dropout participation in the latter two categories is unknown .

however , these programs may reach more dropouts or potential dropouts than the explicitly focused programs in the first category , particularly given that their funding levels are generally higher .

for example , the fy2006 appropriation for esea title i - a grants for local educational agencies ( leas ) was $12,713,125,000 .

if only 0.04% of these title i - a funds were used for dropout programs , they may have served more students than the dpp , which received $4,851,000 in fy2006 .

each of the act's authorizing the programs discussed above is likely to be considered for reauthorization in the 110 th congress .

this section discusses several issues pertaining to dropouts that may arise as these acts are considered for reauthorization .

the esea is currently authorized through fy2008 as a result of an automatic one - year extension provided by the general education provisions act ( p.l .

90-247 ) .

the funding authorization for the hea programs discussed above is extended through june 30 , 2007 , under the third higher education extension act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-292 ) .

the authorization for wia programs expired on september 30 , 2003 , although annual appropriations have continued funding for wia through fy2007 .

would the various dropout programs be more cost effective and better serve students through additional coordination ? .

the three primary purpose programs in ed — dpp , n&d , and the migrant high school equivalency program — are administered by three different offices within ed .

the degree of coordination between these offices is not clearly apparent .

moreover , these programs serve similar students as several of the multiple purpose programs ; many of which are further administered by separate offices in ed and dol .

in its fy2006 and fy2007 budget requests , ed proposed eliminating some of the current programs ( specifically , dpp , talent search , upward bound , and gear up ) and replacing them with a new high school reform program which , among other things , was intended to improve graduation rates .

the high school reform proposal was not made in the fy2008 budget request .

ed maintains that eliminating the four programs in favor a single program under one office would improve program coordination .

the dropout prevention act authorized the secretary of ed to establish an interagency working group to , "address inter - and intra - agency program coordination issues at the federal level with respect to school dropout prevention" ( esea , section 1811 ( a ) ( 4 ) ) ; however , this group has not been set up .

in its recommendations for esea reauthorization , the aspen commission on nclb urged congress to improve federal , state , and local dropout prevention coordination .

congress may consider requiring the secretary to establish the working group or some other coordinating body and may also debate whether students are best served by the current array of decentralized programs .

how effective have current federal programs been at promoting secondary degree completion among dropouts or potential dropouts ? .

findings from evaluations of federally supported local dropout programs show that most programs did not reduce dropping out by statistically significant amounts , but that some programs did improve some outcomes .

research on programs funded at the district and school levels have produced more promising results .

determining the degree to which dropouts or potential dropouts have been served , as well as the effectiveness of services offered , may help congress determine a course of action regarding dropouts or youth at risk of dropping out ; these locally - successful models may enlighten that effort .

should states be required to report graduation rates to ed along with its annual report on academic assessments ? .

should congress require consistent and better quality graduation , dropout , and enrollment data reporting from states to nces ? .

and should ed be required to disseminate these data to congress and the public in a timely manner ? .

the reporting of data appears to have improved as a result of the nclb amendments ; however , a few gaps in the data remain .

a handful of states continue to report dropout data incompatible with nces guidelines .

further , inconsistent reporting and missing data require nces to undertake substantial data manipulation to estimate the afgr .

in its suggestions for reauthorizing the nclba , ed argues that "states must demonstrate real progress in accurately reporting and improving high school graduation rates .

several other groups have also advocated for more accurate reporting and better data quality .

ed and the aspen commission joined the national governors association in calling for data reporting on high school outcomes to be disaggregated by student subgroups similar to the ayp requirements .

since the strength of the esea accountability system depends on accurate data reporting , congress may consider strengthening the requirements around reporting of high school outcomes .

are current programs well targeted in light of their objectives ? .

the data presented in this report indicate that , for white non - hispanics , high school attainment has become nearly universal in the last two decades .

these data further suggest that perhaps the educational system is reaching something like a "ceiling effect" — making further progress toward 100% high school completion increasingly difficult .

at the same time , the data in table 2 show that certain groups in the population still have a way to go .

hispanic immigrants have , by far , the lowest rates of high school completion , but hispanic , non - immigrants and black , non - hispanics also have rates significantly lower than whites and asians .

few of the programs described above are targeted to serve students by race / ethnicity .

it is not clear that existing programs are optimally targeted to at - risk individuals in these groups .

some argue that our level of knowledge about the risk factors associated with dropping out could provide for a much more precise targeting of the federal effort .

should the federal effort to encourage high school completion and prevent dropouts be divided between those at risk of dropping out and those who have already dropped out ? .

some argue that dol programs should focus on those who have already left school and the ed programs should focus on retaining at - risk students who haven't dropped out yet .

while this may seem to be a logical programmatic organization , others argue that this view of the dropout problem fails to recognize that youth do not cleanly move from being students to being dropouts .

an underlying issue pertains to whether one believes dropouts are more indicative of problems with the educational system or family and economic hardships .

the latter may be more difficult to address with discrete dropout programs .

do nclba assessments and accountability provisions encourage students to drop out of school ? .

some argue that more frequent and early testing of students may cause some to avoid the shame and discouragement associated with poor performance .

such students may also be subtly encouraged to leave school by administrators and teachers whose attention is focused on meeting ayp targets .

the aspen commission report calls attention to this problem and argues that schools must be held accountable for graduation rates as well as student achievement to avoid the problem of "pushing out" low - performing students to raise assessment scores .

as mentioned earlier in this report , the nclba required the secretary of ed to conduct a national assessment of the title i programs and their impact on seas , leas , schools , and students .

two preliminary reports have been released but neither have discussed the effect of assessments on dropouts .

congress may call for additional information on this issue as it considers amending the current esea assessment and accountability provisions .

