united nations ( u.n. ) reform is an ongoing policy issue for the united states , and may continue to be an area of focus during the 114 th congress .

as the single largest financial contributor to the u.n. system , the u.s. government has an interest in ensuring the united nations operates as efficiently and effectively as possible .

congress has the responsibility to appropriate u.s. funds to the united nations and can impose conditions on payments .

on several occasions , it has sought to link u.s. funding of the united nations to specific reform benchmarks .

since the establishment of the united nations in 1945 , u.n. member states and past secretaries - general have repeatedly attempted to reform the organization .

these reform efforts tend to be cyclical , with member states considering waves of new reform proposals every 5 to 10 years .

the reform attempts are often initiated by a member state , groups of member states , and / or the current secretary - general .

they have generally focused on three areas of concern: ( 1 ) perceived inefficiencies and lack of accountability in the u.n. secretariat ; ( 2 ) duplication and redundancy of u.n. mandates , missions , and / or programs ; and ( 3 ) evidence of fraud , waste , abuse , and / or mismanagement of u.n. resources .

proposed reforms often reflect the political , economic , and cultural climate of the time .

in the 1950s and 1960s , member states focused on increasing membership on the u.n. security council and the u.n. economic and social council ( ecosoc ) to account for growing u.n. membership .

in the 1970s , as the economic and political gap between developed and developing countries grew more pronounced , the general assembly examined structural changes that would help the united nations address "problems of international economic co - operation. .

due in part to pressure from the united states , u.n. reform initiatives in the 1980s and early 1990s addressed financial and structural issues , with a particular focus on decision - making processes related to the u.n. regular budget , which funds core u.n. activities .

since the early 2000s , reform efforts have been driven by a combination of u.n. budgetary and financial challenges , controversy over mismanagement of the iraq oil - for - food program , perceived ineffectiveness of u.n. human rights mechanisms , and allegations of sexual abuse committed by u.n. staff and peacekeepers , among other issues .

this report examines reform priorities from the perspective of several key actors , including members of congress , the obama administration , selected member states , the u.n. secretary - general , and a cross - section of groups tasked with addressing u.n. reform during the past 10 to 15 years .

it also discusses congressional actions related to u.n. reform and mechanisms for implementing reform , as well as possible challenges facing u.s. policymakers as they consider existing and future u.n. reform efforts .

in 2005 , u.n. reform efforts gained momentum as heads of state and government met for a world summit at u.n. headquarters in new york .

the summit outcome document , which was adopted by consensus , laid the foundation for a series of reforms that included improving u.n. management structures ; strengthening the security council ( see text box ) ; enhancing u.n. system coordination and coherence ; and creating a new human rights council ( see text box ) .

since the world summit , u.n. member states have worked toward implementing these reform initiatives with varied results .

some reforms are stalled or have not been addressed , while others are underway or completed .

selected reform activities include the following: the long - term impact of these and other recent activities remains to be seen .

the overall success of these efforts — and any future reform efforts — depends on how effectively the united nations and its member countries manage and follow through on the implementation of these reforms and how , if at all , they work to correct possible weak nesses or issues that may arise over time .

generally , congress supports the united nations and its overall mission .

it authorizes and appropriates u.s. funds to the organization each year and often uses u.n. mechanisms to further u.s. foreign policy objectives .

congress can also be critical of the united nations — especially when some members believe that it may not be running as effectively as it could be .

in such instances , congress may use a wide range of legislative tools to influence and direct u.s. policy at the united nations .

placing financial conditions or limits on u.s. funding to the united nations , described in more detail below , is a common congressional approach to u.n reform .

other tools may include considering "sense of the congress" resolutions ; holding hearings to investigate u.n. programs or oversee administration policies ; and considering u.s. nominations for u.n. posts .

the united states generally supports the mission and mandate of the united nations .

it played a key role in establishing the united nations in 1945 , and serves as one of five permanent members of the security council .

some administrations have been critical of the united nations , however , and have advocated sweeping reform of the organization .

a significant challenge for advocates of u.n. reform is finding common ground among the disparate definitions of reform held by various stakeholders .

there is no common definition of u.n. reform and , as a result , there is often debate over the scope , appropriateness , and effectiveness of past and current reform initiatives .

one method for determining how a stakeholder defines u.n. reform may be to identify policy priorities in the u.n. reform debate .

in some cases , common objectives among stakeholders have translated into substantive reform policy , though shared goals do not always guarantee successful outcomes .

previous and current u.n. reform initiatives encompass an array of organizational issues that may require different processes for implementation .

these reforms might be achieved by amending the u.n. charter or through various non - charter reforms .

charter amendment is a rarely used practice and has only occurred on three occasions .

non - charter reforms are more common and comparatively easier to achieve .

achieving meaningful and comprehensive u.n. reform is a significant and ongoing challenge for u.n. member states .

the 114 th congress may wish to take possible reform obstacles into account when considering legislation that exercises oversight or supports a reform agenda .

each u.n. member state has its own political agenda and foreign policy goals , and may also have its own definition of u.n. reform .

as a result , member states often hold differing views on when reform is necessary , how best to implement reform , and how to measure the success or failure of a given reform initiative .

in some cases , failure to reach consensus can lead to significant delay , or failure , of certain reform initiatives .

some member states package their policy priorities as u.n. reform to further their own policy goals .

this can cause distrust among member states as countries question whether reform proposals by other member states are based on self - interest or a genuine desire to improve the u.n. system .

some observers cite the inability of u.n. member states or secretaries - general to effectively prioritize reform initiatives as an obstacle to u.n. reform .

when secretary - general annan presented reform proposals in 2005 , for example , he requested that they be adopted by the general assembly not in increments , but as a package of reforms .

instead of considering a large series of reform proposals , some observers argue that member states should select only a few reform priorities and work toward their adoption and implementation .

others contend that the most efficient way to achieve reform may be for member states first to adopt reform initiatives they can agree to and then gradually work toward tackling the more divisive and complicated reform issues .

the united nations is a highly complex and decentralized organization , and therefore may be slow to consider or implement potential reforms .

some argue that there is a "culture of inaction" in the united nations , and that u.n. managers and staff are resistant to the implementation of new programs , changes to existing programs , and modifications to staffing and personnel policies .

many contend that prospective and agreed - to reforms lack clear plans for implementation , including deadlines and cost estimates .

they stress that this overall lack of planning may affect the progress and ultimate success of reforms already implemented , as well as those reforms currently being considered by the general assembly .

some also emphasize that without proper implementation plans and follow - up , u.n. member states may be unable to adequately gauge the overall effectiveness of reforms .

many observers note that a significant challenge for u.n. reform efforts may be the effective implementation of reforms within the current u.n. budget .

some reform initiatives are established by member states to operate "within existing resources. .

many argue that the existing u.n. budget limits may not be able to support all of the reform initiatives currently being considered .

some member states , including the united states , however , contend that money saved from other reforms could create a funding source for further reforms and / or the creation of new u.n. programs or bodies .

the complex relationships that exist among member states outside of the u.n. system may be another challenge affecting u.n. reform efforts .

these relationships are entirely independent of the united nations but can affect how countries work together within the u.n. framework to achieve reform objectives .

military conflict , religious and ethnic differences , political conflict , trade and economic issues , and geography can all potentially impact reform priorities and cooperation among u.n. member states .

appendix a .

selected reform legislation when considering u.n. reform issues , congress may wish to explore the nature and effectiveness of past legislative approaches and the extent to which they may have influenced the adoption of reform measures at the united nations .

there is some evidence that legislation such as the kassebaum - solomon amendment and the helms - biden agreement may have led , either directly or indirectly , to substantive changes in u.n. policies .

the following sections highlight selected reform legislation from 1986 to the present and note any subsequent changes to internal u.n. policy .

kassebaum - solomon amendment ( 1986-1987 ) in the mid - 1980s , some members of congress expressed concern that u.s. influence over the u.n. budget was not proportionate to its rate of assessment .

in 1986 congress passed legislation , popularly known as the "kassebaum - solomon amendment," which required that the u.s. assessed contribution to the u.n. regular budget be reduced to 20% unless the united nations gave major u.n. financial contributors a greater say in the budget process .

subsequently , in 1986 the general assembly adopted a new budget and planning process that incorporated consensus - based budgeting as a decision - making mechanism , thus giving member states with higher assessment levels a potentially greater voice in the budget process .

u.n. office of internal oversight services ( 1993 ) in the early 1990s , some members of congress and the administration were concerned with the apparent lack of oversight and accountability within the u.n. system .

in 1993 , as part of the fy1994 state department appropriations act , congress directed that 10% of u.s. assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget be withheld until the secretary of state certified to congress that "the united nations has established an independent office with responsibilities and powers substantially similar to offices of inspectors general act of 1978. .

on july 29 , 1994 , the u.n. general assembly established the office of internal oversight services ( oios ) which reports directly to the secretary - general and provides "internal auditing , investigation , inspection , programme monitoring , evaluation and consulting services to all u.n. activities under the secretary - general's authority. .

helms - biden agreement ( 1999 ) in the late 1990s , congress and the administration negotiated and agreed to legislation that would further u.s. reform policy at the united nations .

the helms - biden bill authorized payment of some u.s. arrears if specific reform benchmarks were met and certified to congress by the secretary of state .

under the terms of helms - biden , the united states agreed to ( 1 ) pay $819 million in arrearages over fiscal years 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 ; and ( 2 ) forgive $107 million owed to the united states by the united nations in peacekeeping costs if the united nations applied the $107 million to u.s. peacekeeping arrears .

for arrearage payments to occur , congress required that the u.s. assessment for contributions to the u.n. regular budget be reduced from 25% to 22% and that the peacekeeping contribution be reduced from 30% to 25% .

in december 2000 , the u.n. general assembly reduced the regular budget assessment level to from 25% to 22% , and the peacekeeping share from approximately 30.4% to 28% .

in subsequent years , the u.s. peacekeeping assessment continued to fall and is now close to 26.5% .

appendix b .

key u.n. reform recommendations and proposals by independent and u.n .

affiliated groups appendix c. organizational chart of the u.n. syste .

