the shrinking of the remnants of the cold war in asia along with the rise of china are causing a fundamental rethinking of interests and relationships among the countries and economies of east asia .

for a half century following world war ii , east asia was divided into two blocs: communism on one side confronting the united states and u.s. allies on the other .

smaller countries at sundry times were ensnared in the confrontation , and in cases — such as in korea and in vietnam — the great power rivalry manifested itself in intense , but limited , warfare .

international trade patterns tended to follow political alliances with the american market serving both as the anchor of the asia pacific economy and as the preferred export destination for many of the non - communist countries .

now a tectonic shift has occurred in the landscape in east asia .

five forces are driving these shifts: ( 1 ) the rise ( re - emergence ) of china and its jockeying for influence and leadership with japan and south korea and other asian countries , ( 2 ) globalization and the cross - border expansion of corporations and supply chains , including supplies of energy and raw materials , ( 3 ) liberalized trade and investment flows , ( 4 ) the global war on terrorism , and ( 5 ) the rise of the european security model ( keeping the peace through progressive institution building and increased stakeholder relationships ) to challenge balance - of - power realism ( keeping the peace through a confrontational stalemate among big powers ) .

the purpose of this report is to examine the developing regional architecture — the growing trade , financial , and political arrangements among countries of east asia — and what that implies for u.s. interests and policy .

the focus is on china , south korea , japan , and southeast asia with some mention of links with australia and new zealand .

the types of arrangements include bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) , regional trade pacts , currency and monetary arrangements , and political and security arrangements .

the east asian regional architecture is supported by two distinct legs .

the economic leg is strong and growing more intense .

a web of free trade and regional monetary agreements is developing rapidly .

it is driven primarily by the quest for business profits , for economic stability , and for high rates of economic growth .

while east asia lags behind north america and the european union in the extent and depth of economic integration , the region is catching up quickly despite strong historical animosities that chill otherwise warm economic relations — particularly among northeast asian nations .

east asia is home to many of the most dynamic economies in the world , and competition is intensifying to join in regional trade agreements .

beginning with the asean fta in 1992 ( an agreement that lowered but did not eliminate intra - regional tariffs ) , the momentum for countries in asia to conclude ftas both among themselves and with countries outside the region has been increasing .

current u.s. policy is to explore ftas with asian countries that would be advantageous to u.s. workers , consumers , and businesses .

however , since three ftas negotiated during the bush administration ( with columbia , panama , and south korea ) await approval by congress , and since labor interests have opposed ftas , the obama administration has pursued only one , long - term free - trade negotiation ( see below ) .

as u.s. policy toward economic and security arrangements in east asia evolves , it is turning on matters of job creation , intensity , inclusiveness , and final structure .

the global financial crisis and rise in rates of unemployment both in the united states and in other countries of the world has placed a policy focus on job creation .

as part of this focus , the obama administration has proposed to double u.s. export growth over the next five years , particularly by small - and medium - sized businesses .

u.s. exports either can be pulled or pushed overseas .

they are pulled by higher growth rates in other countries , lowered import barriers abroad , and a cheaper dollar that lowers the relative price of american goods .

they are pushed by various export promotion programs , including export finance and export facilitation , as well as advances in product design and technology .

on december 14 , 2009 , united states trade representative ron kirk notified congress of the intent of the obama administration to enter into negotiations of a regional , asia - pacific trade agreement , known as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement .

this objective is to shape a high - standard , broad - based regional free trade agreement with australia , brunei darussalam , chile , new zealand , peru , singapore , and vietnam .

the first round of negotiations began on march 15 , 2010 , in sydney , australia .

the tpp negotiations are the first market - opening initiative of the obama administration .

singapore , chile , brunei , and new zealand are the original members of the pact .

the united states , australia , peru , and vietnam are seeking to join .

the united states already has ftas with singapore , chile , australia , and peru .

the tpp could become the basis for a free trade area of the asia - pacific over the long term .

countries in asia have been actively concluding bilateral or regional free trade agreements .

singapore , in particular , already has 15 ftas in force with 23 nations and is negotiating more .

indonesia , thailand , malaysia , the philippines , and vietnam in asean as well as japan , south korea , and taiwan also have been reaching out to establish free trade with willing partner countries .

china also has ridden the crest of fta fever with a notable deal with asean that took effect in 2010 .

japan has been pushing for an east asian community that would include the 16 members of the east asian summit ( asean plus three [china , japan , and south korea] and india , australia , and new zealand .

this also is called the comprehensive economic partnership for east asia ( cepea ) .

the political and security leg of the east asian regional architecture remains relatively underdeveloped .

the most progress has been made with asean playing the role of convener and has taken the form of the east asia summit established in 2005 ( involving all the members of asean plus china , japan , and south korea , together with india , australia and new zealand ) , the asean security community and asean regional forum ( arf ) .

in northeast asia , the six - party talks aimed at resolving the north korean nuclear program have been operating in fits and starts on an ad hoc basis .

unlike closer economic ties that tend to benefit both sides ( positive sum ) , security arrangements may pull in strategic competitor countries in an attempt to resolve difficult issues that benefit one at the expense of another ( zero - sum ) .

political and security fora , furthermore , usually exclude the very officials most involved with security issues — the military .

in asia , military relations tend to be conducted on a country - to - country basis rather than through regional institutions .

regional security meetings tend to be attended by foreign affairs ministers or their representatives rather than by defense chiefs , and they often result in "talk and photo - ops" rather than in actual problem solving or confidence building .

still , pressures for greater security cooperation are being driven by the boom in economic interchange and its concomitant requirement for political stability .

also , the transnational character of security threats ( particularly with terrorism , illegal narcotics , and weapons proliferation ) , and a need to replace the cold war structure with something more cooperative and less prone to generating hostility beg for a political / security organization for east asia that is less process - oriented ( meetings ) and more directed toward functions and achieving concrete results .

asia , moreover , still is rife with nationalism and power rivalries that operate in a 20 th century fashion with interstate conflicts and territorial disputes flaring up on occasion .

the whole east asian region is moving toward formalizing trading and investment relationships through free trade agreements or other such preferential trading arrangements .

the further development of these ftas is proceeding regardless of u.s. action .

the united states also is participating in this activity with the korea - u.s. fta awaiting legislative approval and negotiations ongoing , albeit fitfully , with malaysia and thailand plus existing ftas with singapore and australia .

various interest groups also have pushed for ftas with taiwan , japan , and asean as a whole .

any change in u.s. fta policy , therefore , seems one of intensity rather than direction .

a question is whether the united states should speed up the work by the u.s. trade representative to conclude more ftas with asian economies , continue with the status quo , or halt efforts such as negotiations of a trans - pacific partnership agreement .

the questions of intensity and inclusiveness dovetail with each other .

as the intensity of fta negotiations rises , the question of inclusiveness looms ever larger .

it is clear that many in asia wish for an asian - only organization that would be a counterweight to the european union and the north american free trade agreement .

american interests in asia , however , are so deeply ingrained and the american presence so large that some argue that american interests need to be represented whenever asians meet .

if the united states is not there , some feel that china will assume the leadership mantle and work at cross purposes to american interests .

should a future asian fta , for example , include only east asia or should it cross the pacific ocean as the asia pacific economic cooperation forum does ? .

for example , some are proposing an asean + 3 ( china , japan , and south korea ) fta .

others may see , instead , an asean + 4 fta to include the united states .

japan has proposed a 16-nation asia free trade area to be coordinated by an organization similar to the organization for economic cooperation and development .

the 16 nations would include the ten members of the association of southeast asian nations , japan , china , south korea , india , australia and new zealand .

the reality with asian nations is that some do not have the institutional and industrial development necessary for a comprehensive fta that meets u.s. standards .

with some countries , therefore , the united states can negotiate toward an fta ( malaysia and thailand ) , but with others a tifa is more appropriate ( trade and investment framework agreement that may specify areas for improvement needed before considering an fta ) .

for example , with vietnam , a trade and investment framework agreement ( in 2007 ) established normal trading relations status , and negotiations were begun in june 2008 on a bilateral investment treaty with the aim of expanding upon the existing investment provisions included tifa .

by relying primarily on bilateral ftas with asian nations while still emphasizing trans - pacific arrangements , such as the trans - pacific partnership , the united states seems to be hedging its bets — not trying to block attempts to create exclusive east asian ftas but pursuing deals to keep from being cut out from their benefits .

the danger seems remote at this time that an exclusive and inward looking trade bloc will emerge in east asia .

in particular , most asian nations are members of the world trade organization ( except for laos , taiwan , and north korea ) .

any fta among wto member nations prohibits raising barriers against non - fta countries that also are members of the wto .

on the security side , the issues of intensity and inclusiveness have a more direct bearing on u.s. national interests .

the united states already is viewed as a hegemonic power in asia with as many as 100,000 military personnel forward deployed in the pacific command and strong alliance relationships with japan , south korea , the philippines , thailand , and australia / new zealand plus close security relations with singapore and taiwan .

east asia includes countries with three of the world's six largest armed forces: those of china , north korea , and south korea .

russia also is nearby .

china is a nuclear power , and north korea has tested nuclear weapons .

in addition , japan is upgrading its defense forces ; terrorist and insurgent attacks often occur in southeast asia ; and flashpoints exist along the taiwan strait and on the korean peninsula .

u.s. security interests in east asia are so great that in issues related to asian security the united states has sought a seat at the table and often leads in attempts to resolve contentious issues .

the united states has joined with tokyo and seoul in calling for a northeast asia regional forum that would include the united states , china , russia , japan , and south korea .

this forum , a counterpart to the asean regional forum ( that also includes these countries plus others ) , could institutionalize cooperation in northeast asia on issues related to security , energy , or disease .

there also is some discussion of linking the major democracies in the region ( united states , japan , australia , and india ) in some form of regional organization .

at the core of u.s. concern over the developing regional architecture in east asia is the growing influence of china .

beijing aims to reclaim its position as the leader of asia .

it already is displacing japan and the united states among asian nations as their primary trading partner and is an increasing source of economic assistance to countries in need .

china also has pursued a "charm offensive" that appears to be winning the "hearts and minds" of many people in the countries there .

china has accomplished this through skillful diplomacy , use of aid resources , by presenting a more friendly face , and also through formal trade and other agreements , although some backlash has occurred .

the danger exists that if china comes to dominate regional institutions in east asia , it could steer them down a path inimical to u.s. interests , much as beijing has already done with the shanghai cooperation organization .

in the future , when security issues arise in east asia , policymakers may face a dilemma: should they look toward the united states or toward china for a solution ? .

chinese recent successes , however , should not be over emphasized .

the united states still is the world's preeminent military and economic power , and while many global supply chains include china , they also include the united states — particularly in product design , technology , and marketing .

although asian nations are seeking to broaden international options with major powers , they also engage in a continuing round of hedging and maneuvering for advantage and against possible chinese dominance .

in this process , they are seeking closer ties with each other and also with the united states .

the united states still is seen as the region's security stabilizer and economic partner of choice .

the final question for the policy deliberations on trade and security arrangements in east asia is what form the architecture will take .

this includes whether the economic and security organizations are to be separate or merged , how countries are to be grouped , where the center will be located , and how much voice each participant will have .

so far , u.s. policy has been to allow the asian nations to take the lead in proposing various organizations .

most have either an economic or security focus or are divided into two parts , one addressing trade and possibly leading to an fta and another to address security issues .

the end of the cold war and demise of communism triggered two revolutionary movements .

the first was political — symbolized by the fall of the berlin wall and the breakup of the former soviet union .

the second was economic — symbolized by the privatization of state - owned enterprises , the loosening of centralized control , and adoption of market principles not only in the former soviet union but in east asian countries such as china and vietnam .

on the economic side , a global consensual philosophy is now evolving that the economic system that provides the highest growth rates , greatest consumer satisfaction , and best standard of living is market - based with private ownership , access to global markets , freedom of capital movement , and government intervention / regulation primarily in cases of market failure .

autocratic governments , moreover , have found that they can use the market system and the growth it generates to gain legitimacy , repress opposition , fund military expansion , and build nationalistic pride in their countries .

even with the uneven income distribution and potential for conflict between the "haves" and "have - nots" caused by rapid economic growth , governments increasingly are placing their policy bets on globalization , international trade , and industrialization to raise standards of living and garner popular political support .

eventually , moreover , experts see economic growth as creating a middle class and competing power centers wherever it occurs .

this arguably leads to more democratic societies and less chance of military confrontation with the industrialized countries of the world .

during the cold war , trade patterns followed security relationships .

the united states became a major ( if not the main ) trading partner of japan , south korea , taiwan , and several countries of southeast asia .

communist countries likewise gravitated to china and the soviet union and were rewarded with special trade credits .

currently , however , those trade patterns have changed .

globalization knows no political philosophy .

businesses seek low cost , high quality production bases regardless of where they are located .

china is rapidly becoming the preferred manufacturing platform for companies from japan , south korea , taiwan , the united states , and other countries .

formal trading arrangements are following the newly developed trading patterns .

the structure overlaying the individual market economies is rapidly becoming crisscrossed by bilateral and regional preferential trade agreements .

during the cold war , the security overlay for countries often coincided with the philosophy underlying the organization of government and their economies .

communist blocs arose among socialist countries , while the united states formed explicit and tacit alliances with the more market - oriented economies .

on one side was a u.s. - led arrangement with the united states as a benign hegemon supported by bilateral security alliances with key non - communist asian countries .

the united states maintained strategic and allied relationships with japan , south korea , taiwan , the philippines , thailand , australia , and new zealand in a type of hub and spoke configuration .

this u.s. - protected block dominated peripheral asian and pacific ocean countries .

on the other side was a communist china that shared a hostility toward the united states with the soviet union and dominated the interior of the asian land mass .

china and the soviet union supported countries with communist governments , such as north korea and north vietnam .

the result was bifurcation of east asia into u.s. - dominated and communist - dominated blocs with some countries attempting to follow more independent paths .

the two sides intersected with a balance of power regionally that derived from the cold war balance of terror globally .

some intra - asian or world organizations existed , but none of them could effectively deal with overarching security , political , or economic issues in asia .

the political and security arrangements that were formed among east asian nations , moreover , tended to be anti - china or anticommunist in nature .

asean or seato ( south east asia treaty organization ) are two cases in point .

currently , however , the economic and political arrangements are crossing philosophical lines , and china is emerging as a regional hegemon in asia .

these changes are manifest in intra - asian organizations such as the east asia summit , asean economic community , asean + 3 ( asean plus china , japan , and south korea ) , the asean regional forum , and the six - party talks , as well as track - two fora , such as the shangri - la dialogue or the northeast asia cooperation dialogue .

countries join in bilateral agreements and multilateral arrangements in order to prevent or limit armed conflict , ease tensions , gain economic advantages , and , in cases , raise standards for human rights .

on the security side , the uncomfortable fact faced by all nations is that the space above the level of countries is basically anarchy .

throughout history , nations have attempted to step into that anarchy to pursue narrow national interests .

until world war ii , countries countered such behavior mainly by creating security alliances .

no global institution with global sovereignty existed .

now , international laws and norms have been established , and institutions ( eg , the united nations ) exist , but these institutions wield sovereignty only to the extent that individual countries cede power to them .

in many cases , a primary benefit of such institutions is to provide a mechanism to resolve international disputes , provide non - hegemonic peace - keeping forces , and to bring countries face to face in a diplomatic setting rather than on the battlefield .

on the economic side , the space above national economies also is anarchic , but unlike many zero - sum security exchanges ( such as conquering territory ) , international economic transactions are positive sum and usually provide gains for businesses and consumers on both sides .

in cases , however , private trading gains may conflict with national policies ( such as in illicit trade ) .

the role of nations in legitimate economic activity is to provide the crucible for it to occur , to facilitate it , to regulate it , and in some cases , own it .

in facilitating trade in the anarchic space among nations , for example , governments establish trading rules and cede preferential benefits to other nations through formal mechanisms .

these include granting normal trade relations ( most - favored nation ) status , establishing the world trade organization ( wto ) , adopting free trade agreements , or organizing special financial institutions such as the world bank or international monetary fund .

trade and security arrangements and institutions also provide a platform for countries to take leadership roles and to spread their influence .

the end of the cold war brought unipolarity with the united states sitting at the top .

asian nations recognize that the united states will continue to exercise major influence in the region , but beijing , in particular , sees the formation of an exclusive asian organization as an opportunity to help reclaim what it considers to be its historical position as the regional leader in asia .

china also would like to weaken the relationships between the united states , japan and south korea ( india also ) and see countries in asia more acquiescent to its own desires .

asean , likewise , sees itself as a more neutral party in the big power rivalry as this plays out in asia and a moving force for regionalism .

southeast asians observe that it matters not whether the big elephants are courting or fighting , in the process the surrounding spectators can get trampled .

east asia also has a unique history that plays into the interaction among nations and the composition of any regional organization .

historically , there have been two major models that linked east asian countries .

the first occurred when china considered itself the "central kingdom" and sat atop a hierarchy as a "superior state" whose values and culture spread throughout the region .

this sino - centric order required surrounding countries to treat china somewhat like the head of a family and to pay respects and tribute to peking .

the second model came under the japanese - controlled greater east asian co - prosperity sphere prior to and during world war ii .

under this model , japan forcibly subdued or received through war settlements territory that now includes the korean peninsula , taiwan , much of china , and much of southeast asia .

japan's occupation of many of these areas was often brutal , and resentment still lingers , particularly in south korea and china .

the wariness of some asian nations to join in a grouping that would allow china or japan to take the lead often harkens back to memories of either of these historical east asian structures .

scholars have long observed the relationship between economic interaction and warfare .

a "democratic peace" hypothesis states that democratic nations ( particularly liberal democratic nations ) almost never go to war with one another .

recent academic studies of the results of economic interdependence and security indicate the following: among nations , the greater the interdependence ( the greater the costs of exiting from an economic relationship ) , the greater the probability that the nations will not seek political demands that could lead to conflict .

on the other hand , economic interdependence also can be used as leverage to extract political demands .

the greater the extent that internationally oriented coalitions in a country ( actors with interest in expanding foreign markets or in importing ) have political clout , the more likely that outside , economic incentives or sanctions will be effective in influencing policy in the country in question .

the more democratic and market - oriented a country is , the more likely this will occur .

the expectation of future commercial gains between nations helps to dampen political tensions and deter the onset of hostilities .

such future gains are enhanced by preferential trading arrangements , such as ftas .

membership in preferential trading arrangements tends to inhibit interstate conflict .

economic and security arrangements increase opportunities for communication , establishing personal ties between people , and cooperating in diplomatic endeavors .

this reduces the chances for miscalculations and misperceptions and increases the chances for direct diplomacy and back - channel communications .

on the other hand , economic arrangements may increase competition for domestic industries and invite blowback from trade liberalization .

the motivation for trade and financial agreements is usually to gain benefits for exports , imports , or investments that are not available through global concessions agreed to multilaterally through the wto .

under wto rules , bilateral and regional trade agreements can lower barriers between signatory countries but cannot raise barriers to other economies .

trade agreements have both trade diversion and trade creation effects .

they divert existing trade toward the signatory countries but also may create more trade overall .

free trade and other trade agreements also may lock in market access or other benefits provided by one government in a country that are under risk of being withdrawn by successive governments .

they also may induce governments to take politically difficult actions , such as opening agricultural markets or providing labor rights or protection for the environment .

any change in the rules of trade , however , creates both winners and losers — those who can take advantage of the new trading regime and those who are hurt by it .

there usually will be some economic actors ( particularly declining or non - competitive industries or certain labor groups ) that are protected from international competition under an existing trade regime that will be worse off if that protection is eliminated by a free - trade agreement .

environmental or other interests also may be threatened by more trade ( eg , logging of old growth forests ) .

as with the european union or the north american free trade area , preferential trade arrangements usually follow trading patterns .

ftas do not spring into existence ex nihilo ( out of nothing ) , although in cases ftas are pursued for political more than economic reasons .

ftas typically proceed through evolutionary stages with respect to intensity ( greater liberalization ) and expansiveness ( more members ) .

as shown in figure 1 , trading relationships begin with unorganized trade and investment flows based on comparative economic advantage .

trade then can come under broad international trading rules such as those stemming from normal trade relations ( most - favored nation ) status or from the wto .

trade then can be placed under a preferential trading arrangement with special access privileges or reduced barriers but not necessarily free trade .

as a precursor to a preferential trading arrangement , the united states uses trade and investment framework agreements ( tifa ) to strengthen bilateral trade and support economic reform in the partner country through regular senior - level discussions on commercial and economic issues .

other countries use framework agreements that may provide for an "early harvest" of trade concessions and launch discussions on a future fta .

japan and other countries often negotiate partial ftas called economic partnership agreements ( epa ) .

these have established free trade in most manufactured goods , but they also may exclude sensitive sectors , such as agriculture .

in some cases , they include only a few actual trade concessions .

they also may map a path toward a full fta .

an fta usually provides for eliminating tariffs on goods , liberalized access in services and investment flows , as well as other provisions .

the most extensive trading arrangement is a common market which goes beyond an fta .

its members have free trade among themselves plus common external barriers and allow for free movement of labor and capital among member states .

as trade arrangements become more intense , they also can become more expansive by including other countries ( such as is occurring with european union enlargement ) .

in east asia , most trade agreements have been driven by the market .

they also have been competitive .

the benefits available under a preferential trade agreement usually induce other countries to seek the same trade advantages or risk losing business for their exporters or investors .

in some cases , the arrangements ( or lack thereof ) are politically driven , particularly in the case of taiwan as beijing attempts to isolate it diplomatically while taipei tries to counter the diplomatic snubs that belie existing underlying trading relations .

in other cases , politics and disputes over history ( especially between japan and china and south korea ) have hindered the conclusion of free trade agreements .

regional trade agreements ( rtas ) , including ftas , have become a major vehicle to achieve trade and investment liberalization .

they are being negotiated both as a supplement to and concurrently with multilateral trade negotiations under the wto .

while some see rtas as stumbling blocks to global trade liberalization , others see them as building blocks to eventual global free trade .

wto agreements tend to result in "lowest common denominator" outcomes , whereas rtas can go beyond wto agreements with deeper concessions made by like - minded nations .

the complex web of free trade agreements in the world , sometimes referred to as a "spaghetti bowl," is becoming denser each year .

the wto reports that as of december 2008 , 421 regional trade agreements had been notified to the wto , and 230 agreements were in force .

close to 400 rtas are scheduled to be implemented by 2010 .

the major east asian rta relationships are summarized in table 1 .

security arrangements , in most cases , are designed to reduce the risk of hostilities by co - opting the interests of the signatory nations and also by presenting a united front to potential adversaries .

such arrangements range from formal alliances and mutual defense institutions to merely creating a forum to discuss security issues in order to build confidence and resolve conflicts through diplomacy .

under the european model of security , intra - european wars , particularly among germany , france , england , and spain , have become a dimming memory as the countries have joined together under the european union and , for most , the north atlantic treaty organization .

trans - atlantic institutions , such as the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( helsinki commission ) also exist that provide a regularized forum to discuss security and human rights issues .

such security arrangements underlie what is sometimes referred to as the new security paradigm: "disconnectedness defines danger. .

the threat of the cold war has been replaced by terrorism , rogue nations with possible weapons of mass destruction , competition for energy and resources , and ethnic or religious conflict .

today , most dangers originate from areas of the world without collective security arrangements and disconnected from the process of globalization , network connectivity , financial transactions , and liberal media flows .

even in this new age , however , the potential for a big power confrontation ( including one with a nuclear - armed china ) still exists .

regional political and security arrangements in east asia are still in the developmental stage compared with those in europe , the north atlantic , or gulf states .

the major efforts in asia include the asean security community , asean regional forum , the east asian summit , the shanghai cooperation organization , and the six - party talks .

figure 2 shows current and proposed regional trade , political , and security arrangements in east asia .

currently , asean is playing a key organizing role in several of the arrangements , but it is doing so partly at the strong support of china and with close cooperation from beijing .

the united states also is a major player and is acting from both inside and outside depending on the organization .

the united states plays a central role in apec and the six - party talks , and is a major participant in the asean regional forum .

the united states also would be a key member of the proposed northeast asia regional forum and now can join the east asia summit .

the security related organizations in east asia are discussed below .

the development of new trade and security arrangements in east asia raises several issues for u.s. policy makers that stem from essential u.s. interests .

for the united states , policy options include ( 1 ) disengage from institution building in asia , ( 2 )  continue current administration policy , and ( 3 ) establish a stronger presence in existing institutions , particularly in southeast asia , and push for a new regional organization for northeast asia .

one policy option is to disengage from direct participation in negotiating economic and security institutions in asia and allow asian nations to determine their own architecture .

the united states already is a member of apec and the asean regional forum as well as the six - party talks on north korea .

the united states has relied upon a spoke and hub system of military alliances and forward deployed troops to look to u.s. security interests .

many feel that regional organizations tend toward being "talk shops" anyway .

the united states could disengage from regional institution building without disengaging from economic and security ties with asia .

currently no locus of opinion seems to be manifesting itself in the united states on this issue on the economic side , however , debate is intense over the effects and utility of free trade agreements .

opposition toward further ftas has been building in congress , although congress did approve the u.s. - oman fta and a u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement .

under the bush administration , the united states signed ftas with columbia , panama , and south korea , but these await legislative action and final approval .

concerns have been raised with respect to issues , such as the large u.s. trade deficit , outsourcing of jobs , protection of intellectual property rights , and labor and environmental conditions abroad .

u.s. debate over future ftas appears to be more between domestic interests opposed to or in favor of more liberalized trade than over the geopolitical and international implications of closer economic relations with other countries .

the creation of an asia pacific fta encompassing the 21 apec nations ( including the united states ) seems distant .

an east asian economic community ( asean + 3 fta ) or east asian fta ( asean + 6 ) could divert trade away from the u.s. market , but the united states can continue to negotiate bilateral ftas with countries belonging to any asian regional trade arrangement .

a system of bilateral ftas and security alliances emanating from the united states as a hub should be able to poke spokes into the various asian regional organizations existing and being proposed .

still the united states could use its influence to dampen enthusiasm for new asian regional organizations , or washington could let the asians wrestle with each other to determine the size , shape , and reach of any new institution .

a danger of disengagement from institution building on the security side is that asian nations may see that as evidence that the united states is distracted by the middle east and has lost interest in asia .

disengagement also opens the way for china to assume a leadership role and possibly to move the organization in ways that are inimical to u.s. interests .

another option is to continue current policy of engagement in institution building in asia as pursued by the obama administration and congress .

this includes seeking membership in the trans - pacific partnership ; pursuing possible additional bilateral ftas , such as a future fta with asean and a future asia pacific fta ; strengthening the asean regional forum and the asia pacific economic cooperation forum ; holding discussions on establishing a security forum for northeast asia ; and maintaining current strategic alliances with certain countries in the region .

the largest item on the agenda arguably is for congress to address consideration of the korea - u.s. free trade agreement .

the current negotiations for the united states to join the trans - pacific partnership represents a concrete way for the united states to cement itself into the evolving architecture of international trade in the asia pacific .

the fta negotiations were originally among the four countries of chile , new zealand , singapore , and brunei ; australia , peru , and vietnam also have joined the talks .

this is one trade arrangement that includes countries on both sides of the pacific .

such an arrangement , along with the asean fta , could form the nucleus for an fta of the asia pacific that would include those willing among the 21 members of the asia pacific economic cooperation forum .

current u.s. policy has evolved from historical conditions and through the tussle of political , military , and economic forces that drive decision making and provide opportunities for leaders to place their patina on the tenor of relations among nations .

the strategy of the united states at the present with respect to east asia appears to be based on two primary factors .

the first is the reality that the middle east and afghanistan / pakistan has taken priority over east and southeast asia .

the amount of new resources and energy the united states can devote to issues in east asia is constrained by commitments in iraq and afghanistan .

the second factor seems to be that peace and prosperity in east asia is possible in the short run only if the united states maintains a strong military and political presence in the region and in the long run only if nations have political and economic systems that allow human ambition to be channeled into constructive and peaceful endeavors .

the u.s. military presence in east asia is based on a series of treaty alliances .

some of these alliances have required a major adjustment recently , but they still form the bedrock of u.s. security in asia .

as for the rise of china , current u.s. strategy seems to be to engage china but also to place constraints on activities potentially inimical to u.s. security or economic interests .

both "idealism" and "realism" come into play .

the pentagon's military planning , of necessity , tends to be power - and threat - based and built on realism as a lens through which to view the world .

it considers and prepares for several scenarios , including the "worst case" in order to provide for the security interests of the united states .

these policies stress contingent military planning , export controls , strong alliance relations with japan and south korea , and rising levels of engagement .

according to the 2008 national defense strategy , china is one ascendant state with the potential for competing with the united states .

for the foreseeable future , the united states will need to hedge against china's growing military modernization and the impact of its strategic choices upon international security .

it is likely that china will continue to expand its conventional military capabilities , emphasizing anti - access and area denial assets including developing a full range of long - range strike , space , and information warfare capabilities .

u.s. interaction with china will be long - term and multi - dimensional and will involve peacetime engagement between defense establishments as much as fielded combat capabilities .

the objective of this effort is to mitigate near term challenges while preserving and enhancing u.s. national advantages over time .

other u.s. policies toward china tend to be based on an idealistic view of the world .

they are aimed at promoting u.s. ideals of democracy , a liberal market economy , and human rights .

in the long run , matters of war and peace depend on actions of national governments or the lack thereof .

in this view , conditions favorable for peace are generated most generally through political systems in nations with strong democratic institutions and economic systems that are vibrant and market - oriented with liberal trading and investment opportunities .

such economic systems support a knowledgeable middle class that , in turn , forms the foundation for democratic society .

a democratic society is less likely than a dictator - dominated state to seek to achieve its goals through belligerent means .

a country without a viable economy and functioning representative government also is vulnerable to becoming a failed state and home to terrorist organizations .

this economic - democratic - peace hypothesis calls for opening borders to foreign trade , liberalizing domestic economies , developing representative governments , establishing the rule of law with a court system to back it , and reducing corruption .

this is a major rationale for current u.s. policies of liberalizing trade , recognizing china's right to have a leadership role in international institutions , encouraging communications at all levels , and engaging beijing on a multitude of fronts including through regional institutions .

a third policy option overlaps with current policy somewhat and is more incremental than divergent .

it would be to increase efforts to energize or join existing organizations , to push harder for a northeast asia regional forum , and to encourage japan and south korea to join the trans - pacific partnership negotiations .

the united states first could join the east asia summit .

the obama administration has taken a necessary step toward this possibility by signing the asean treaty of amity and cooperation , an action required for membership .

the united states could do more to reinvigorate apec .

at the 2006 apec leader's meeting in hanoi , the united states did push for an fta of the asia pacific .

this would realize the bogor goal of achieving free and open trade and investment among the industrialized apec members by 2010 and the remainder of the members by 2020 .

while the apec working groups seem to be accomplishing considerable trade facilitation , the large goal of establishing a free trade area that spans the pacific and includes the united states , canada , mexico , japan , south korea , china , taiwan , australia , singapore , and other apec members does not seem even remotely feasible within three years as stated in the bogor declaration .

rather than a specific goal , the bogor goals seem to have become more of a long - term prospect .

the next two years may be a critical period for apec in either setting a concrete direction to achieve its bogor goals or to postpone them and treat them as a future target .

the 2010 meetings are to be held in yokohama , japan — the target year for apec's industrialized members to achieve the bogor goals .

the united states will host the 2011 meetings .

the obama administration has chosen honolulu as the host city for the 2011 leaders' meeting but has not given a clear indication of apec's role in u.s. trade policy .

with the proposal for an east asian economic community seeming to be gaining traction , the industrialized world appears to be coalescing into a three bloc world — three large geographical free trade areas: north america , europe , and east asia .

how would a potential east asian fta affect the united states ? .

judging from u.s. relations with the european union , the formation of the eu as a trade bloc meant that the balance of economic power across the atlantic became more equal .

rather than the united states with its $14.8 trillion gross domestic product ( $17.3 trillion for nafta ) negotiating with the uk ( $2.1 trillion gdp ) or germany ( $3.3 trillion gdp ) , the united states now faces an equal in the eu with its combined gdp of $16.3 trillion .

an east asian fta encompassing 16 nations not only would constitute half the world population but a combined gdp of $16.4 trillion that is growing faster than either north america or europe .

realistically speaking , however , a 16-nation asian fta would be far into the future , if at all .

china and south korea are lukewarm to the idea , and japan and south korea currently cannot agree on an fta between themselves , let alone one that includes china and 13 other nations .

recently , however , china , japan , and south korea seem to be warming to the possibility of an fta among themselves .

south korea , in particular , is pursuing several ftas .

the ftas now being implemented between asean and the three major east asian nations on a bilateral basis has for now become a structure for regional trade: the asean +1 type of fta with asean as the center of a hub - and - spoke network of ftas and with the spokes ( asean trade with japan , china , south korea , and india ) having more weight than the hub .

on the security side , the proposals for future direction go beyond the purview of this report .

a direction of thinking by some , however , is that the united states needs to go beyond the threat - centric mode of bilateral security arrangements to one based more on multilateral security partnerships , or what is termed a "convergent security" approach .

the reason is that the immediate danger to security appears to center more on terrorism and the threat of nuclear proliferation than on cold war style attacks by nation states .

a "convergent security" approach differs from the concepts of offshore balancing and independent asian power centers in that it envisages the united states as working as an active partner with its bilateral allies to manage transitions in the region's security order that lead to multilateral stability rather than to geopolitical coalitions .

the underlying assumption of this approach is that china has enough at stake in maintaining international stability that it will cooperate in financial and economic issues with the rest of the world and not engage in military action that would destabilize the system .

a "convergent security" approach would , for example , call for greater engagement in new multilateral initiatives , such as the east asia summit and asia pacific community .

another possible measure for u.s. policy could be to convene a conference to organize the northeast asia regional forum .

current proposals for membership are to invite countries with strong interest in northeast asia , such as the united states , russia , china , japan , south korea , and north korea .

other possible candidates for membership are mongolia , canada , and taiwan ( as an observer ) .

current proposals are for such a forum to be attended by foreign ministers .

attendance could be expanded to include defense ministers or heads of state ( as with apec ) .

in order to generate interest and participation in such an organization , an expectation would have to be established that the organization would go beyond a "photo - op and talk shop. .

the organization could be aimed at resolving particular problems of common concern , those that are tractable , build confidence , invite a high level of participation by members , and maximize benefits of coordinated collective action .

it could take up issues related to the north korean nuclear program — currently the topic of the six - party talks — but also could address issues such as trade liberalization , combating terrorism and corruption , energy security , and containing the spread of infectious diseases .

it also could work toward resolving disputes related to history , such as sponsoring the joint writing of textbooks on sensitive historical topics such as world war ii or japan's annexation of korea .

