climate change is generally viewed as a global issue , but proposed responses typicallyrequire action at the national level .

with the 1997 kyoto protocol now in force , countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases .

 ( 1 ) in particular , the european union ( eu ) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme ( called a "cap - and - trade" program ) , along with other market - orientedmechanisms permitted under the protocol , to help it achieve compliance at least cost .

 ( 2 ) the decision to use emissiontrading to implement the kyoto protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the united states to implement its sulfur dioxide ( acid rain ) control programcontained in title iv of the 1990 clean act amendments .

 ( 3 ) the eu's emissions trading system ( ets ) is a cornerstone of the eu's efforts to meet itsobligation under the kyoto protocol .

it covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 eu member countries , including oil refineries , powerplants over 20 megawatts ( mw ) incapacity , coke ovens , and iron and steel plants , along with cement , glass , lime , brick , ceramics , andpulp and paper installations .

covered entities emit about 45% of the eu's carbon dioxide emissions.the trading program does not cover emissions of non - co 2 greenhouse gases , which account forabout 20% of the eu's total greenhouse gas emissions .

the first trading period began january 1,2005 .

a second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008 , covering the period of the kyotoprotocol , with a third one planned for 2013 .

 ( 4 ) under the kyoto protocol , the then - existing 15 nations of the eu agreed to reduce theiremissions by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble. .

by 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the eu were 2.3% below 1990 levels , mostly the result ofa structural shift from coal to natural gas in the united kingdom and the incorporation of eastgermany into west germany .

several countries , including ireland , spain , and portugal , experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period .

 ( 5 ) in light of the kyoto protocol targets , the eu adopted a directiveestablishing the eu - ets that entered into force october 13 , 2003 .

 ( 6 ) the importance of emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern europe countries to eumembership in may 2004 .

collectively , these 10 countries' greenhouse gas emissions dropped 22.6%from 1990-2001 , with only slovenia's emissions increasing during that time ( 10.4% ) .

thisexpansion of the eu trading zone to 25 countries greatly increases the opportunities forcost - effective allowance trades .

in deciding on its trading program , the european commission ( ec ) adopted a"learning - by - doing" approach to prepare the eu for the kyoto protocol's emissions limitations .

theeu does not have major experience with emissions trading , and the ec felt an initial programbeginning in 2005 would give the eu practical familiarity in operating such a system .

the ec alsowanted the most comprehensive program possible .

as stated in its "green paper": the wider the scope of the system , the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies , and the greater the potential forlowering costs overall .

this argues in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentmember states covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks , and encompassing all emissionssources .

 ( 7 ) economic analysis conducted by the european commission confirms the potentialcost - saving available from a comprehensive trading scheme .

as shown in table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by the ec to reduce kyoto compliance costs to eu countries by 3billion euro , or one - third over a compliance scenario that does not include trading among membercountries , and by 0.9 billion euro , or 13% below the estimate cost of compliance with the tradingscheme ultimately chosen by the ec .

table 1: cost of reaching kyoto target to eu member statesin 2010 ( in billions of 1999 euro ) source: ec green paper ( mar .

8 , 2000 ) , p. 27 .

for a variety of reasons , the ec chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases .

some european analysts have noted that eupolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program .

as noted by boemare and quirion: a significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system , which had been excluded by the [european] commission atthe beginning of the process .

the reason was again political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax .

 ( 8 ) not surprisingly , this reason was not employed by the ec in explaining its decision to createa less comprehensive trading scheme at this time .

as stated by the ec: ... there are sound scientific and practical reasons whythe community might not wish to establish a comprehensive scheme at this stage .

there areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [hfc , pfc , sf 6 ] andthe absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks .

allocating allowances , monitoring emissions andenforcing compliance of small mobile emitters , such as private cars , raise complex technical andadministrative issues .

 ( 9 ) for determining the size of the trading program , the ec looked at five criteria: ( 1 ) environmental effectiveness , ( 2 ) economic efficiency , ( 3 ) the potential effects on competition , ( 4 ) feasibility , and ( 5 ) existence of alternative policies and measures .

it felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources that contribute significantly to total emissions andfor which trading could reduce cost significantly would "substantially" satisfy these criteria .

 ( 10 ) as noted , the six sectorschosen emit about 45% of the eu15's co 2 emissions ( which are about 80% of the eu's totalgreenhouse gas emissions ) .

the coverage for individual countries varies widely ; only 20% offrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered , compared with 69% of estonia's emissions .

 ( 11 ) .

national allocation plans ( naps ) are central to the eu's effort to achieve its kyotoobligations .

each member of the eu must submit a nap that lays out its allocation scheme underthe ets , including individual allocations to each affected unit .

for the first trading period , eachcountry had to prepare a nap by march 31 , 2004 ( may 1 , 2004 for the 10 new eu members ) .

napsfor the second period were due june 30 , 2006 .

these naps are assessed by the ec to determinecompliance with 11 criteria ( 12 for the second period ) delineated in an annex to the emissionstrading directive .

 ( 12 ) criteria include requirements that the emissions caps and other measures proposed by the state aresufficient to put it on the path toward its kyoto target , protections against discrimination betweencompanies and sectors , along with provisions for new entrants , clean technology , and early reductioncredits .

for the second period , the nap must guarantee kyoto compliance .

for the first period , the ec approved most of the necessary naps by the end of 2004 .

thelast nap was approved june 20 , 2006 ( from greece ) .

in general , the primary problem the ec foundwith naps that resulted in revisions were excessive allocation of allowances and state efforts topermit "ex - post adjustments" to their allocations .

excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target , to be filled with measures to be defined later ; insufficiently delineated plans to purchase allowances ; and unrealistic economic or emissions growthassumptions .

ex - post adjustments by states are not allowed ; such adjustments are seen by the ecas potentially disruptive to the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies .

to assist its review of the ets , the ec has surveyed stakeholders'viewpoints on ets implementation and long - term issues .

 ( 27 ) thereport surveys the viewpoints of participating companies , governments , industryassociations , market intermediaries , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) from june to september 2005 .

asked which of 12 topics surrounding etsimplementation entities felt were most important to them , companies , industryassociations , and governments all ranked topics such as emissions reductiontargets , allocation rules , and rules for new entrants and closures as the mostimportant - - topics that all relate to long - term uncertainty .

table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed , along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders .

the five issues are discussed below .

table 3 .

importance of eu etstopics ( ranking ) source: european commission , review of eu emissions trading scheme ( november 2005 ) , p. 13 .

at first glance , the ets would appear an effective vehicle for the eu to meetits kyoto protocol obligations during the second trading period .

the anticipateddeficit between the second trading period for the original 15 member states can becovered by trading with the newer member states that anticipate a surplus .

inaddition , potential cers and erus from the cdm and ji respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs .

table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the kyoto protocol's five - year compliance period.obviously , not all these allowances may be available to the eu alone ; othercountries , such as japan and canada , may decide to incorporate emissions tradinginto their implementation strategies and acquire allowances from these sources .

yet,the totals suggest that all else being equal , the supply of allowances would beadequate .

table 6: international supply of emissionscredits and allowances ( cumulative total 2008-2012 , million metric tonsco 2 ) source: compiled by grubb and neuhoff , "allocation and competitiveness in theeu emissions trading scheme: policy overview," p. 20 .

however , there are other considerations .

the availability of surplus credits created via ji and cdm is restricted by the ec linking directive that requires thatsuch credits be "supplemental" to a country's domestic efforts .

each country is tospell out what "supplemental" means in its nap for the second trading period.individual countries are likely to define that term differently - - restricting allowancetrades and purchases in some countries .

another consideration is the overall commitment of the kyoto protocol .

asnoted earlier , the ets only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various member states of the eu .

some sectors not covered by theets may grow faster than sectors covered by the ets , creating difficulties forcompliance .

in particular , the transportation area is already a major source ofconcern .

a final consideration for the ets is its suitability for directing long - terminvestment toward a low - carbon future - - the ultimate goal of any climate changeprogram .

it is too early to tell whether the ets market signal and individualcountries' naps will move investment in the appropriate direction .

the early signsare not particularly encouraging , with the 2005-2008 naps producing anover - allocation of allowances , and one major member state , germany , attemptingto direct its second nap toward carbon - intensive , coal - fired electric generatingfacilities rather than low - carbon alternatives .

reluctance by countries to redirecttheir naps and an inconsistent price from the ets make the long - term effect of theets uncertain .

norway , a non - eu country , also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on january 1 , 2005 .

norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing , and has severalfeatures in common with the eu ets .

 ( 48 ) these sectors account for about 10-15% of thecountry's emissions .

other parts of norway's industry , particularly its offshore oiland gas sector , are covered by the country's carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of co 2 - - much higher than the anticipated allowance price under the tradingprogram .

the carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's co 2 emissions - - about half the country's total greenhouse gas emissions .

 ( 49 ) the firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007 , with a second , expandedphase to begin in 2008 .

developing its initial trading scheme independently of the eu , norway's"quota commission" ( created in 1998 ) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible , suggesting that the system could include close to 90% ofthe country's greenhouse gas emissions .

 ( 50 ) to achieve this coverage , the commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas , depending on cost - effectiveness andpracticality considerations .

arguing in favor of regulating co 2 emissions at theproducer ( upstream ) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources , thequota commission states: for these emissions , regulation at theproducer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions thanregulation at the consumer level , because the volume of emissions from a particularcommodity is not dependent on technology .

for those process emissions which arerecommended for inclusion in the system , regulation by quotas should be imposedat the end - user level in cases where the processes originate with major industrialcompanies .

for process emissions stemming from a series of small sources , egemissions of n 2 o from commercial fertilizers , regulation by quotas should beimposed on retailers , or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts .

 ( 51 ) the commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer , in part on the sales or import chain , and in part on theend - user" ( 52 ) may be overtaken by development of the eu ets,which is likely to influence the future direction of norway's trading system .

theinternational energy agency ( iea ) states: the government had indicated earlierthat it would consider expanding the [trading] system from 2008 to include as manysources of emissions as practical through an upstream system allocating allowancesto fossil fuel producers and importers .

with the adoption of the eu ets designfeatures , norway seems to move away from this option .

 ( 53 ) .

