through various acts of congress , the public safety community is poised to develop a national , wireless , emergency communications capacity with unencumbered spectrum , a mechanism for planning , and funding .

with the passage of the deficit reduction act , congress established an important milestone toward improving emergency communications by providing a date certain for the release of spectrum for new radio channels .

previously used for analog television broadcasting , 24 mhz of wireless capacity at 700 mhz will become available to public safety in 2009 .

by requiring the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish an office of emergency communications , congress has legislated the creation of a forum to reach agreement on an interoperable communications plan .

congress has not passed legislation , however , regarding how the soon - to - be - released spectrum should be used .

there are currently three major initiatives to develop plans that could incorporate spectrum at 700 mhz in solutions for public safety communications to improve interoperability and resiliency .

one initiative is congress's mandate to dhs to bring together a diverse body of experts and develop a national emergency communications plan that would rely , at least in part , on shared networks .

second , an initiative by the administration to improve spectrum efficiency gives responsibility to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) to provide policy recommendations that include spectrum uses for homeland security and public safety .

an advisory committee created by the ntia is studying public safety tests of networks at 700 mhz .

the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , which has jurisdiction over spectrum used by state and local public safety agencies , is pursuing its own initiative .

it is seeking comment on a plan to use spectrum at 700 mhz assigned to public safety for a shared network that would operate under its regulatory supervision .

the fcc's proposal includes many elements favored by a majority of public safety participants , but — by taking over the management of public safety radio channels at 700 mhz — it would apparently minimize the role of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in planning for interoperable communications .

some of the unresolved policy choices brought into focus by the fcc proposal are: direction of national planning for emergency communications .

control of network operations .

joint management by agencies .

regulatory vs. legislative authority .

spectrum management .

congressional jurisdiction .

funding sources and distribution .

the schedule set for rulemaking means that the fcc could move forward in the creation of an interoperable network as early as spring 2007 .

congress may change the terms of the debate by setting its own timetable , objectives , and parameters for creating a national authority to manage a public safety network at 700 mhz .

options for congress that have been suggested by public safety experts include requiring the department of homeland security to expedite its own plans , requiring greater participation of the fcc in the dhs planning process , curtailing the right of the fcc to regulate network development for public safety , and turning over management of spectrum used for public safety to the ntia .

there are also other efforts and proposals , some of which are summarized in this report , that congress may consider .

radio frequency spectrum is used for all forms of wireless communications .

spectrum licenses are allocated within bands of designated frequencies , divided into bandwidths , or channels .

licenses are assigned , as is the case for state and local public safety agencies , or auctioned to commercial entities .

as new wireless tools are developed to help emergency responders , the demand for spectrum increases .

finding appropriate spectrum to carry these vital transmissions as well as finding ways to use spectrum more efficiently are among the policy decisions to be addressed as part of the national effort to develop a robust , interoperable , emergency communications capability .

pricing spectrum access for all users , or auctioning all spectrum and creating property rights , are market - driven methods for allocating spectrum that could maximize economically efficient use .

in the case of public safety , however , demand may be inelastic and substitution difficult with the result that the cost to the public is increased without any compensating gains .

the need for spectrum capacity among first responders and other emergency workers is variable .

when radio communications are routine , public safety's demand for spectrum is modest .

in times of crisis , demand for spectrum exceeds availability .

identifying spectrum that public safety can share — with commercial users for example — is also considered a possible means to use valuable spectrum more efficiently .

although , cumulatively , radio frequencies designated for non - federal public safety total over 90 mhz , the characteristics of these frequencies are dissimilar , requiring different technological solutions .

although the fragmentation of spectrum assignments for public safety has some advantages for voice communications , it is a significant barrier to achieving needed broadband capacity for the future .

it is one of the technical problems that plague public safety communications , such as out - of - date equipment , proprietary solutions , network congestion , and interference among systems .

providing new spectrum at 700 mhz for broadband communications capabilities , including interoperable connectivity , is viewed by many as the optimal solution for overcoming problems caused by incompatible radio frequencies and technologies , as well as for enhancing communications capacity for public safety .

because 700 mhz is viewed as highly desirable for consumer - oriented applications , some believe that a means should be found for public safety and commercial users to share radio frequencies in this band .

as noted above , the fcc has proposed the building of a network , accessible nationwide , that would require standardized interfaces .

this model , which mirrors the organization of commercial wireless service in the united states , represents a significant departure from existing public safety radio operations .

like most public safety support services , radio communications have historically been built primarily for local operations , often with proprietary solutions that limit interoperability .

with post - 9 / 11 emphasis on improving interoperability , three technology - based solutions for nationwide interoperability have dominated policy making .

these are: radios — pursued primarily through standard setting ; gateways — supported through guidance from dhs and federal grants ; and networks — recognized as a potential solution but not developed .

this overview does not cover all the organizational and technological solutions that are being used or tested , or have been proposed .

however , the following reflects the major considerations and breadth of the debate .

under law , spectrum is considered a natural resource , owned by the federal government , and is assigned for use by others , but not sold .

the building of a network on spectrum assigned to public safety is a significant policy decision affecting not only the daily safety of the public but also the security of the nation .

some of the administrative , regulatory , and legislative considerations that have been brought to the forefront by the fcc proposal are: composition of and network operations control by the proposed not - for - profit entity .

if the cost of building a network is offset by allowing commercial use , will the network operator show a preference for solutions that mesh with commercial interests or will it give priority to developing interfaces that support other federal and state programs for emergency communications ? .

non - commercial interoperable communications needs might , for example , extend to 911 call centers , emergency alert systems , border security , and to other emergency workers , often referred to as the "second tier. .

joint management by agencies .

the fcc and ntia have a history of working together to develop and implement spectrum policy .

what role , if any , would the ntia , the presidential spectrum initiative , and the spectrum advisory council play in advising , directing or regulating the development and operation of any network ? .

how would management of the 700 mhz network interface with fema , the department of homeland security , the national response plan and other federal authorities with responsibilities for establishing and maintaining emergency communications ? .

regulatory and legislative actions .

the fcc is using its regulatory authority over spectrum use to take action in an area ( improvement to public safety communications ) where congress has assigned responsibility to dhs .

should congress seek means to coordinate the fcc plan with planning efforts at dhs ? .

or take some other action to assign responsibility for planning and implementation ? .

spectrum management .

what are the best policies to encourage efficient use of spectrum by public safety ? .

market - driven pricing has been proposed by the fcc , among others .

if this is applied only to usage at 700 mhz , would it be effective policy to have a two - speed regulatory framework for public safety spectrum licenses , with one set of rules for 700 mhz and different rules for other spectrum holdings ? .

congressional jurisdiction .

in the law that created the office of emergency communications , congress specified that , in reviewing interoperable emergency communications plans , the emergency communications director would exclude the review of spectrum allocation and management .

congress has yet to make decisions about jurisdiction for programs planned and funded by dhs that operate on spectrum managed by the fcc and the ntia .

funding .

funding of $1 billion expressly for interoperable communications is mandated for 2007 .

this would be in the form of a distribution from the digital television transition and public safety fund created by the deficit reduction act .

according to language directing distributions from the fund , grants are to be spent for "the acquisition of , deployment of or training for the use of interoperable communications systems that utilize , or enable interoperability with communications systems that can utilize" spectrum at 700 mhz .

new federal funding for interoperable communications is under consideration .

many propose that the cost of a new network built on public safety spectrum be funded with access fees from users .

how will existing and planned federal funding programs be applied to include a private operator for the key interoperable network ? .

in the light of these and other questions , congress may decide to revisit emergency communications policy and management at the federal level through hearings and oversight , as well as to clarify congressional priorities and goals regarding interoperability .

this report has described three separate policy initiatives from different sectors of the federal government that appear to be moving in different directions .

this situation can be attributed , in part to the division of jurisdictional and institutional responsibilities in both the executive and legislative branches of government , and in part to the absence of any recent crisis that would raise the profile of emergency communications needs .

without guidance from congress or the administration , it is possible that these three initiatives will continue to develop along dissimilar paths with little or no apparent coordination .

if so , what would be the likely impact on emergency communications policy ? .

of the three initiatives , the proposal by the fcc — which is sponsored by the public safety and homeland security bureau it created in 2006 — seems to be the most far reaching .

although it is possible that the fcc will extend the time for public comments and also deliberate extensively , it could move to allocate the spectrum to a quasi - commercial entity in 2007 for development by 2010-2011 .

this could possibly preempt any decisions or recommendations from the ntia and dhs , which are operating within unspecified but apparently longer time frames .

in a different scenario , the fcc might provide a bridge connecting the regional emergency communications coordination ( recc ) working group that dhs is to create to regional planning committees like those the fcc originally formed to develop the 700 mhz band plan and agreements on interoperability .

the fcc could then bring to the recc table the benefits of regional representation , technical expertise , and a broad sample of public opinion from its rulemaking efforts .

a network not unlike the one now proposed by the fcc might be the result , but with potentially wider participation and acceptance .

such a network might be administered by the office of emergency communications , not through fcc regulations .

another possibility is that dhs might cede responsibilities and requirements stated in p.l .

109-295 for developing public safety networks to the fcc .

this could diminish the scope of the new office of emergency communications .

in that scenario , dhs might focus on continuing its policy of assisting cities and other areas in setting up gateways , adding access to the 700mhz systems .

the advantage of spectrum efficiency through sharing frequencies at 700 mhz would likely be lost to public safety users ( but not to commercial users ) .

in the absence of clear authority and direction , many routes are possible .

it remains to be seen whether these routes will be coordinated or whether they will collide at the crossroads .

