established in 1953 , the small business administration's ( sba's ) origins can be traced to the great depression of the 1930s and world war ii , when concerns about unemployment and war production were paramount .

the sba assumed some of the functions of the reconstruction finance corporation ( rfc ) , which had been created by the federal government in 1932 to provide funding for businesses of all sizes during the depression and later financed war production .

during the early 1950s , the rfc was disbanded following charges of political favoritism in the granting of loans and contracts .

in 1953 , congress passed the small business act ( p.l .

83-163 ) , which authorized the sba .

the act specifies that the sba's mission is to promote the interests of small businesses to enhance competition in the private marketplace: it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small - business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

the sba currently administers several types of programs to support small businesses , including loan guaranty and venture capital programs to enhance small business access to capital ; contracting programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loan programs for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and small business management and technical assistance training programs to assist business formation and expansion .

congressional interest in these programs has increased in recent years , primarily because small businesses are viewed as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs .

many members of congress also regularly receive constituent inquiries about the sba's programs .

this report provides an overview of the sba's programs and funding .

it also references other crs reports that examine the sba's programs in greater detail .

the sba's fy2020 congressional budget justification document includes funding and program costs for the following programs and offices: 1. entrepreneurial development programs ( including small business development centers , women's business centers , score , entrepreneurial education , native american outreach , prime , the state trade expansion program , and veterans' programs ) ; 2. disaster assistance ; 3. capital access programs ( including the 7 ( a ) loan guaranty program , the 504 / certified development company [cdc] loan guaranty program , the microloan program , international trade and export promotion programs , and lender oversight ) ; 4. contracting programs ( including the 7 ( j ) management and technical assistance program , the 8 ( a ) minority small business and capital ownership development program , the historically underutilized business zones [hubzones] program , the prime contract assistance program , the women's business program , the subcontracting program , and the surety bond guarantee program ) ; 5. regional and district offices ( counseling , training , and outreach services ) ; 6. the office of inspector general ( oig ) ; 7. capital investment programs ( including the small business investment company [sbic] program , the new market venture capital program , the small business innovation research [sbir] program , the small business technology transfer program [sttr] , and growth accelerators ) ; 8. the office of advocacy ; and 9. executive direction programs ( the national women's business council , office of ombudsman , and faith - based initiatives ) .

table 1 shows the sba's estimated costs in fy2019 for these program areas .

program costs often differ from new budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts because the sba has specified authority to carry over appropriations from previous fiscal years .

the sba also has limited , specified authority to shift appropriations among various programs .

the sba's entrepreneurial development ( ed ) noncredit programs provide a variety of management and training services to small businesses .

initially , the sba provided its own management and technical assistance training programs .

over time , the sba has come to rely increasingly on third parties to provide that training .

the sba receives appropriations for seven ed programs and two ed initiatives: small business development centers ( sbdcs ) ; the microloan technical assistance program ; women business centers ( wbcs ) ; score ; the program for investment in microentrepreneurs ( prime ) ; veterans programs ( including veterans business outreach centers , boots to business , veteran women igniting the spirit of entrepreneurship [vwise] , entrepreneurship bootcamp for veterans with disabilities , and boots to business: reboot ) ; the native american outreach program ( nao ) ; the entrepreneurial development initiative ( regional innovation clusters ) ; and the entrepreneurship education initiative .

fy2019 appropriations for these programs are $131 million for sbdcs , $31 million for the microloan technical assistance program , $18.5 million for wbcs , $11.7 million for score , $5 million for prime , $12.7 million for veterans programs , $2 million for nao , $5 million for the entrepreneurial development initiative ( regional innovation clusters ) , and $3.5 million for the entrepreneurship education initiative .

four additional programs are provided recommended funding in appropriations acts under ed programs , but are discussed in other sections of this report because of the nature of their assistance: ( 1 ) the sba's growth accelerators initiative ( $2 million in fy2019 ) is a capital investment program and is discussed in the capital access programs section ; ( 2 ) the sba's 7 ( j ) technical assistance program ( $2.8 million in fy2019 ) provides contacting assistance and is discussed in the contracting programs section ; ( 3 ) the national women's business council ( $1.5 million in fy2019 ) is a bipartisan federal advisory council and is discussed in the executive direction programs section ; and ( 4 ) the state trade expansion program ( step , $18 million in fy2019 ) provides grants to states to support export programs that assist small business concerns .

step is discussed in the capital access programs' international trade and export promotion programs subsection .

the sba reports that over 1 million aspiring entrepreneurs and small business owners receive training from an sba - supported resource partner each year .

some of this training is free , and some is offered at low cost .

sbdcs provide free or low - cost assistance to small businesses using programs customized to local conditions .

sbdcs support small business in marketing and business strategy , finance , technology transfer , government contracting , management , manufacturing , engineering , sales , accounting , exporting , and other topics .

sbdcs are funded by grants from the sba and matching funds .

there are 63 lead sbdc service centers , one located in each state ( four in texas and six in california ) , the district of columbia , puerto rico , the virgin islands , guam , and american samoa .

these lead sbdc service centers manage more than 900 sbdc outreach locations .

the sba's microloan technical assistance program is part of the sba's microloan program but receives a separate appropriation .

it provides grants to microloan intermediaries to offer management and technical training assistance to microloan program borrowers and prospective borrowers .

there are currently 147 active microloan intermediaries serving 49 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

wbcs are similar to sbdcs , except they concentrate on assisting women entrepreneurs .

there are currently 121 wbcs , with at least one wbc in most states and territories .

score was established on october 5 , 1964 , by then - sba administrator eugene p. foley as a national , volunteer organization , uniting more than 50 independent nonprofit organizations into a single , national nonprofit organization .

score's 320 chapters and more than 800 branch offices are located throughout the united states and partner with more than 11,000 volunteer counselors , who are working or retired business owners , executives , and corporate leaders , to provide management and training assistance to small businesses .

prime provides sba grants to nonprofit microenterprise development organizations or programs that have "a demonstrated record of delivering microenterprise services to disadvantaged entrepreneurs ; an intermediary ; a microenterprise development organization or program that is accountable to a local community , working in conjunction with a state or local government or indian tribe ; or an indian tribe acting on its own , if the indian tribe can certify that no private organization or program referred to in this paragraph exists within its jurisdiction. .

the sba's office of veterans business development ( ovbd ) administers several management and training programs to assist veteran - owned businesses , including 22 veterans business outreach centers which provide "entrepreneurial development services such as business training , counseling and resource partner referrals to transitioning service members, veterans, national guard & reserve members and military spouses interested in starting or growing a small business. .

the sba's office of native american affairs provides management and technical educational assistance to native americans ( american indians , alaska natives , native hawaiians , and the indigenous people of guam and american samoa ) to start and expand small businesses .

the sba reports that "regional innovation clusters are on - the - ground collaborations between business , research , education , financing and government institutions that work to develop and grow the supply chain of a particular industry or related set of industries in a geographic region. .

the sba has supported the entrepreneurial development initiative ( regional innovation clusters ) since fy2009 , and the initiative has received recommended appropriations from congress since fy2010 .

the sba's entrepreneurship education initiative provides assistance to high - growth small businesses in underserved communities through the emerging leaders initiative and the sba learning center .

the emerging leaders initiative is a seven‐month executive leader education series consisting of "more than 100 hours of specialized training , technical support , access to a professional network , and other resources to strengthen their businesses and promote economic development. .

at the conclusion of the training , "participants produce a three‐year strategic growth action plan with benchmarks and performance targets that help them access the necessary support and resources to move forward for the next stage of business growth. .

the learning center is the sba's primary online training service , which offers free online courses on business planning , marketing , government contracting , accounting , and social media , providing learners an "opportunity to access entrepreneurship education resources through toolkits , fact sheets , infographic tip sheets , instructor guides , and audio content. .

several sba programs assist small businesses in obtaining and performing federal contracts and subcontracts .

these include various prime contracting programs ; subcontracting programs ; and other assistance ( eg , contracting technical training assistance , the federal goaling program , federal offices of small and disadvantaged business utilization , and the surety bond guarantee program ) .

as mentioned previously , the sba provides funding to third parties , such as sbdcs , to provide management and training services to small business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs .

the sba also provides management , training , and outreach services to small business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs through its 68 district offices .

these offices are overseen by the sba office of field operations and 10 regional offices .

sba district offices conduct more than 20,000 outreach events annually with stakeholders and resource partners that include "lender training , government contracting , marketing events in emerging areas , and events targeted to high - growth entrepreneurial markets , such as exporting. .

sba district offices focus "on core sba programs concerning contracting , capital , technical assistance , and exporting. .

they also perform annual program eligibility and compliance reviews on 100% of the 8 ( a ) business development firms in the sba's portfolio and each year conduct on - site examinations of about 10% of all hubzone certified firms ( 529 in fy2018 ) to validate compliance with the hubzone program's geographic requirement for principal offices .

the office of inspector general's ( oig's ) mission is "to improve sba management and effectiveness , and to detect and deter fraud in the agency's programs. .

it serves as "an independent and objective oversight office created within the sba by the inspector general act of 1978 [p.l .

95-452] , as amended. .

the inspector general , who is nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate , directs the office .

the inspector general act provides the oig with the following responsibilities: "promote economy , efficiency , and effectiveness in the management of sba programs and supporting operations ; conduct and supervise audits , investigations , and reviews relating to the sba's programs and support operations ; detect and prevent fraud , waste and abuse ; review existing and proposed legislation and regulations and make appropriate recommendations ; maintain effective working relationships with other federal , state and local governmental agencies , and nongovernmental entities , regarding the mandated duties of the inspector general ; keep the sba administrator and congress informed of serious problems and recommend corrective actions and implementation measures ; comply with the audit standards of the comptroller general ; avoid duplication of government accountability office ( gao ) activities ; and report violations of federal criminal law to the attorney general. .

the sba has several programs to improve small business access to capital markets , including the small business investment company program , the new market venture capital program ( now inactive ) , two special high technology contracting programs ( the small business innovative research and small business technology transfer programs ) , and the growth accelerators initiative .

the sba's office of advocacy is "an independent voice for small business within the federal government. .

the chief counsel for advocacy , who is nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate , directs the office .

the office of advocacy's mission is to "encourage policies that support the development and growth of american small businesses" by intervening early in federal agencies' regulatory development process on proposals that affect small businesses and providing regulatory flexibility act compliance training to federal agency policymakers and regulatory development officials ; producing research to inform policymakers and other stakeholders on the impact of federal regulatory burdens on small businesses , to document the vital role of small businesses in the economy , and to explore and explain the wide variety of issues of concern to the small business community ; and fostering a two - way communication between federal agencies and the small business community .

the sba's executive direction programs consist of the national women's business council , the office of ombudsman , and faith - based initiatives .

during the 111 th congress p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) provided the sba an additional $730 million in temporary funding , including $375 million to subsidize fees for the sba's 7 ( a ) and 504 / cdc loan guaranty programs and to increase the 7 ( a ) program's maximum loan guaranty percentage to 90% for all regular 7 ( a ) loans through september 30 , 2010 , or when appropriated funding for the subsidies and loan modification was exhausted .

p.l .

111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , authorized the secretary of the treasury to establish a $30 billion small business lending fund ( sblf ) to encourage community banks with less than $10 billion in assets to increase their lending to small businesses ( about $4.0 billion was issued ) and a $1.5 billion state small business credit initiative to provide funding to participating states with small business capital access programs .

the act also provided the sba an additional $697.5 million ; including $510 million to continue the sba's fee subsidies and the 7 ( a ) program's 90% maximum loan guaranty percentage through december 31 , 2010 , and about $12 billion in tax relief for small businesses .

p.l .

111-322 , the continuing appropriations and surface transportation extensions act , 2011 , authorized the sba to continue its fee subsidies and the 7 ( a ) program's 90% maximum loan guaranty percentage through march 4 , 2011 , or until available funding was exhausted , which occurred on january 3 , 2011 .

during the 112 th congress , the sba's statutory authorization expired ( on july 31 , 2011 ) .

since then , the sba has been operating under authority provided by annual appropriations acts .

prior to july 31 , 2011 , the sba's authorization had been temporarily extended 15 times since 2006 .

p.l .

112-239 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 , increased the sba's surety bond limit from $2 million to $6.5 million ( and up to $10 million if a federal contracting officer certifies that such a guarantee is necessary ) ; required the sba to oversee and establish standards for most federal mentor - protégé programs and establish a mentor - protégé program for all small business concerns ; required the sba's chief counsel for advocacy to enter into a contract with an appropriate entity to conduct an independent assessment of the small business procurement goals , including an assessment of which contracts should be subject to the goals ; and addressed the sba's recent practice of combining size standards within industrial groups as a means to reduce the complexity of its size standards by requiring the sba to make available a justification when establishing or approving a size standard that the size standard is appropriate for each individual industry classification .

during the 113 th congress , p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , increased the sba's sbic program's annual authorization amount to $4 billion from $3 billion .

during the 114 th congress p.l .

114-38 , the veterans entrepreneurship act of 2015 , authorized and made permanent the sba's administrative decision to waive the sbaexpress loan program's one time , up - front loan guaranty fee for veterans ( and their spouse ) .

the act also increased the 7 ( a ) loan program's fy2015 authorization limit from $18.75 billion to $23.5 billion ( later increased to $26.5 billion ) .

p.l .

114-88 , the recovery improvements for small entities after disaster act of 2015 ( rise after disaster act of 2015 ) , includes several provisions designed to assist individuals and small businesses affected by hurricane sandy in 2012 , and , among other things , authorizes the sba to provide up to two years of additional financial assistance , on a competitive basis , to sbdcs , wbcs , score , or any proposed consortium of such individuals or entities to assist small businesses located in a presidentially declared major disaster area ; authorizes sbdcs to provide assistance to small businesses outside the sbdc's state , without regard to geographical proximity to the sbdc , if the small business is in a presidentially declared major disaster area ; and temporarily increases , for three years , the minimum disaster loan amount for which the sba may require collateral , from $14,000 to $25,000 ( or , as under existing law , any higher amount the sba determines appropriate in the event of a disaster ) .

p.l .

114-92 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , includes a provision that expands the definition of a base realignment and closure act ( brac ) military base closure area under the hubzone program to include the lands within the external boundaries of the closed base and the census tract or nonmetropolitan county in which the lands of the closed base are wholly contained , intersect it , or are contiguous to it .

this change is designed to make it easier for businesses located in those areas to meet the hubzone program's requirement that at least 35% of its employees reside in a hubzone area .

the act also extends brac base closure area hubzone eligibility from five years to not less than eight years , provides hubzone eligibility to qualified disaster areas , and adds native hawaiian organizations to the list of hubzone eligible small business concerns .

starting one year from enactment ( effective november 25 , 2016 ) , the act also adds requirements concerning the pledge of assets by individual sureties participating in the sba's surety bond guarantee program and increases the guaranty rate from not less than 70% to not less than 90% for preferred sureties participating in that program .

p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , expands the projects eligible for refinancing under the 504 / cdc loan guaranty program in any fiscal year in which the refinancing program and the 504 / cdc program as a whole do not have credit subsidy costs , generally limits refinancing under this provision to no more than 50% of the dollars loaned under the 504 / cdc program during the previous fiscal year , and increases the sbic program's family of funds limit ( the amount of outstanding leverage allowed for two or more sbic licenses under common control ) to $350 million from $225 million .

the act also provided the 7 ( a ) loan program a fy2016 authorization limit of $26.5 billion .

p.l .

114-125 , the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 , renamed the "state trade and export promotion" grant initiative to the "state trade expansion program. .

p.l .

114-125 also reformed some of the program's procedures and provided $30 million in annual authorization for step grants from fy2016 through fy2020 .

in terms of program administration , p.l .

114-125 allows the sba's associate administrator ( aa ) for international trade to give priority to step proposals from states that have a relatively small share of small businesses that export or would assist rural , women - owned , and socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses and small business concerns .

p.l .

114-328 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 , authorizes the sba to establish different size standards for various types of agricultural enterprises ( previously statutorily set at not more than $750,000 in annual receipts ) , standardizes definitions used by the sba and the department of veterans affairs concerning service - disabled veteran owned small businesses , requires the sba to track companies that outgrow or no longer qualify for sba assistance due to the receipt of a federal contract or being purchased by another entity after an initial federal contract is awarded , and , among other provisions , clarifies the duties of the offices of small and disadvantaged utilization within federal agencies .

during the 115 th congress p.l .

115-31 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 , increased the 7 ( a ) program's authorization limit to $27.5 billion in fy2017 from $26.5 billion in fy2016 .

p.l .

115-56 , the continuing appropriations act , 2018 and supplemental appropriations for disaster relief requirements act , 2017 , provided the sba an additional $450 million for disaster assistance .

p.l .

115-123 , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 , provided the sba an additional $1.652 billion for disaster assistance and $7.0 million to the sba's oig for disaster assistance oversight .

p.l .

115-141 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , increased the 7 ( a ) program's authorization limit to $29.0 billion in fy2018 .

the act also relaxed requirements on microloan intermediaries that prohibited them from spending more than 25% of their technical assistance grant funds on prospective borrowers and more than 25% of those grant funds on contracts with third parties to provide that technical assistance by increasing those percentages to 50% .

p.l .

115-189 , the small business 7 ( a ) lending oversight reform act of 2018 , among other provisions , codified the sba's office of credit risk management ; required that office to annually undertake and report the findings of a risk analysis of the 7 ( a ) program's loan portfolio ; created a lender oversight committee within the sba ; authorized the director of the office of credit risk management to undertake informal and formal enforcement actions against 7 ( a ) lenders under specified conditions ; redefined the credit elsewhere requirement ; and authorized the sba administrator to increase the amount of 7 ( a ) loans not more than once during any fiscal year to not more than 115% of the 7 ( a ) program's authorization limit .

the sba is required to provide at least 30 days' notice of its intent to exceed the 7 ( a ) loan program's authorization limit to the house and senate committees on small business and the house and senate committees on appropriations' subcommittees on financial services and general government and may exercise this option only once per fiscal year .

p.l .

115-232 , the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , included provisions originally in h.r .

5236 , the main street employee ownership act of 2018 , to make 7 ( a ) loans more accessible to employee - owned small businesses ( esops ) and cooperatives .

the act clarifies that 7 ( a ) loans to esops may be made under the preferred lenders program ; allows the seller to remain involved as an officer , director , or key employee when the esop or cooperative has acquired 100% ownership of the small business ; and authorizes the sba to finance transition costs to employee ownership and waive any mandatory equity injection by the esop or cooperative to help finance the change of ownership .

the act also directs the sba to create outreach programs and an interagency working group to promote lending to esops and cooperatives .

during the 116 th congress p.l .

116-6 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 , increased the 7 ( a ) program's authorization limit to $30.0 billion in fy2019 .

the sba's received an appropriation of $887.604 million for fy2015 , $871.042 million for fy2016 , $1.337 billion for fy2017 , $2.360 billion for fy2018 , and $715.370 million for fy2019 .

as shown in table 8 , the sba's fy2019 appropriation of $715.37 million includes $267.50 million for salaries and expenses , $247.70 million for entrepreneurial development and noncredit programs , $155.15 million for business loan administration , $4.0 million for business loan credit subsidies ( for the microloan program ) , $21.9 million for office of inspector general , $9.12 million for the office of advocacy , and $10.0 million for disaster assistance .

