each year , congress provides funding to the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) to renew the more than 2.1 million section 8 vouchers — also called housing choice vouchers — authorized by congress ( see table 1 below ) .

the section 8 voucher program is federally funded and governed by federal rules , but is administered at the local level by quasi - governmental public housing authorities ( phas ) .

section 8 vouchers are rental subsidies that low - income families use in the private market to help make up the difference between their rent and their expected contribution toward that rent ( 30% of adjusted income ) .

the cost of a voucher to a pha is the difference between the lesser of a tenant's actual rent or the maximum subsidy level set by the pha — called a payment standard — and 30% of a tenant's income .

that cost increases or decreases with changes in tenant incomes and changes in rents and payment standards .

 ( for more information on section 8 voucher reform proposals , see crs report rl34002 , section 8 housing choice voucher program: issues and reform proposals , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in recent years , congress has enacted , and hud has implemented , a series of changes in the way that voucher renewal funding is distributed to local phas .

these changes have led to funding uncertainty for many phas , and has put pressure on congress to adopt a permanent funding formula , possibly through enactment of section 8 voucher reform legislation .

this report discusses the renewal funding formula changes that congress has enacted as a part of the annual appropriations process , starting in fy2003 , and concludes with a discussion of their effects .

prior to fy2003 , phas administering the voucher program were funded based on their average annual per - voucher cost from the previous year , adjusted by an inflation factor and multiplied by the number of vouchers that the pha was authorized to lease .

each pha was provided with a reserve equal to one month of voucher funding that could be used in the event that a pha's voucher costs increased faster than the inflation factor established by hud .

despite the fact that they received full funding , few phas were able to lease 100% of their authorized vouchers .

low utilization rates were a major concern of congress for several years .

while phas are expected to have utilization rates of at least 95% , in fy2000 and fy2001 , national voucher utilization rates were just over 91% .

since phas were not utilizing all of their vouchers , they typically had low budget utilization as well , meaning that they had more money in their budgets than they needed , and they rarely had to dip into their one - month program reserves , even if their costs rose significantly .

at the end of the year , hud and each pha would reconcile their budgets , and hud was typically able to recapture excess funds from phas' reserves .

hud generally used this same formula — last year's actual costs , plus an inflation , times the number of authorized vouchers — each year to determine how much funding to request from congress for the renewal of tenant - based section 8 vouchers .

hud would also make available to congress for rescission those unused funds that the agency had recaptured from phas .

the end result of this system for phas was that their funding increased along with their costs .

if their costs dropped , they were permitted to use some of their excess funds to create new vouchers , a process called maximized leasing .

the end result of this system for congress was that each year it provided more funds for voucher renewals than phas could reasonably be expected to use , and then recaptured those unused funds the following year to offset the cost of that year's appropriation .

in recent years , some members of congress from both parties have introduced voucher reform legislation containing statutory changes to the voucher renewal funding formula , generally similar to the cost and utilization based formulas contained in recent appropriations acts .

however , it is important to note that even if a new funding formula were to be adopted through the authorizing process , the appropriations committees could override the formula by adopting a different allocation formula in the annual appropriations act , as they have each year since fy2003 .

it is unclear whether the appropriations committees would defer to the authorizing committees in this circumstance .

prior to fy2003 , the section 8 voucher program was funded much like an entitlement program ; the amount provided by congress was largely determined by a formula , limiting congress's ability to constrain funding without facing the prospect of reducing the number of vouchers and providing little incentive for phas to restrain costs .

in response to concern about inefficient funding allocations , as well as , later , rising costs , and in an attempt to obtain greater control over future cost growth , congress enacted a series of funding changes , beginning with those enacted for fy2003 .

these changes resulted in a conversion of the program's funding structure into one more similar to other discretionary programs , in which grantees received an annual fixed sum of money , regardless of changes in their costs or the number of people served .

while these changes gave congress greater control over the program's budget , many phas argued the changes made the program more difficult to administer .

phas have only limited control over their costs since the value of the subsidies provided to families is statutorily set ( as roughly the difference between rent and 30% of income ) .

in areas where they did have control , such as in setting payment standards , selecting families from the waiting list , and issuing vouchers , many phas made changes .

some lowered their payment standards from 110% to 100% or less of local fair market rents .

since changes in payment standards only affect future families in the program , some phas undertook rent reasonableness reviews and reduced rents paid to landlords , some of whom accepted the cut , others of whom chose to no longer participate in the program .

phas had the option of selecting higher - income families from their waiting lists ( for whom subsidy costs are lower ) , although phas were still constrained by a requirement that 75% of all vouchers be targeted to the lowest - income families .

many phas intentionally reduced their utilization rates by not reissuing vouchers when families left the program .

agencies that intentionally lowered their utilization rates in order to save money in fy2004 likely encountered problems in fy2005 , as their budgets were capped at their costs and utilization rates as of the third quarter of fy2004 .

it is likely that , at least for some phas whose costs had risen faster than their funding under the new formula , these changes resulted in fewer households receiving vouchers .

data from hud indicate that voucher costs leveled off and utilization rates declined from 2005 to 2006 .

according to crs analysis of hud data , average voucher costs declined by around 1.5% and average utilization declined by over 2% during that period .

at the same time , some agencies were receiving more money than they were legally permitted to spend .

under the budget - based funding formulas in place in fy2005 and fy2006 , phas' funding did not necessarily decrease if their costs decreased ( for example , due to changes in the types of families served or changes in the rental market ) .

since maximized leasing was prohibited , some phas had funds that they were not permitted to spend , even if they had waiting lists for vouchers in their communities ( 7% of all phas had unusable funds , as of september 2006 , according to crs analysis ) .

the budget - based funding formula changes enacted through fy2006 were controversial with low - income housing advocates and pha industry groups .

most low - income housing advocates called for a return to an actual - cost and unit - based formula .

pha advocacy groups were vocal about the difficult predicament they felt that the current formula put them in , given the statutory constraints under which they run their programs .

the fy2007 funding bill reversed recent trends by enacting a voucher renewal funding formula similar to the one that was in place when the changes first began .

in fy2007 , phas were funded based on the amount of funding they were using in the previous year , rather than the amount of money they had received in the previous year .

as a result , phas that had large funding surpluses were eligible for less funding in fy2007 , although funding for the program was sufficient to provide all phas with over 105% of their formula eligibility , meaning phas could continue to serve at least all of the families they had been serving , and additional families , as long as they were not overleasing .

the fy2008 and fy2009 formulas followed the fy2007 formula closely , although they included reductions in the budgets of agencies that had more reserve funding than they were legally permitted to spend , paired with rescissions .

these rescissions and offsets made unusable funding usable , and reduced the amount of appropriations needed to fund the program .

the fy2010 and fy2011 formulas were similar to the fy2009 formula , except without a reduction related to reserves .

in fy2012 , again , agency reserves were used to offset the cost of renewals .

now that the strictly "budget - based" funding model has been replaced with a cost and utilization - based model , phas again have an incentive to increase their utilization and spend all of their funding .

as a result , costs and utilization have begun rising again .

since costs and utilization are rising , so is the cost of the program to congress .

as in fy2003 and fy2004 , these rising costs could put pressure on policy makers to find ways to again contain costs in the program .

past cost containment strategies have been effective at reducing costs , but have also led to a reduction in the number of families served , and accumulations of unspent and unusable funds .

policy makers wishing to pursue future cost containment strategies may want to tailor policies that attempt to maintain a level of service to families , while minimizing the accumulation of unspent funds .

section 8 voucher reform legislation has proposed formula changes designed to maximize the number of families served , but not necessarily to firmly cap future cost growth .

further , even if such legislation is enacted , it could be overridden by future appropriations legislation .

