there are many divergent interpretations of the july - august war in lebanon and its implications for u.s. policy in the middle east .

on the one hand , some consider this conflict to be just the latest battle in a global war on terror pitting the democracies of the west and israel against terrorist organizations backed by radical regimes .

others view the war less in terms of an overall effort against islamic extremism and more of a battle between powerful nation - states , seeing lebanon as the battleground in an "opening round" of an iranian - israeli struggle for regional preeminence .

still , some observers assert that the war is simply another chapter in a long history of localized arab - israeli violence spurred by the lack of any discernable progress in a peace process .

in reality , there may be elements of truth within all of these perspectives .

the conflict has posed its own set of challenges for u.s. policy toward lebanon .

in a broader sense , the war has jeopardized not only the long - term stability of lebanon but has presented the bush administration with a basic dilemma .

on one hand , the administration is sympathetic to israeli military action against a terrorist organization ; president bush has spoken in favor of israel's right of self - defense .

on the other hand , the fighting dealt a setback to administration efforts to support the rebuilding of democratic institutions in lebanon .

one commentator suggested "the two major agendas of his [bush's] presidency — anti - terrorism and the promotion of democracy — are in danger of colliding with each other in lebanon. .

if lebanon disintegrates through a return to communal civil strife or becomes closely aligned with syria or iran , u.s. goals could be seriously affected .

the united states would lose a promising example of a modernizing pluralist state moving toward a resumption of democratic life and economic reform and quite possibly face a return to the chaos that prevailed in lebanon during the 15-year civil war .

such conditions would be likely to foster terrorism , unrest on israel's border , and other forms of regional instability .

moreover , the growth of syrian or iranian influence or some combination of the two could strengthen regional voices supporting extremist and likely anti - western views associated with clerical regimes ( iran ) , totalitarian models ( syria ) , or a militant stance toward israel .

a viable cease - fire , on the other hand , could be an initial step toward further progress in the long quest for regional peace .

with hezbollah deeply ingrained in lebanese shiite society , the movement has become a fixture in the political system , though whether or not its militia and terrorist wings can be disarmed remains to be seen .

many israelis remain deeply skeptical over international efforts to disarm hezbollah , as the real work of preventing re - armament over land , sea , and air will take place behind the scenes in the months ahead .

israeli sources are already reporting the renewal of syrian and iranian shipments to hezbollah though such reports are difficult to confirm .

a key aspect of hezbollah's possible re - armament is the role of syria .

many questions remain concerning syria: the willingness of the united states and israel to bring syria into the diplomatic mix , syria's influence over hezbollah in a lebanon free of syria's military occupation , and what demands syria may make in exchange for its possible cooperation .

some observers suggest a variety of theoretical incentives that the west could provide syria , including the end of its isolation by the united states and the removal of syria from the state department's terrorism list and the relaxation of economic sanctions ; the tacit recognition of its influence in lebanese politics ; the ratification of the eu association agreement with syria that provides it with certain trade benefits ; diminished international pressure regarding the u.n. - led investigation into the murder of former lebanese prime minister rafiq hariri ; increased financial support , possibly from arab gulf states ; and finally ( though less likely ) , a resumption of negotiations over the israeli - occupied golan heights - a longstanding syrian goal since its defeat in the june 1967 six - day war .

others believe that u.s. refusal to reward syria for its intransigence should continue and that any u.s. engagement would undermine western efforts to strengthen lebanese independence and sovereignty , even if the unspoken reality is one in which syria's special role in lebanese affairs is widely recognized .

after the recent attack on the u.s. embassy in damascus , some observers have asserted that the united states and syria share an interest in combating islamic extremism and should renew limited security cooperation and intelligence sharing .

finally , speculation over the winners and losers of the war will most likely be debated for some time .

israeli officials believe that their overwhelming response to hezbollah's provocation caught it and iran off - guard and that israel's subsequent operations have eroded its opponents' deterrent capabilities along the israeli - lebanese borders .

nevertheless , there are many israelis both in and out of the government who believe that the war was poorly managed , did not achieve its goals , or was simply ill - conceived .

hezbollah claimed that by merely surviving , it gained a symbolic victory over the more powerful israeli army and that it continued to threaten israel with rocket attacks after weeks of israeli attempts to destroy its arsenal .

iran may believe that it achieved an ideological victory against israel , seeing the conflict as producing increased arab and muslim support for lebanese shiites and for overall iranian opposition to israel .

analysts caution that increased arab and muslim support for hezbollah may simply be a temporary phenomenon in response to solidarity with the lebanese people and sympathy for lebanese civilian casualties .

others see increasing domestic political pressure in moderate arab states and elsewhere , such as egypt , jordan , saudi arabia , and even turkey to condemn israel and hold the united states partially responsible for civilian casualties in lebanon as a way to deal with popular anger and their own islamists .

appendix a. prelude to the crisis the following was originally the opening section of this report and has been included in the appendix for use a resource on background to the july - august war .

it will not be updated .

although hezbollah's july 12 , 2006 , kidnaping of two israeli soldiers initiated the conflict in southern lebanon , tensions in the region had grown since the hamas electoral victory in palestinian legislative elections in january 2006 .

over the course of the next six months , israeli - palestinian relations deteriorated rapidly , culminating in renewed fighting in the gaza strip , only months after israel withdrew entirely from the territory and evacuated its settlements .

most observers assert that hezbollah used the clashes between hamas and israel as a pretext and justification for its july 12 attack .

the following sections provide background on how the region was transformed over six months from one of relative calm to full - scale war .

palestinian elections and the hamas - led pa government on january 25 , 2006 , candidates of the "change and reform" party associated with the islamic resistance movement ( hamas ) won a majority in palestinian legislative council ( plc ) elections , defeating fatah , the prior ruling party of the plc and of palestinian authority president ( pa ) mahmoud abbas .

in response , the quartet ( i.e. , the united states , european union , united nations , and russia ) stated that "there is a fundamental contradiction between armed group and militia activities and the building of a democratic state. .

subsequent quartet statements established clear principles for reviewing further engagement and assistance with the hamas - led palestinian government , namely "that all members of a future palestinian government must be committed to non - violence , recognition of israel , and acceptance of previous agreements and obligations , including the roadmap. .

president abbas endorsed hamas' platform and cabinet candidates while expressing his demand that hamas comply with the quartet's principles and support his efforts to achieve a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict .

since january 2006 , hamas leaders have largely rejected and refused to discuss the quartet principles , arguing that while president abbas may decide to negotiate with israel , ultimately the palestinian people would decide what to accept .

the isolation of hamas and internecine palestinian violence the electoral victory of hamas surprised many outside observers and created a series of policy challenges for the bush administration , which had supported the election process as part of its efforts to reform the palestinian authority and its broader middle east democracy promotion agenda .

israel and members of the quartet took steps to limit the provision of non - humanitarian aid and financial resources to the hamas - controlled palestinian authority based on hamas leaders' refusal to accept the quartet principles .

israel ceased its monthly transfers of approximately $55 million in taxes and customs revenue collected monthly on behalf of the pa , and two leading israeli banks announced plans to sever their commercial relationships with financial institutions in the west bank and gaza strip .

the bush administration suspended u.s. - funded development projects in the palestinian territories and prohibited any and all u.s. persons from engaging in any unauthorized transactions with the palestinian authority because of its control by hamas , a designated terrorist entity .

the european union — the pa's largest donor — also suspended its direct aid to the palestinian authority and , at the quartet's behest , has subsequently spearheaded efforts to develop an international mechanism to deliver assistance to the palestinian people without transfers to or through hamas or the elements of the pa under its control .

the loss of customs revenue and direct foreign aid created crippling budgetary shortfalls for the pa and significant derivative economic hardship for many palestinian citizens .

president abbas referred to the steps as a "siege," and throughout april , may , and june 2006 , tensions over unpaid salaries and disagreements over command responsibilities flared between the hamas - led government and armed security force personnel loyal to fatah .

palestinian leaders , including president abbas , engaged in several efforts to end the intra - palestinian violence and bring closure to open questions of official palestinian support for the quartet principles ( see discussion of the national accord document below ) .

however , before these efforts could bear fruit , fresh violence between israel and hamas erupted in the gaza strip and has escalated .

israeli - palestinian fighting for many months prior to the late spring / summer 2006 outbreak of fighting , violence had been somewhat subdued due to some self - imposed restraint by the major players involved .

in march 2005 , hamas and 12 other palestinian groups agreed to extend an informal truce or "calm" ( referred to in arabic as a hudna ) with israel for one year .

some call the agreement a cease - fire even though it was a unilateral palestinian declaration to which israel was not a party .

palestine islamic jihad ( pij ) did not agree to the calm and was responsible for several suicide bombings within israel in the period that followed .

hamas , which had been responsible for many suicide bombings during the second intifadah ( palestinian uprising against israeli occupation ) that had begun in september 2000 , refrained from such attacks after declaring the hudna .

it did , however , continue to fire mortars and rockets against israeli settlements in the gaza strip before israel's summer 2005 withdrawal from the region and into southern israel after israel's withdrawal .

israel usually responded with air and artillery strikes , but it also carried out what it terms targeted killings of terrorists .

on june 9 , 2006 , a palestinian family was killed on a gaza beach .

the palestinians claimed that the victims had been struck by israeli artillery fire , but israel denied responsibility for the deaths .

nonetheless , the incident provoked hamas to call off its truce and intensify rocket fire into southern israel .

also in june , palestinian factions held an intense national dialogue in the west bank and gaza in which they ultimately agreed on a national accord document ( also known as the prisoners' document because hamas and fatah leaders imprisoned by israel had collaborated on the first draft ) to reconcile their positions and goals .

hamas leaders in damascus , notably political bureau chief khalid mish'al , reportedly did not agree with the national accord document because it might be seen as suggesting that hamas had moderated its views regarding israel and the peace process .

on june 25 , members of the hamas military wing ( izz ad - din al - qassam brigades ) and two other groups attacked israeli forces in israel , just outside of gaza , killing two israeli soldiers , wounding four , and kidnaping one .

the perpetrators demanded the release of palestinian women and minors from israeli prisons .

some analysts suggest that mish'al was behind the attack in order to assert his power over more "moderate" hamas officials in the territories and to undermine the national accord .

on june 27 , after unsuccessful diplomatic efforts to secure the kidnapped soldier's release , israeli forces began a major operation which israel explained as an effort to rescue the soldier , to deter future hamas attacks including rocket launches from gaza into southern israel , and to weaken , bring down , or change the conduct of the hamas - led palestinian authority government .

israeli officials claimed that hamas had crossed a "red line" with the kidnaping and attack within pre - 1967 israel , but said that israel did not intend to reoccupy gaza .

on june 28 , hamas officials in the palestinian authority allied themselves with the kidnappers by adopting their demands .

israeli officials responded by insisting on the unconditional release of the soldier .

on june 29 , israel forces arrested 64 palestinian ( hamas ) cabinet ministers , parliamentarians , and other hamas officials in the west bank and jerusalem in what the foreign ministry described the action as a "normal legal procedure" targeting suspected terrorists .

in early military operations , israeli planes bombed offices of pa ministries headed by hamas , weapons depots , training sites , and access roads ; ground forces entered gaza to locate tunnels and explosives near the border and targeted hamas offices in the west bank .

after hamas militants fired an upgraded rocket at the israeli port city of ashkelon on july 4 , the israeli cabinet approved "prolonged" activities against hamas ; air and artillery strikes and ground incursions are still occurring .

meanwhile , palestinian militants continue to fire rockets into southern israel .

international mediators have tried to calm the recent upsurge in violence .

the egyptians have reportedly proposed a resolution in which hamas would release the soldier in exchange for an israeli promise to release prisoners at a later date .

on july 10 , however , khalid mish'al insisted on the mutual release or "swap" of prisoners .

on the same day , israeli prime minister ehud olmert reportedly said that trading prisoners with hamas would cause a lot of damage to the future of the state of israel , perhaps because it would continue a precedent that he seeks to break .

he later observed that negotiating with hamas also would signal that moderates such as palestinian authority ( pa ) president mahmud abbas are not needed .

abbas told a visiting u.n. team that he wanted to "de - link" the crisis in the palestinian areas from the crisis that developed subsequently between israel and hezbollah in lebanon in order to prevent non - palestinian extremists ( hezbollah ) from hijacking the leadership of the palestinian issue .

yet , neither president abbas nor the hamas - led pa government officials represent the kidnappers and can bring about a resolution .

hamas leader mish'al appears to be in control of key elements in hamas and emphasizes the importance of cooperation between hamas and hezbollah and specifically calls for not separating the palestinian and lebanese issues .

enter hezbollah on july 12 , under cover of massive shelling of a town in northern israel , hezbollah forces crossed the international border from lebanon into northwestern israel and attacked two israeli vehicles , killing three soldiers and kidnaping two .

hezbollah thereby opened a second front against israel ostensibly in support of hamas .

sheikh hassan nasrallah , hezbollah's leader , suggested that the hezbollah operation might provide a way out of the crisis in gaza because israel had negotiated with hezbollah indirectly in the past even though it refuses to negotiate with hamas now .

he said that the only way the soldiers would be returned would be through a prisoner exchange .

although hezbollah and hamas are not organizationally linked , hezbollah provides military training as well as financial and moral support to the palestinian group and has acted in some ways as a mentor or role model for hamas , which has sought to emulate the lebanese group's political and media success .

hamas's kidnaping of the israeli soldier follows a different hezbollah example .

moreover , two groups share the goal of driving israel from occupied territories and ultimately eliminating it ; both maintain close ties with iran .

possible explanations for hezbollah's attack nasrallah has publicly espoused an intention to kidnap israelis to effectuate a prisoner exchange .

hezbollah , however , has the capacity to decide to act on its own and could have done so in the spirit of "shi'a triumphalism" spurred by the iraqi shiites' ascension to power and iran's pursuit of nuclear weapons .

it also may have acted in solidarity with the besieged palestinians or with its syrian and iranian supporters .

another explanation is that hezbollah may have wanted to prevent a resolution of the gaza crisis .

egyptian president hosni mubarak and palestinian authority president mahmud abbas have claimed that an agreement for a prisoner exchange had almost been reached , immediately before the hezbollah attack , but hezbollah's action complicated or prevented it .

some observers question hezbollah's autonomy and offer other explanations for the july 12 action .

much speculation focuses on whether hezbollah acted at the behest of or with the approval of iran , its main sponsor , because iran also supports hamas or may have wanted to divert international attention from the impasse over its nuclear program .

if the latter is the case , it gained only a limited time when the u.n. security council postponed consideration of the nuclear issue due to the lebanon situation because , on july 31 , the council approved a resolution demanding that iran suspend its uranium enrichment program by august 31 or face sanctions .

others suggest that syria may be using its hezbollah allies to resurrect its influence in lebanon , from which it had been forced to withdraw in 2005 .

other experts give a more nuanced appraisal .

u.s. centcom commander general john abizaid observed that it is more likely that syria and iran are exploiting the situation created by the kidnaping than that they ordered it .

u.s. state department coordinator for counterterrorism henry crumpton reportedly asserted that syria and iran do not control hezbollah , but added that hezbollah asks iranian permission if its actions have broader international implications .

in this case , hezbollah may not have foreseen the implications of its july 12 operation and expected "the usual , limited" israeli response characteristic of the period since 2000 .

therefore , it may not have asked permission from teheran .

appendix b .

chronology of conflict on the israeli - lebanese - syrian border appendix c. recent legislation congressional oversight in response to the current crisis , congress took swift steps to express its support of israel and that country's "right to take appropriate action to deter aggression by terrorist groups and their state sponsors," and to urge "the president to continue fully supporting israel as israel exercises its right of self - defense in lebanon and gaza. .

some members of congress called on the president to appeal to all parties for an immediate cessation of violence , to commit to multi - party negotiations , and expressed support for an international peacekeeping mission in southern lebanon .

others called for "the cessation of targeting...of infrastructure vital to non - combatants" ; establishment of "a secure humanitarian corridor" for purposes of evacuation and transporting of food and medicine to the civilian population ; an immediate cease - fire ; and a "comprehensive and just solution" .

house resolution 954 called on the president to appoint a special envoy for middle east peace .

a senate resolution , s.res .

548 , called on syria and iran to end their support for hezbollah , for the warring parties to reach a cessation of hostilities , and for reconstruction to find international support .

evacuation costs for u.s. citizens in the early stages of u.s. government - supported evacuations of americans from lebanon , the state department required evacuees to sign promissory notes to assume financial liability of the costs of their evacuation .

several members of congress objected to this , noting that the law is ambiguous at best , and called on the u.s. secretary of state to waive the statutory requirements for reimbursement .

on july 18 , 2006 , after the secretary of state consulted with some members , the state department announced that such fees would be waived .

congress adopted two measures increase funding available to the social security administration to provide temporary assistance to u.s. citizens returned from foreign countries ( public law 109-250 ) , to authorize the secretary of state to redistribute funds within the state department's budget to cover the costs of evacuations , and to increase funding available to the state department for such evacuations ( public law 109-268 ) .

other legislation , as yet not enacted , proposed to change permanently the statutory basis under which the state department requests reimbursements , or replenish funds in the budget of the department of health and human services that are expended once evacuees have returned to the united states .

appendix d. u.s. sanctions syria , iran , hamas , and hezbollah — the states and entities that congress has noted for aggression against israel , support for terrorism , or terrorist activities in the current crises — are currently subject to fairly comprehensive u.s. economic sanctions .

the secretary of state designated syria and iran as state sponsors of acts of international terrorism , in 1979 and 1984 respectively , thus triggering a myriad of statutorily required restrictions and prohibitions on aid , non - emergency agricultural aid , trade , support in the international banks , and other economic transactions .

such a designation generally triggers a prohibition on all but the most basic of humanitarian exchanges .

iran iran is also denied investment dollars intended for development of its petroleum industry under the iran and libya sanctions act of 1996 .

sanctions available under this act , to be imposed on those who engage in unlawful investment in iran , include a prohibition on export - import bank funds , prohibition on exports , denial of loans from u.s. financial institutions , denial of rights to financial institutions to participate as a dealer in u.s. debt instruments , denial of procurement contracts , and any other transaction the president wishes to restrict if the authority to do so also is stated under the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

petroleum - related investments are restricted also by executive order , and all new investments , regardless of the industry , are also restricted under the ieepa .

syria although syria has been identified as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism since 1979 , regulations that implement restrictions on trade and transactions with that country are less restrictive than those that pertain to other designated countries , reportedly because syria is considered instrumental in the middle east peace process .

congress took this into account when it sent the syria accountability and lebanese sovereignty restoration act of 2003 to the president .

the act , triggered by increasingly organized and forceful efforts in lebanon to shed itself of foreign forces , and reflecting recent statements from the bush administration targeting syria's involvement with terrorism , development and trade of weapons of mass destruction , and support of the insurgency in iraq , requires the president to curtail trade and transactions until certain conditions are met .

the act requires the denial of export licenses for any item on the u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) or commerce control list ( ccl ) .

the act also requires the president to impose two or more of the following restrictions: prohibit export of all products ( except food and medicine , as made exempt by the trade sanctions reform act of 2000 ) ; prohibit investment in syria ; restrict travel of syrian diplomats to only the environs of washington , dc and the united nations in new york ; prohibit syrian - owned air traffic in or over the united states ; reduce diplomatic contact ; and block transactions in property .

the president implemented terms of the syria accountability and lebanese sovereignty restoration act on may 11 , 2004 , by complying with the mandatory restrictions on usml and ccl exports , and by prohibiting u.s. exports and restricting syrian air traffic .

lebanon for fy2003 and each fiscal year thereafter , of any economic support funds allocated or obligated to lebanon , $10 million shall be withheld: unless and until the president certifies...that ( 1 ) the armed forces of lebanon have been deployed to the international recognized border between lebanon and israel ; and ( 2 ) the government of lebanon is effectively asserting its authority in the area in which such armed forces have been deployed .

to date , the president has not certified that these conditions have been met .

congress , however , has ensured that the $10 million would be made available each year by overriding the restriction .

annual foreign operations appropriations measures have provided assistance to lebanon "notwithstanding any other provision of law. .

hamas and hezbollah in 1995 , the president identified hamas and hezbollah as specially designated terrorists ( sdt ) that threaten to disrupt the middle east peace process and authorized the blocking of all assets and of transactions with persons associated with either organization .

subsequent legislative and executive initiatives led to the creation of several other lists .

enactment of the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 , which also authorizes deportation or exclusion from entry into the united states , generated the foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) list .

the president issued an executive order to create the specially designated global terrorists ( sdgt ) list in the wake of events of september 11 , 2001 .

all these lists were subsequently consolidated into one specially designated nationals and blocked persons list ( the "sdn list" ) , administered by the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control in 2002 .

hamas and hezbollah , or individuals associated with each , are on each of the lists .

