libya's political transition has been disrupted by armed non - state groups and threatened by the indecision and infighting of interim leaders .

after an armed uprising ended the 40-plus - year rule of muammar al qadhafi in late 2011 , interim authorities proved unable to form a stable government , address pressing security issues , reshape the country's public finances , or reconcile .

qadhafi left state institutions weak and deprived libyans of experience in self - government , compounding stabilization challenges .

at present , armed militia groups and locally organized political leaders remain the most powerful arbiters of public affairs .

an atmosphere of persistent lawlessness has enabled militias , criminals , and islamist terrorist groups to operate with impunity .

insecurity became prevalent in libya following the 2011 conflict and deepened in 2014 , driven by overlapping ideological , personal , financial , and transnational rivalries .

elections for legislative bodies and a constitutional drafting assembly held in 2012 and 2014 were administered transparently , but were marred by declining rates of participation , threats to candidates and voters , and zero - sum political competition .

issues of dispute have included governance , military command , national finances , and control of oil infrastructure .

u.s. africa command ( africom ) has emphasized the importance of a political solution for stability , and in march 2018 , told congress that , in light of prevailing turmoil , "the risk of a full - scale civil war remains real. .

in december 2015 , some libyan leaders endorsed the u.n. - brokered political agreement to create a government of national accord ( gna ) to oversee the completion of the transition .

gna prime minister - designate fayez al sarraj and members of a gna presidency council have attempted to implement the agreement and have competed for influence with political figures and armed forces based in eastern libya , including leaders of the house of representatives elected in 2014 and field marshal khalifa haftar's "libyan national army" ( lna ) movement .

the united nations ( u.n. ) security council and the united states have recognized the gna , but it has made little progress in overcoming disputes that have split the country politically and geographically .

u.s. officials and other international actors have worked since 2014 to convince libyan factions and their various external supporters that inclusive , representative government and negotiation are preferable to competing attempts to achieve dominance through force of arms .

the u.n. security council has authorized financial and travel sanctions on individuals and entities responsible for threatening "the peace , stability or security of libya," obstructing or undermining "the successful completion of its political transition," or supporting others who do so .

a u.n. arms embargo is in place , and u.s. executive orders provide for sanctions against those undermining the transition .

a u.n. - sponsored action plan launched in 2017 seeks to complete the transition in 2018 , and libyans and outsiders are debating its implementation , including the timing and sequencing of elections and a constitutional referendum .

past mediation efforts struggled to gain traction and outsiders have at times pursued their own agendas through ties with libyan factions .

such competition by proxy raises the stakes of libya's internal rivalries and complicates negotiations .

the state department suspended operations at the u.s. embassy in tripoli in july 2014 and has delayed the reintroduction of u.s. personnel on a permanent basis in light of prevailing security conditions .

u.s. diplomats engage with libyans and monitor u.s. programs in libya via the libya external office ( leo ) at the u.s. embassy in tunisia .

u.s. military strikes and advice supported some libyan forces in operation odyssey lightning , a 2016 campaign to eliminate and expel thousands of islamic state ( is , aka isis / isil ) supporters from the central coastal city of sirte ( table 1 ) .

periodic u.s. strikes target is members and other terrorists .

u.s. officials judge that the threats posed by is members and al qaeda have been degraded , but note that these groups remain dangerous and could resurge if political and security conditions deteriorate .

congress has conditionally appropriated funding for limited u.s. transition support and security assistance programs for libya since 2011 and is considering the trump administration's request for additional assistance funds for fy2019 .

congress continues to shape u.s. policy toward libya through its oversight of existing diplomatic , foreign assistance , and defense activities and its consideration of new proposals and requests .

relative resource investment and a lack of physical presence in libya arguably limit u.s. influence on the ground .

the administration and some members of congress are considering options for future engagement in libya with two interrelated goals: supporting the emergence of a unified , capable national government , and reducing transnational threats posed by terrorists and other actors who have exploited libya's instability .

pursuing these objectives simultaneously presents u.s. policymakers with complicated choices about relative priorities and the interrelated consequences of a range of options .

points of active discussion concern the nature and extent of u.s. partnership with different libyans ; the type , timing , and extent of u.s. assistance ; the potential utility or costs of sanctions or other coercive measures ; and the degree of cooperation or confrontation with other outside actors seeking to influence developments .

these issues will likely shape u.s. policy debates about libya for the foreseeable future .

libya's 2011 uprising and conflict brought muammar al qadhafi's four decades of authoritarian rule to an end .

competing factions and alliances — organized along local , regional , ideological , tribal , and personal lines — have jockeyed for influence and power in post - qadhafi libya , at times with the backing of rival foreign governments .

according to ghassan salamé , the special representative of the u.n. secretary - general ( srsg ) and head of the u.n. support mission in libya ( unsmil ) , libyans are struggling to overcome a political "discourse of hatred" and "mutual exclusion" that has prevented the completion of the country's transition to date .

this discourse is in part a legacy of muammar al qadhafi's decades of divisive rule and in part a product of the internal divisions , rampant insecurity , and zero - sum competition that have followed qadhafi's downfall .

although some observers attribute libya's divisive politics to simple binaries — "islamist versus secular," "east versus west," "tribe versus tribe," "urban versus rural," "ethnic majority versus ethnic minority," or "old - regime officials versus newly empowered groups" — many of these factors and others often interact to shape local and national dynamics .

since 2011 , a series of transitional governing arrangements have been endorsed in two national elections and a constitutional drafting assembly referendum , but rates of participation have declined over time .

the net result has been a de facto accrual of transitional leaders with competing claims of legitimacy who have been locked in an inconclusive political struggle .

after years of rivalry and conflict , many libyan actors make claims to some degree of political legitimacy and possess some means to assert themselves by force , but none have consolidated enough political support or military force to provide credible leadership or durable security on a national scale .

sustained national civil war has been avoided , but violent clashes have occurred in many areas , and the threat of wider conflict persists .

in this context , key post - qadhafi political issues for libyans have included the relative powers and roles of local , regional , and national government ; the weakness of national government institutions and security forces ; the role of islam in political and social life ; the involvement in politics and security of former regime officials ; and the proper management of the country's large energy reserves , related infrastructure , and associated revenues .

factors that have shaped the relative degree of conflict , mutual accommodation , and reconciliation among libyan factions since 2014 include the relative ability of numerous factions to muster sufficient force or legitimacy to assert dominance over each other ; the inability of rival claimants to gain exclusive access to government funds controlled by the central bank or sovereign assets held overseas ; the u.n. arms embargo and the potential widening of u.n. sanctions ; and the threats posed to libyans by extremist groups , including the islamic state .

among the range of external actors seeking to shape developments in libya , the united states has at times acted unilaterally and directly to protect its national security interests .

other countries have done the same .

at the same time , the united states and other external parties have expressed support for multilateral initiatives to encourage compromise and consensus in support of libya's transition .

some foreign observers have praised the role of the united nations and other third parties in promoting national reconciliation , but have argued that continuous efforts are needed to engage all libyan actors with influence or direct control over security , natural resources , infrastructure , and sources of revenue if stability is to be achieved .

various libyans have at times accused the u.n. and other third parties of unwarranted interference in libya's domestic affairs , particularly when they perceive outside interventions to undercut their interests or serve those of their rivals .

for the united states and other outsiders , key issues related to post - qadhafi libya have included transnational terrorist and criminal threats emanating from libya ; the security and continued export of libyan oil and natural gas ; libya's role as a transit country for europe - bound refugees and migrants ; the security of weapons stockpiles and unconventional weapons materials ; and the country's orientation in various region - wide political competitions .

for a more detailed description of libya's history and political evolution , see ‎ appendix a .

for a description of select libyan political actors , see appendix d .

conflict and instability in libya have taken a severe toll on the country's economy and weakened its fiscal and reserve positions since 2011 .

as of 2014 , libya was estimated to have the largest proven crude oil reserves in africa and the ninth largest globally .

oil and natural gas supply 97% of the government's fiscal revenue , and a combination of supply disruptions and market forces caused oil production and revenue to plummet from 2014 through 2016 , devastating state finances .

although state revenue has declined from its post - 2011 high points , state financial obligations have increased , with public spending on salaries , imports , and subsidies all having expanded .

libyan officials have identified more than 1.75 million state employees ( equivalent to more than 25% of the population ) and estimate that salaries consume nearly 60% of the state budget .

government payments to civilians and militia members have continued since the outbreak of conflict in 2014 , and central bank authorities have simultaneously paid salaries for military and militia forces aligned with opposing sides in the internal conflicts .

to manage deficits and continue payments of salaries and subsidies , libyan officials have drawn on state financial reserves , but reports of delays in salary payments persist .

world bank / international monetary fund statistics and u.n. estimates suggest that foreign exchange reserves have fallen from their high point of $124 billion in 2012 to an estimated $69 billion in 2017 .

in august 2017 , the u.n. secretary - general reported that the budget deficit was then "much higher than previously projected" and predicted that foreign currency reserves would remain dangerously low through the end of 2017 .

an expansion of oil production since mid - 2017 has provided a much - needed injection of new financial resources , with domestic production remaining near 1 million bpd for most of the period from december 2017 through april 2018 .

as oil production has rebounded , libya has faced calls from fellow organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) members to participate in the group's production cut agreement .

libyan authorities reportedly have agreed to recognize a cap near the current 1 million bpd level of production .

fighting near the oil crescent region and intermittent shutdowns of pipelines by militias , terrorist attacks , and labor and property disputes have demonstrated the prospect of potential disruptions or production declines .

in march 2018 , srsg salamé told the u.n. security council that , "libya's finances remain precarious .

despite the country now producing well over 1 million barrels a day and generating rosy macro - economic indicators , the country does not enjoy a true economic recovery. .

salamé warned of "signs of a looming monetary and fiscal crisis" and cautioned against "underinvestment or sabotage" of oil revenues .

he also said that , "government expenditure is bloated and continues to increase , but more spending , so far , does not lead to better services. .

libyan implementing and auditing agencies have attempted to improve budget execution , but serious challenges remain .

among these challenges have been rivalries among parallel leaders of key national institutions such as the central bank , national oil company ( noc ) , and libya's sovereign wealth fund — the libya investment authority ( lia ) .

these opaque , consequential rivalries have reflected the country's underlying political competition over time .

central bank officials in tripoli and bayda have become embroiled in the rivalry between the gna presidency council and the hor government , with the united states and other backers of the gna presidency council recognizing the tripoli - based institution as legitimate .

in may 2016 , the bayda - based bank moved to issue its own currency and to access secured assets held at the bayda central bank branch , leading the u.s. government to warn against actions not authorized by the gna presidency council that could undermine confidence among libyan consumers and international trading partners .

when the hor nominated a replacement for tripoli - based central bank chairman sadiq al kabir in december 2017 , the gna state council protested the nomination , noting that it hadn't been consulted pursuant to article 15 of the lpa , which provides for appointments to select sovereign positions .

unsmil also rejected the move , but the hor nominee , mohammed shukri , was confirmed as head of the bayda - based bank in january 2018 .

the tripoli central bank also invalidated bayda - issued dinar coins in late 2017 .

in august 2016 , the gna presidency council named an interim steering committee for the lia after a long - simmering dispute between rival board members and chairmen brought the fund's leadership to a standstill .

the lia's assets reportedly exceed $60 billion , much of which remain frozen pursuant to u.n. security council resolutions 1970 and 1973 ( 2011 ) , as modified by resolution 2009 ( 2011 ) .

the gna council authorized the steering committee to represent the lia in ongoing legal proceedings , but not to manage assets .

in february and may 2017 , libyan court rulings invalidated the gna appointment and authorization on the grounds that the gna's tenure had still not been approved under the terms of the lpa .

leadership of the lia remains in dispute , and in march 2018 the chief executive appointed by figures in eastern libya resigned , amid a new round of questions about the value and status of lia assets .

some news reports allege that some frozen lia assets have been redirected by individuals and authorities in countries where assets are held , but lia officials have denied that this is the case .

disputes involving the national oil company also have ebbed and flowed since early 2016 .

in april 2016 , the u.n. security council blacklisted an oil tanker that had taken on hundreds of thousands of barrels of oil sold by the hor - affiliated branch of the national oil company , but the sanctions were withdrawn at the gna presidency council's request on may 12 .

a deal to unite the tripoli and benghazi branches of the noc was reached in early july 2016 , but appeared to unravel later that month after gna officials reached a related agreement with petroleum forces guard personnel that then held key oil infrastructure .

benghazi - based noc officials issued statements lifting force majeure orders on oil terminals seized by lna forces in september 2016 and in march 2017 moved to cancel the july 2016 agreement .

tripoli - based noc chairman mustafa sanalla has called for the noc to be depoliticized and wrote in june 2017 that he and his colleagues "intend to remain neutral until there is a single legitimate government we can submit to. .

according to sanalla , "noc is like a glue , unifying the country .

i make sure i'm very neutral. .

u.n. security council resolution 2362 ( 2017 ) stresses "the need for the government of national accord to exercise sole and effective oversight over the national oil corporation , the central bank of libya , and the libyan investment authority as a matter of urgency , without prejudice to future constitutional arrangements pursuant to the libyan political agreement. .

transnational terrorist groups and locally organized armed extremist groups , including the islamic state organization and al qaeda in the islamic maghreb ( aqim ) , remain active in libya .

terrorist organizations active in libya and the continuing weakness of libya's national security bodies and government institutions pose a dual risk to u.s. and international security .

whereas u.s. intervention in libya in 2011 was motivated largely by concern regarding threats posed to libyans by the qadhafi government , u.s. policy since has been defined by efforts to contain and mitigate the negative effects of state collapse and support transition efforts .

operations by libyan partner forces , backed by u.s. military strikes , succeeded in ending the islamic state organization's control over territory in central and western libya during 2016 , but little parallel progress has been made toward achieving durable political reconciliation .

armed groups empowered under counterterrorism or transition support arrangements may complicate efforts to achieve negotiated agreements by asserting themselves relative to transitional political leaders .

today , u.s. and libyan officials in the country's various governing entities share concerns about remaining extremists , the weakness of state institutions , and flows of migrants , refugees , and contraband within and across libya's largely un - policed borders .

current u.s. efforts focus on supporting the implementation of the u.n. action plan , preventing libyan territory from being used to support terrorist attacks , and providing stabilization and transition assistance to local communities and national government entities .

libya's natural resources and economic potential may provide future opportunities for strengthening u.s. - libyan trade and investment ties , but circumstances have not allowed such ties to flourish .

the trump administration has maintained u.s. recognition of the gna and signaled continuing interest in providing u.s. foreign aid and security assistance to support libya's transition .

then - ambassador to libya peter bodde and africom commander general thomas waldhauser visited libya in may 2017 , and gna prime minister fayez al sarraj visited washington , dc , in november 2017 .

the trump administration has not appointed a special envoy for libya to replace jonathan winer , whose mandate ended with the obama administration .

as noted above , the state department suspended operations at the u.s. embassy in tripoli in july 2014 .

u.s. diplomats engage with libyans and monitor u.s. programs in libya via the libya external office ( leo ) at the u.s. embassy in tunisia .

u.s .

ambassador to libya peter bodde retired in december 2017 , and , as of may 2018 , the trump administration had not nominated a new ambassador - designate .

senior foreign service officer stephanie williams leads the leo as chargé d'affaires .

since 2017 , the trump administration has imposed conditional restrictions on the entry of libyan nationals to the united states , with some exceptions .

 ( see textbox below ) .

the 2012 attacks in benghazi , the deaths of u.s. personnel , the emergence of terrorist threats on libyan soil , and internecine conflict among libyan militias have reshaped debates in washington about u.s. policy toward libya .

following intense congressional debate over the merits of u.s. and nato military intervention in libya in 2011 , many members of congress welcomed the announcement of libya's liberation , the formation of the interim transitional national council government , and the july 2012 national general national congress election .

some members also expressed concern about security in the country , the proliferation of weapons , and the prospects for a smooth political transition .

the breakdown of the transition process in 2014 and the outbreak of conflict amplified these concerns , with the subsequent emergence and strengthening of islamic state supporters in libya compounding congressional apprehension about the implications of continued instability in the country .

as of 2018 , the executive branch and congress appear to have reached a degree of consensus regarding limited security and transition support programs in libya , some of which respond to specific u.s. security concerns about unsecured weapons , terrorist safe havens , and border security .

congress has conditionally appropriated funding for limited u.s. transition support and security assistance programs for fy2018 , and is considering trump administration requests for additional foreign operations and defense funds to support libya - related programs for fy2019 .

in recent years , congress has enacted appropriations legislation requiring the administration to certify libyan cooperation with efforts to investigate the 2012 benghazi attacks and to submit detailed spending and vetting plans in order to obligate appropriated funds .

congress also has prohibited the provision of u.s. assistance to libya for infrastructure projects "except on a loan basis with terms favorable to the united states. .

the foreign operations appropriations act for fy2018 carries forward some past terms and conditions on fy2018 u.s. assistance to libya ( section 7041 ( f ) of division k of h.r .

1625 / p.l .

115-141 ) , and includes a requirement for notice to congress in cases of aid diversion or destruction .

the fy2017 and fy2018 acts did not require submission of a spending plan to congressional appropriators prior to obligations .

terrorist threats , libyans' divisive political competition , and , since mid - 2014 , outright conflict between rival groups have prevented u.s. officials from developing robust partnerships and assistance programs in post - qadhafi libya .

the shared desire of the u.s. government and some international actors to empower an inclusive government and rebuild libyan state security forces has been confounded by the strength of armed non - state groups , weak institutions , and a fundamental lack of political consensus among libya's interim leaders , especially regarding security issues .

control over national institutions , territory , and key energy infrastructure continues to define the balance of power in libya .

to the extent that these factors define the prospects for governance and economic viability , they are likely to remain objects of intense competition .

prior to the escalation of conflict in may 2014 , some libyans had questioned the then - interim government's decision to seek foreign support for security reform and transition guidance , while some u.s. observers had questioned libya's need for u.s. foreign assistance given libya's oil resources and relative wealth .

during subsequent fighting , some libyans have vigorously rejected others' calls for international support and assistance and traded accusations of disloyalty and treason in response to reports of partnership with foreign forces .

these dynamics raise questions about the potential viability of the u.s. partnership approach , which has sought to build libyan capacity , coordinate international action , and leverage libyan financial resources to meet shared objectives and minimize the need for direct u.s. involvement .

some libyan actors appear to view offers of external assistance and threats of external sanctions in zero - sum terms , despite assurances that third parties seek to support inclusive , consensus arrangements .

in some cases where the u.s. government has sought libyan government action on priority issues , especially in the counterterrorism sector , u.s. officials have weighed choices over whether u.s. assistance can build sufficient libyan capacity quickly and cheaply enough .

u.s. officials also have considered whether interim leaders are appropriate or reliable partners for the united states and how u.s. action or assistance might affect libyan politics .

in some cases , such as with the threat posed by the islamic state , u.s. officials have debated when threats to u.s. interests require immediate , direct u.s. action .

with islamic state forces degraded and rivalries among libyan factions persistent , these questions continue to apply to debates about the future of u.s. assistance plans .

at present , u.s. officials remain engaged with libyan counterparts in efforts to move forward with the u.n. - backed action plan .

next steps may include a constitutional referendum and national elections some time in 2018 or later , but the timing , legal framework , and sequencing of these proposed steps has not yet been determined .

the potential success of u.n. - backed reconciliation could provide a new foundation for improving stability in libya , and could create new opportunities for security and economic partnership between libya and the united states .

the potential failure of u.n. - promoted reconciliation efforts among libyans may present u.s. decisionmakers with hard choices about how best to mitigate threats emanating from the country in the continuing absence of a viable , legitimate national government .

possible questions before the united states may include whether and when to return u.s. personnel to libya on a permanent basis ; what types and extent of assistance , if any , to provide for stabilization and transition support purposes ; how to ensure that u.s. aid recipients and security partners have not been and are not now involved in gross violations of human rights ; whether or how to use existing sanctions provisions or other coercive measures against parties seen as obstructing progress under the u.n. - sponsored action plan ; whether or how to continue to intervene militarily against terrorist groups ; whether or how to respond to the actions of other third parties , including russia ; whether or how to leverage or amend u.n. arms embargo provisions to allow for security assistance to parties in libya ; what degree of support , if any , to provide to emergent national security forces ( particularly in the absence of an agreed political framework ) ; and whether or how to respond in the event of any military clashes between rival libyan factions that involve groups that have received u.s. assistance .

legislative debates over future appropriations and defense authorization measures provide potential means for members to influence u.s. policy and engagement with libyan actors .

congressional oversight prerogatives also provide opportunities to engage administration officials to refine the scope and content of u.s. programs proposed to support the government of national accord and other libyans ; regarding u.s. contingency planning for the possibility that other third parties may intervene more forcefully in libya ; regarding plans for potentially expanding u.s. partnership with libyans if u.n. - backed reconciliation measures succeed ; and regarding the possibility that negotiations among libyans and planned elections may not bring instability in libya to a prompt close .

appendix a. libyan history , civil war , and political change the north african territory that now composes libya has a long history as a center of phoenician , carthaginian , greek , roman , berber , and arab civilizations .

modern libya is a union of three historically distinct regions — northwestern tripolitania , northeastern cyrenaica or barqa , and the more remote southwestern desert region of fezzan .

in the 19 th century , the ottoman empire struggled to assert control over libya's coastal cities and interior .

italy invaded libya in 1911 on the pretext of liberating the region from ottoman control .

the italians subsequently became mired in decades of colonial abuses against the libyan people and faced a persistent anticolonial insurgency .

libya was an important battleground in the north africa campaign of the second world war and emerged from the fighting as a ward of the allied powers and the united nations .

on december 24 , 1951 , the united kingdom of libya became one of africa's first independent states .

with u.n. supervision and assistance , a libyan national constituent assembly drafted and agreed to a constitution establishing a federal system of government with central authority vested in king idris al sanussi .

legislative authority was vested in a prime minister , a council of ministers , and a bicameral legislature .

the first parliamentary election was held in february 1952 , one month after independence .

the king banned political parties shortly after independence , and libya's first decade was characterized by continuous infighting over taxation , development , and constitutional powers .

in 1963 , king idris replaced the federal system of government with a unitary monarchy that further centralized royal authority , in part to streamline the development of the country's newly discovered oil resources .

prior to the discovery of marketable oil in 1959 , the libyan government was largely dependent on economic aid and technical assistance it received from international institutions and through military basing agreements with the united states and united kingdom .

the u.s. - operated air base at wheelus field outside of tripoli served as an important strategic air command base and center for military intelligence operations throughout the 1950s and 1960s .

oil wealth brought rapid economic growth and greater financial independence to libya in the 1960s , but the weakness of national institutions and libyan elites' growing identification with the pan - arab socialist ideology of egyptian leader gamal abdel nasser contributed to the gradual marginalization of the monarchy .

popular criticism of u.s. and british basing agreements grew , becoming amplified in the wake of israel's defeat of arab forces in the 1967 six day war .

king idris left the country in mid - 1969 for medical reasons , setting the stage for a military coup in september , led by a young , devoted nasserite army captain named muammar al qadhafi .

the united states did not actively oppose the coup , as qadhafi and his co - conspirators initially presented an anti - soviet and reformist platform .

qadhafi focused intensely on securing the immediate and full withdrawal of british and u.s. forces from military bases in libya , which was complete by mid - 1970 .

the new government also pressured u.s. and other foreign oil companies to renegotiate oil production contracts , and some british and u.s. oil operations eventually were nationalized .

in the early 1970s , qadhafi and his allies gradually reversed their stance on their initially icy relationship with the soviet union and extended libyan support to revolutionary , anti - western , and anti - israeli movements across africa , europe , asia , and the middle east .

these policies contributed to a rapid souring of u.s. - libyan political relations that persisted for decades and was marked by multiple military confrontations , state - sponsored acts of libyan terrorism against u.s. nationals , covert u.s. support for libyan opposition groups , qadhafi's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction , and u.s. and international sanctions .

qadhafi's policy reversals on wmd and terrorism led to the lifting of international sanctions in 2003 and 2004 , followed by economic liberalization , oil sales , and foreign investment that brought new wealth to some libyans .

after u.s. sanctions were lifted , the u.s. business community gradually reengaged amid continuing u.s. - libyan tension over terrorism concerns that were finally resolved in 2008 .

during this period of international reengagement , political change in libya remained elusive .

government reconciliation with imprisoned islamist militants and the return of some exiled opposition figures were welcomed by some observers as signs that suppression of political opposition had softened .

the qadhafi government released dozens of former members of the al qaeda - affiliated libyan islamist fighting group ( lifg ) and the muslim brotherhood from prison in the years prior to the revolution as part of its political reconciliation program .

the george w. bush administration praised qadhafi's cooperation with u.s. counterterrorism efforts against al qaeda and the lifg .

qadhafi's international rehabilitation coincided with new steps by some pragmatic government officials to maneuver within so - called "red lines" and propose minor reforms .

however , the shifting course of those red lines increasingly entangled would - be reformers in the run - up to the outbreak of unrest in february 2011 .

ultimately , inaction on the part of the government in response to calls for guarantees of basic political rights and for the drafting of a constitution suggested a lack of consensus , if not outright opposition to meaningful change among hardliners .

this inaction set the political stage for the revolution that overturned qadhafi's four decades of rule and led to his grisly demise in october 2011 .

political change in neighboring tunisia and egypt helped bring long - simmering libyan reform debates to the boiling point in january and early february 2011 .

the 2011 revolution was triggered in mid - february by a chain of events in benghazi and other eastern cities that quickly spiraled out of qadhafi's control .

the government's loss of control in these cities became apparent , and broader unrest emerged in other regions .

a number of military officers , their units , and civilian officials abandoned qadhafi .

qadhafi and his supporters denounced their opponents as drug - fueled traitors , foreign agents , and al qaeda supporters .

until august 2011 , qadhafi and his forces maintained control over the capital , tripoli , and other western cities .

the cumulative effects of attrition by nato airstrikes against military targets and a coordinated offensive by rebels in tripoli and from across western libya then turned the tide , sending qadhafi and his supporters into retreat and exile .

september and early october 2011 were marked by sporadic and often intense fighting in and around qadhafi's birthplace , sirte , and the town of bani walid and neighboring military districts .

nato air operations continued as rebel fighters engaged in battles of attrition with qadhafi supporters .

qadhafi's death at the hands of rebel fighters in sirte on october 20 , 2011 , brought the revolt to an abrupt close , with some observers expressing concern that a dark chapter in libyan history ended violently , leaving an uncertain path ahead .

the self - appointed interim transitional national council ( tnc ) and its cabinet took initial steps toward improving security and reforming national institutions .

voters elected an interim general national congress ( gnc ) in july 2012 .

the gnc assumed power on august 8 , 2012 , but failed to demobilize militia groups , reconstitute national bureaucracies , or launch ambitious economic or political reforms .

the unravelling of libya's post - qadhafi transition intensified in late 2013 , as a campaign of unsolved assassinations targeting security officers swept the country's second - largest city , benghazi ; a militia force briefly kidnapped then - prime minister ali zeidan ; militias killed protesting civilians in tripoli and benghazi ; and rival coalitions within the general national congress ( elected july 2012 ) clashed over the future of zeidan's government and the gnc's mandate and term of office .

zeidan survived numerous attempted no confidence votes during his tenure ( november 2012 to march 2014 ) , which was marked by a series of crises stemming from militia demands for the political isolation of qadhafi - era officials , militias' seizure of oil infrastructure , and the strengthening of armed islamists in the east and south .

long - expected elections for a constitutional drafting assembly were delayed until february 2014 , and were ultimately marred by relatively low turnout and violence that prevented voters in some areas from selecting delegates .

in march 2014 , a coalition of islamist and independent forces in the gnc garnered enough votes to oust zeidan amid a growing boycott by other gnc members that made it difficult for the body to operate with a politically viable quorum .

under increasing pressure to leave office , gnc members voted to replace the gnc with a new 200-member house of representatives ( hor ) , to which legislative authority would be transferred .

public and intra - general national congress tensions were driven in part by differences of opinion over the future roles and responsibilities of armed militias , the relative influence of powerful local communities over national affairs , and the terms governing the political exclusion of individuals who had formerly served in official positions during the qadhafi era .

disagreements between islamist politicians and relatively secular figures also contributed to the gradual collapse of consensus over the transition's direction .

these groups differed over some domestic legal and social developments as well as libya's security relationships with foreign governments .

gradually , an unspoken code under which libyans sought to refrain from shedding other libyans' blood in the wake of qadhafi's ouster deteriorated under pressure from a series of violent confrontations between civilians and militias , clashes between rival ethnic groups , and the blatant targeting of security officers by an unidentified , but ruthless network in benghazi .

that code was rooted in shared respect for the sacrifices of anti - qadhafi revolutionaries and in shared fears that the 2011 predictions of muammar al qadhafi and his supporters would come true: that qadhafi's downfall would be followed by uncontainable civil strife and chaos .

in may 2014 , forces loyal to qadhafi - era retired general khalifah haftar launched an armed campaign unauthorized by interim authorities dubbed "operation dignity" to evict islamist militia groups from eastern libya .

haftar capitalized on widely shared presumptions that certain armed islamist groups were responsible for the assassination of security officers and were cooperating with foreign jihadists , including al qaeda , its regional affiliates , and syria - based armed groups .

more controversially , haftar broadened his rhetoric and objectives to include pledges to cleanse libya of islamists , including supporters of the muslim brotherhood .

in the months that followed , libya was drawn deeper into a region - wide struggle between pro - and anti - islamist forces , with the governments of egypt and the united arab emirates offering haftar support .

haftar's actions and those of his opponents have helped to push many of the country's latent tensions to the surface and contributed to libya's polarization on ideological and community lines .

this polarization was visible during a summer 2014 political struggle between supporters of prime minister abdullah al thinni and the leading coalition of islamists and independents within the gnc , which sought to replace al thinni prior to the june 2014 elections for the new hor .

haftar's armed extremist military opponents and his relatively more moderate political adversaries responded vigorously to his challenges .

through late 2014 , the operation dignity military campaign had suffered several setbacks on the battlefield at the hands of the u.s. designated foreign terrorist organization ansar al sharia ( aas ) and that group's allies in an emergent coalition known as the benghazi revolutionaries' shura council .

haftar's forces counterattacked , attempting to force their way back into benghazi but failing to overcome determined resistance until making progress in early 2016 .

large areas of the city have been damaged in the fighting and unsmil has reported mass displacement among the population of the city .

residents who have remained have reported shortages of supplies and critical service interruptions .

in western libya , fighting also erupted in mid - 2014 along political , ideological , and community lines with two coalitions of forces battling for control of tripoli's international airport , government facilities , other strategic infrastructure , and areas around the capital .

tensions between locally organized militia groups in the west predated the launch of haftar's operations in the east .

over time , however , fighting and rhetoric in the two theaters became more interrelated and overlaid local rivalries , with some western - based forces endorsing and offering material support to haftar's campaign and the hor and others mobilizing to isolate haftar's erstwhile allies and / or the hor .

specifically , some armed groups from the city of misrata and smaller islamist militias formed a coalition known as fajr libya ( libya dawn ) and launched a multipronged offensive in july 2014 to take control of tripoli's main international airport .

participants have included libya's central shield force , members of the tripoli - based libya revolutionaries operations room ( lror ) , the knights of janzour brigade , militias from zawiya , and several misrata - based militias , including the mars a and hatin brigades .

the international airport had long been held by a rival coalition of militias largely from zintan — the sawa'iq and qaaqaa brigades , and the martyr mohammed madani brigade — who opposed the gnc - leading islamist - independent coalition during its final months in office .

libya dawn operations after the fall of the airport included clashes with militias in tripoli's suq al jumah neighborhood and militias affiliated with the warshafanah tribe south and west of the city .

control over lucrative national infrastructure remained a subtext of fighting in the region , which became less intense during 2015 as localized cease - fire agreements were reached .

the united nations - facilitated dialogue process that led to the 2015 government of national accord agreement built in part on improvements in security conditions and trust that accompanied de - escalation in fighting between members of the libya dawn and operation dignity coalitions .

appendix b. u.s. assistance to libya fy2010-fy2014 from 2011 through 2014 , u.s. engagement in libya shifted from immediate conflict - related humanitarian assistance to focus on transition assistance and security sector support .

more than $25 million in usaid - administered programs funded through the office of transition initiatives , regional accounts , and reprogrammed funds were identified between 2011 and 2014 to support the activities of libyan civil society groups and provide technical assistance to libya's nascent electoral administration bodies .

the security - related withdrawal of some u.s. personnel from libya in the wake of the 2012 benghazi attacks temporarily affected the implementation and oversight of u.s. - funded transition assistance programs .

u.s. security assistance programs also were disrupted , but some assistance programs were reinstated by late 2013 .

appendix c. investigations into 2012 attacks on u.s. facilities and personnel in benghazi appendix d. select political actors and armed group .

