david ricardo postulated the rationale for free trade some 200 years agowhen he argued that countries could improve their national welfare if they exploitedtheir comparative advantage by exporting those goods at which they were relativelymore efficient at producing and importing the rest .

later arguments for trade pointedto the benefits arising from intra - industry trade ( and investment ) in which specializedproduction along with scale economies could lead to even more efficient exchangeand innovation - driven productivity increases .

these foundational ideas , whichrecognize the value of both imports and exports , remain valid today for explainingwhy countries generally wish to pursue freer trade and why trade liberalization hasbeen at the center of the economic reform debate in much of latin america .

in practice , however , few countries have opted unilaterally to throw opentheir borders to unfettered free trade , and the call to maintain trade barriers iscommon even if it is understood that they come with a cost to society as a whole .

there are many reasons for this .

perhaps most transparent is resistence by firms andworkers who stand to bear most of the adjustment costs of freer trade , even ifnational welfare is ultimately enhanced through lower priced goods and services , agreater selection of choices from imports , and overall efficiency gains that can leadto higher national income .

less obvious is that countries adopt diverse trade policiesbased on historically , socially , and politically determined "trade preferences" thatcannot be explained solely by a calculus of economic costs and benefits .

the "trade preference" framework helps explain brazil's trade strategy .

itpegs brazil as a "regional leader" based on its leadership in pressing for southamerican economic integration , its conditional support of multilateral negotiations,and its reticence to consummate separate trade deals with developed countries .

 ( 3 ) brazil's tradepreferences in order of priority are: 1 ) expand and strengthen mercosul , where brazilis the undisputed industrial hub and political leader ; 2 ) advocate developing countryinterests in the doha round , especially on agricultural issues , and ; 3 ) resist what itviews as a welfare reducing , u.s. - designed ftaa , and to a lesser extent , also apreferential trade arrangement with the european union unless it serves as a counterinfluence to the ftaa .

 ( 4 ) brazil and the united states approach trade liberalization from differentperspectives .

u.s. trade strategy has been characterized as "competitiveliberalization," ( 5 ) where simultaneously negotiating comprehensivemultilateral , regional , and bilateral pacts allows gains to be achieved where partiescan agree .

it is competitive in that gains at one level of negotiation ( e.g .

bilateral orregional ) can create new incentives or pressures to make breakthroughs at otherlevels ( e.g .

regional or multilateral ) .

it is comprehensive by its inclusion of issuesthat go beyond market access such as services trade , intellectual property rights,government procurement , and investment .

brazil has a narrower and more cautious tack , restricted largely to marketaccess and dominance in regional trade , where it feels most ready to compete .

theperceived benefits of brazil's strategy include attaining greater bargaining powerthrough the mercosul coalition , slowing the multilateral trade liberalization processto allow more time for economic adjustment , and enhancing its national influence inthe world by protecting domestic economic ( industrial ) capacity .

these "tradepreferences" are not randomly determined , but are deeply embedded in the country'sindustrial , foreign , and macroeconomic policies , discussed below .

brazil has a modern , diversified economy , with services accounting for 53%of gdp , followed by industry and manufacturing at 37% , and agriculture at 9% .

depending on how agribusiness is measured , it contributes to some 30% of gdp .

brazil is the number one producer of raw sugar , oranges , and coffee in the world , andthe second largest producer of soybean , beef , poultry , and corn .

 ( 18 ) it is alsoa major producer of steel , aircraft , automobiles , and auto parts .

by comparativestandards , however , brazil is actually a small trader , with total trade accounting foronly 26% of gdp in 2004 , up from 14% a decade earlier , but still a relatively smallamount compared to the rest of latin america .

brazil represents only 0.9% of worldtrade , a number that has not grown , suggesting that brazil's trade liberalization effortshave not resulted in any change in its trade openness relative to the rest of the world .

brazil's global trade is diversified ( see figure 3 ) , with 25% of exports goingto the european union , 21% to the united states , 20% to latin america , and 15%to asia .

brazil's imports mostly from the european union ( 25% ) , asia ( 20% ) , theunited states ( 18% ) , and latin america ( 16% ) .

brazil's top three trading partnersare the united states , argentina , and germany .

together they account for overone - third of brazil's world trade and each , interestingly , is the dominant tradingpartner of a different region or trade group ( nafta , mercosul , and the europeanunion ) .

figure 3 .

brazil's direction of trade , 2004 some 30% of brazil's merchandise exports are primary products , 14% semi - manufactured goods , and 56% manufactured goods ( see appendix 1 ) .

importantly , natural resource - based goods dominate in all categories .

for example,together all steel and aluminum based products , fabricated to varying levels ofcompletion , represent 10% of total exports .

agricultural products , including rawsugar and other products , as well as , manufactured goods like orange juice andrefined sugar , and semi - manufactured sugar and soybean products , account for atleast 30-40% of exports .

soybean and soybean products alone amount to 10% ofexports , more than automobile and related parts ( 8% ) and aircraft ( 3% ) .

 ( 19 ) thesenumbers provide some insight into why brazil places such a strong emphasis onfurther opening developed country markets to its agricultural products .

brazilian imports fall into five categories: capital goods ( 17.6% ) ; consumergoods ( 10.8% ) ; durable consumer goods ( 4.9% ) , fuels ( 16.4% ) ; and intermediategoods ( 50.3% ) .

brazil imports capital and intermediate goods in support of its ownindustrial and agricultural growth , development , and export .

these goods range fromaircraft engines to chemicals and pharmaceuticals that are used in processing othergoods .

raw materials for farming , foodstuffs , and nondurable consumer goods roundout the major imports .

brazil's trade priorities cannot be derived entirely from a calculation of thetrade - weighted importance of trade partners .

the united states is brazil's largestsingle - country trading partner , yet brazil has resisted increasing trade liberalizationwith the large u.s. market via the ftaa because the u.s. model of liberalization isviewed as insufficiently balanced to meet brazilian needs .

to appreciate brazil'sapproach to the united states and the world with respect to trade negotiations , it iscritical to see how its "trade preferences," discussed above , take form in actualnegotiations .

mercosul is most important to the economic and political life of braziland has taken on perhaps even greater priority under the lula administration .

it isdiscussed first followed by brazil's approach to the ftaa and wto , which willallow for a better understanding of u.s. - brazil trade relations , as a whole .

brazil and the united states are two independent political and economicleaders in the western hemisphere , and is reflected in their trade relationship .

first,unlike much of latin america , brazil does not have a preferential trade arrangementwith the united states such as nafta , the cbi , or the andean trade preferenceact , although it is protective of its u.s. preferences provided under the generalizedsystem of preferences ( gsp ) .

second , although there is consistent effort to maintainconstructive engagement between the two countries at all levels of negotiation , muchattention turns to areas of disagreement .

indeed , progress on the ftaa has crept toa halt , bilateral disputes have left some interests dissatisfied , including thoserepresented in the u.s. congress , and key issues in the multilateral realm remainlargely unresolved .

a look at u.s. - brazil trade and the issues that confront the twocountries help explain this situation .

brazil trades relatively little for an economy of its size and diversity andwould benefit from trading more .

it has embraced export promotion , whichgenerates foreign exchange and can contribute to growth in economic output , but hasshied away from deeper commitments to lowering barriers to imports , which are keyto gains in productivity , per capita income , and development .

this strategy isconsistent with brazil's short - term financing needs and its trade preferences , whichare driven by a combination of macroeconomic , industrial , and foreign policypriorities .

for the united states , this presents a delicate policy conundrum becauseeconomic reciprocity may not be the only key to successful trade negotiations withbrazil .

for example , even if significant progress could be made on agriculturalissues in the doha round , and brazilian trade complaints could be ameliorated inbilateral working groups with the united states , brazil may still choose not toliberalize areas where either it cannot easily fulfill the provisions of an fta ( enforcing protection of ipr ) , or where the united states has a distinct comparativeadvantage or particular interest ( industrial goods , services , investment ) .

this hasbeen made clear in statements by brazilian officials and by formal trade negotiationpositions .

to illustrate , in speaking on the ftaa , a former brazilian ambassador to theunited states and noted trade expert wrote: the brazilian position is not merely atactical reaction to the u.s. negotiating strategy regarding the so - called systemicissues .

in fact , brazil has a clear interest in preventing hemispheric disciplines ontopics such as investment , intellectual property , government procurement , andservices from curtailing its ability to formulate and implement public policies that arein its highest national interest .

 ( 42 ) this attitude is reinforced by evidence questioning the economic logic of brazil'santi - ftaa position based on the u.s. preference for addressing subsidies in thewto .

for example , studies point out that ending agricultural subsidies wouldincrease ftaa agricultural trade little compared to a far bigger gain for brazil fromeliminating tariffs .

 ( 43 ) brazil seems to realize this on some level or itwould not continue to offer the "4+1" market access talks as an alternative to theftaa .

as such , u.s. trade negotiators may be frustrated because there is perhapslittle they can do to nudge brazil off its course of continuing to advance mercosul,where the marginal gains from expansion are likely small , and pursuing selectivepriorities in the wto , while leaving the ftaa to flounder indefinitely .

brazil mayactually have more to lose , however , because as much as both countries couldimprove their economic well - being from greater trade liberalization , as a developingcountry , brazil seems to have the most to gain from not only reducing foreignbarriers to its exports , but unilaterally opening its economy further , particularly aspart of completing its ongoing economic reform agenda .

appendix 1 .

brazil: top 15 exports andimports ( calendar year 2004 , $ millions ) data source : boletim do banco do brasil , september , 2005 .

appendix 2 .

u.s. - brazil merchandise trade ( $ millions ) data source : u.s. department of commerce .

appendix 3 .

u.s. - brazil servicestrade ( $ millions ) data source : u.s. department of commerce .

bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) .

* trade turnover = total trade or exports plus imports .

appendix 4 .

u.s. - brazil foreign directinvestment ( in millions of u.s. dollars , historical costbasis ) source : u.s. department of commerce .

bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) .

note: historical cost data measures the stock of fdi reflecting prices at the time ofthe investment .

