the united states has provided support to drug crop eradication programs in the andes sincethe 1980s and for alternative development ( ad ) since at least the 1970s .

since 2000 , the centerpieceof the u.s. counternarcotics policy has been the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) , withcolombia the major recipient .

the aci program is the centerpiece of u.s. support for plancolombia , a six - year plan developed by colombian president pastrana in 1999 .

aci supports anumber of missions , including interdiction of drug trafficking , illicit crop eradication , alternativedevelopment , and rule of law and democracy promotion in the andes .

the three main producers of cocaine - - colombia , bolivia and peru - - collectively producenearly the entire global supply .

in addition , colombia has become a producer of high quality heroin,most of it destined for the united states .

colombia became the main producer of coca and cocainein the andean region in 1997 , according to the u.n. office on drugs and crime's ( unodc ) worlddrug report 2005 .

peru was the leading producer of coca and coca paste until that time , which itsgrowers shipped to colombia for processing into cocaine .

bolivia is the third largest producer ofcoca .

the united states has made a significant commitment of funds and material support to helpthe andean region fight drug trafficking since 2000 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

congress passed legislationproviding $1.3 billion in assistance for fy2000 ( p.l .

106-246 ) for colombia and its neighbors .

from fy2000 through fy2005 , the united states has provided a total of about $4.3 billion from theandean counterdrug initiative account .

for fy2006 , the administration requested , and congressapproved , $734.5 million in aci funding ( p.l .

109-102 ) .

the department of defense has spentapproximately $1.2 billion from fy2000 through fy2005 from its counternarcotics account,managed by the u.s. army southern command .

the state department's international narcoticscontrol and law enforcement ( inl ) bureau is responsible for managing the aci account .

thecountries considered part of the aci include bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , andvenezuela , ( 1 ) with mostfunding allocated for colombia , peru and bolivia .

additional funding for the andean region is provided through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training ( imet ) program , bothmanaged by the state department .

fmf provides grants to foreign nations to purchase u.s. defenseequipment , services , and training .

fmf assistance to colombia , peru , and bolivia has the objectiveof establishing and strengthening national authority in remote areas that are prone to drug trafficking,and related activities of illegally armed groups .

some fmf funding has been used for infrastructureprotection of oil pipelines in colombia .

the imet program provides training for foreign militaries .

its objectives are to improve defense capabilities , develop professional and personal relationshipsbetween u.s. and foreign militaries , and influence these forces in support of democratic governance .

training focuses on the manner in which military organizations function under civilian control,civil - military relations , military justice systems , military doctrine , strategic planning , and operationalprocedures .

table 1 .

u.s. drug - related foreign assistance to the andeanregion , fy2000-fy2006 ( in millions u.s. $ ) source: congressional budget justifications , foreign operations fy2002-fy2006 ; u.s.department of state's washington file , "u.s. support for plan colombia , fy2000 emergencysupplemental appropriations," july 5 , 2000 .

note: aci figures reflect funding for all nations considered a part of the andean counterdruginitiative .

fmf and imet figures are for bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru .

fy2006 figuresfor fmf and imet are amounts proposed by the administration in its budget request .

aci funds are divided between programs that support eradication and interdiction efforts,as well as those focused on alternative development and democratic institution building .

on theinterdiction side , programs train and support national police and military forces , providecommunications and intelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host countryaerial eradication aircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities .

on thealternative development side , funds support development programs in drug crop growing areas,including infrastructure , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops .

it also includesassistance for internally displaced persons , promotion of the rule of law , and expansion of judicialcapabilities .

table 2 .

aci funding eradication versus alternativedevelopment , fy2000-fy2006 ( in millions u.s. $ ) note: eradication figures include interdiction programs ; ad figures include institution buildingprograms .

the fy2006 figures are the amounts provided in the fy2006 foreign operationsappropriations act , p.l .

109-102 .

other figures are drawn from foreign operations annualcongressional budget justifications , fy2002 through fy2006 .

congress has expressed a number of concerns with regard to eradication , including thefollowing: the health and environmental effects of aerial spraying ; the reliability of drug cropestimates ; and the effectiveness and sustainability of eradication .

with regard to alternativedevelopment , congress has expressed interest in its effectiveness ; its relationship with eradication ; and the long - term sustainability of programs .

both eradication and alternative development face anumber of challenges , some of which are general to the region , and others that are specific to thecountry in which they are conducted .

