the u.s. effort to develop and deploy ballistic missile defenses ( bmd ) based on the concept of hit - to - kill or kinetic energy kill began three decades ago .

this effort gained momentum as the primary focus of the u.s. bmd program in the mid - 1980s with the announcement of president reagan's strategic defense initiative ( sdi ) .

since that time , the united states has pursued numerous major kinetic energy bmd programs ; these have produced hundreds of various flight test results .

these test results and some very limited operational experience in wartime provide sufficient data for at least some conclusions regarding the decades - long u.s. investment in hit - to - kill as a concept for bmd .

this overview report examines the u.s. investment in that concept , what that investment has produced , and raises various questions that might be considered .

the development of bmd has shown important technological differences between efforts designed to attack and destroy short or medium - range ballistic missiles and those designed for long - range or intercontinental ballistic missiles .

therefore , this report will review and distinguish between the program results of theater missile defense ( tmd ) and national missile defense ( nmd ) .

crs received historical flight test data from the missile defense agency ( mda ) in june 2005 .

it is important to note that for each of these flight tests there were various primary and multiple secondary objectives .

such flight tests are inherently complex and relatively costly .

therefore , multiple test objectives are designed to maximize the potential benefit derived from each flight test .

the determination as to whether each of these objectives was reached was made by each relevant agency or military branch .

all of the references to flight test results in this report are derived from the flight tests results memorandum provided by the mda unless otherwise referenced .

crs currently is awaiting an update of the historical flight test data from mda , which will be reviewed and included in an updated version of this report later in 2007 .

the united states has pursued four major kinetic energy interceptor long - range bmd or nmd programs since the early 1980s: homing overlay experiment ( hoe ) , exoatmospheric reentry interceptor subsystem ( eris ) , national missile defense ( nmd ) , and ground - based midcourse defense ( gmd ) .

each of these is briefly discussed below .

the army developed hoe in the late 1970s and early 1980s to test the viability of the emerging hit - to - kill concept .

it conducted four intercept flight tests in 1983 and 1984 .

three of the tests failed to intercept the intended target , but the fourth was considered a success .

the army did not identify any secondary flight test objectives .

nonetheless , the nascent sdi program then viewed the single reported success as evidence of the promise of non - nuclear bmd interceptor technologies .

the technologies tested in hoe served as the basis for its successor program , eris .

eris went through a lengthy development program before flight testing began in 1991 with the first of four intercept flight tests .

although the first was considered a successful intercept of the target , the following three intercept attempts through 1992 failed to destroy their intended targets .

even so , officials concluded that half of the primary and secondary test flight objectives were accomplished , and that the primary bmd concept being pursued held significant promise .

the nmd program followed eris with a series of eight flight tests from 1997 to 2001 .

the first three were planned "fly - by" tests .

there were no intercept attempt objectives .

the first one failed to launch ; however , the other two were deemed successful in their primary objectives .

no secondary objectives were identified .

of the five planned intercept attempts , three reportedly intercepted their intended targets ; one ended in failure because the interceptor kill vehicle did not deploy and the other failed because the on - board sensors designed to track and intercept the target failed .

officials concluded that 17 of the 20 primary objectives were met or partially met and all the secondary objectives by the planned intercept tests were met .

the current gmd program ( nmd's successor ) began flight testing in 2002 .

since that time six flight tests have taken place .

five of these flight tests were planned intercept attempts , with three resulting in failure to intercept .

officials concluded that about 80% of the program's 40 or so primary intercept flight test objectives were met ; all the secondary objectives were met fully or partially .

in 2004 , the gmd undertook a new configuration with a different booster and interceptor .

it flew a successful integration flight test ( non - intercept test ) in early 2004 with all primary and secondary objectives met .

this system was deployed in alaska and california in 2004 and declared operational after eight missiles were placed in silos .

subsequently , two planned intercept flight tests in december 2004 and february 2005 failed to launch .

the currently deployed system thus remains to be tested successfully against targets it might be expected to intercept .

in september 2006 , a successful flight test exercise of the gmd system too place .

although not a primary objective of the data collection test , an intercept of the target warhead was achieved .

flight tests whose primary objectives are intercepts were scheduled for later in 2006 , but have been delayed into 2007 .

each of the four nmd programs were different , but they built on the limited successes of their predecessors .

of the eighteen or so attempted intercepts since the early 1980s , seven of them were considered successful , or roughly a 39% intercept rate in tests .

officials cited several reasons , including program hardware and software , as well as interceptor silo and target launch failures .

from that , there do not appear to be any recognizable patterns that emerge to account for the mostly unsuccessful history of the effort .

nor is there conclusive evidence of a learning curve , such as increased success over time relative to the first tests of the concept 20 years ago .

program supporters can point to limited evidence that , under controlled conditions , there is reason to support the contention that kinetic energy interceptor technology for use against long - range ballistic missiles holds promise .

critics of the flight test effort to date , whether they support missile defense or not in general , can raise questions about the success rate and the realism of the testing effort , given a generation of u.s. investment in its development .

can kinetic energy interceptor technologies for use against long - range ballistic missiles be developed successfully and deployed as an effective part of the u.s. military posture ? .

the answer appears to be ambiguous at this juncture .

can the now - deployed nmd system protect the united states from long - range ballistic missile attacks ? .

currently , there is insufficient empirical data to support a clear answer .

there have been a number of major kinetic - energy tmd programs since the early 1990s: extended range intercept technology ( erint ) , flexible lightweight agile guided experiment / small radar homing intercept technology ( flage / srhit ) , navy lightweight exoatmospheric projectile ( leap ) , the navy aegis bmd , patriot pac - 3 , and theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) .

each of these are briefly examined below .

the army's flage / srhit program conducted eight flight tests from 1984-1987 to prove the feasibility of lower atmosphere intercepts .

five of these flight tests were planned intercept attempts .

from the data provided by mda all the primary and secondary test objectives in the series were achieved .

the targets included stationary targets in the atmosphere and an air - launched target .

only one target , however , was a short - range missile .

the degree to which any conclusions might be drawn regarding very short - range hit - to - kill in this effort is therefore limited .

building on the srhit effort , the army's erint flight test program ( 1992-1994 ) conducted five flight tests .

three of these were planned intercepts ; two of these three flight tests successfully intercepted their targets ( the failure cited was hardware related ) .

despite the missed intercept , the army concluded that all of its primary test objectives for the three tests were met fully or partially , and that all but one of the 26 secondary objectives in the three tests were met .

as far as the two non - intercept flight tests were concerned , the army determined that all of its primary and secondary flight test objectives were met .

the navy developed its own indigenous leap program , which flight tested from 1992-1995 .

three non - intercept flight tests achieved all primary and secondary objectives .

of the five planned intercept tests , only the second was considered a successful intercept , however .

failures were due to various hardware , software , and launch problems .

even so , the navy determined that it achieved about 82% of its primary objectives ( 18 of 22 ) and all of its secondary objectives in these tests .

building on some of its previous efforts in srhit and erint , the army's thaad program nevertheless experienced significant challenges from 1995 to 1999 .

after three relatively successful non - intercept flight tests ( almost all of the primary and secondary test objectives were partially or fully met ) , thaad failed to intercept in seven of its nine planned attempts .

however , the thaad intercept flight test program met about half of its primary and secondary objectives .

because the last two intercepts were successful ( the last being in 1999 ) , the department of defense and congress agreed to further develop , but revamp , the thaad program .

the current thaad program is a redesign of the former thaad system .

recently , the program conducted its first flight test ( non - intercept ) to examine the launch , boost , and fly - out functions of the thaad missile .

mda officials considered this test successful .

the army's patriot ( phased array tracking to intercept of target ) program has a history dating to the 1960s as an air - defense weapon .

only in the mid - to - late 1980s at the insistence of congress was the program given a specific anti - missile role .

using a focused explosive charge ( non - nuclear and not hit - to - kill technology ) , patriot pac - 2's ( patriot antitactical capability ) 1991 desert storm performance remains controversial .

after the war , patriot improvements for missile defense were widely supported .

testing of the patriot pac - 3 with a kinetic energy interceptor began in 1997 .

after the initial two successful non - intercept flight tests ( most of the objectives were met ) , the patriot pac - 3 attempted 27 intercept tests , of which 21 ( about 78% ) were considered successful intercepts .

additionally , some 92% of the primary intercept test objectives were met , as well as almost all of the known secondary objectives .

in terms of actual wartime use , the patriot pac - 3 was used in operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) in 2003 , but its role was very limited ( four missiles fired in two successful engagements ) and thus , while suggestive of significant promise , its operational effectiveness remains uncertain based on limited empirical data .

building on its previous efforts as well , the navy ( as of mid - 2005 ) had conducted six ( of seven ) successful intercept tests of its aegis bmd ( or navy sea - based ) program using the standard missile - 3 ( sm - 3 ) block 1 missile ( 2002-2005 ) .

the most recent test included in the data sheets provided to crs was against a warhead target that separated from the booster rocket itself , in contrast to earlier intercept tests against scud - type ballistic missiles .

the most recent flight test intercept attempt ( in december 2006 ) was not completed due to technical problems aboard the aegis cruiser involved prior to the launch of the two interceptor missiles themselves .

primarily because of the patriot pac - 3 flight test and operational record and the more recent navy bmd program , the concept of hit - to - kill for tmd appears promising .

older tmd efforts were not as suggestive , and the foundation for the current thaad program is based mostly on prior test failures .

nonetheless , because there is no flight test data yet on the current thaad program , nothing conclusive can be said about its potential future for success .

and , although the patriot pac - 3 shows promise , some might note that the patriot system itself has been evolving for about 40 years now .

additionally , much of the navy infrastructure and technology supporting the aegis sm - 3 is decades old and is comparable in evolution to the patriot air and missile defense system .

a central question might be: at this stage how well is the united states doing in developing effective ballistic missile defenses based on this kinetic energy kill concept ? .

since the announcement of the sdi program in the mid - 1980s the united states has spent about $100 billion on missile defense with a primary focus on the kinetic energy or hit - to - kill concept .

u.s. programs began looking at that concept a decade earlier into the mid - 1970s .

supporters of hit - to - kill could argue that what the united states is striving to do has indeed proven to be challenging , but that progress is being made .

furthermore , success measured in terms of operationally effective deployed bmd systems based on this concept , loom on the horizon .

they could also argue that threats posed from the proliferation of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) must be addressed by developing effective bmd systems .

supporters and skeptics could argue the need for an independent , comprehensive evaluation of the test record to determine whether any systemic or conceptual challenges are impeding the u.s. effort .

although some defense officials have provided testimony and private and government agencies have looked in detail at a few of these tests , some might argue that a comprehensive and independent review of the entire record to date has not been undertaken and is warranted .

other observers might argue that alternatives should be pursued as a hedge against the possible failure of this concept for either nmd or tmd .

such alternatives could be military in nature , such as reducing the emphasis on bmd in favor of increased emphasis on counter - force ( i.e. , attacking and destroying enemy missile systems before their missile could be launched ) .

alternatives also could focus on other ways to mitigate ballistic missile proliferation ( eg , arms control ) .

some alternatives , such as a return to nuclear bmd concepts or emphasis toward more exotic technologies ( eg , lasers or weapons in space ) might face opposition on political or technical grounds .

still other observers could argue that in general the united states needs to make a more concerted effort to increase developmental testing across the board , before these systems are ready for more realistic testing regimes .

they could argue that almost all the testing to date is of a developmental nature and that an operational testing regimen has not been developed , but remains essential .

only then , they could argue , could assessments to confirm the validity of the hit - to - kill concept for bmd be made with confidence .

