each year , the federal government spends billions of dollars implementing , operating , and modernizing agency financial management systems .

financial systems are vital to the effective management and oversight of public funds , because the information they provide is used by government officials to make decisions about agency programs and operations .

for example , federal managers use financial data to monitor contract costs , measure program performance , and identify improper payments .

when agency financial systems provide inaccurate or incomplete data , the government might be less able to operate at maximum efficiency , and the risk of waste , fraud , and abuse arguably increases .

for example , gao has reported that financial management deficiencies at the department of defense ( dod ) have resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in over - and underpayments to contractors and contributed to dod's high rate of travel card delinquency .

significant financial management weaknesses can be found throughout the government , and according to gao most agency financial systems are unable to routinely produce reliable , useful , and timely information .

in order to improve the quality of financial data available to government officials , congress has funded a number of financial management improvement initiatives .

such initiatives , by their nature , are often complex and entail a degree of risk .

the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , for example , spent $180 million on two failed efforts to modernize its financial systems , and nasa's third such attempt , currently underway , will cost an additional $983 million .

similarly , problems with inaccurate data led the department of veterans affairs to halt deployment of its new financial system after an investment of $250 million .

one recent effort to improve agency financial systems , the financial management line of business ( fmlob ) initiative , was launched by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in 2004 .

based on the recommendations of an interagency task force , the fmlob proposed that the government move to a "shared services" model of financial management , whereby agencies would transfer their core financial system functions — such as accounting , payments , and reporting — to government - wide shared service providers ( ssps ) .

outsourcing administrative and financial operations to third - party service providers is a common practice in the private sector , and it has already been employed by the federal government in some instances .

the national finance center , for example , a component of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , currently provides payroll and personnel services for 120 federal organizations across the three branches of government .

according to omb , the use of ssps will enhance the timeliness and accuracy of financial information while reducing the costs associated with operating and modernizing agency financial systems .

several departments and agencies have already begun making plans to migrate core functions to ssps , including the department of labor , the department of commerce , usda , and the environmental protection agency .

omb has estimated that remaining agencies will follow suit within the next seven or eight years .

while the objective of moving to a shared services environment is widely supported in principle , a range of public and private sector observers has expressed concern that the initiative is moving too fast .

critics say that the capabilities of some ssps have not been adequately demonstrated , that internal control problems should be addressed prior to migrating core financial systems , and agencies need time to prepare their personnel and build internal support for the initiative .

implementation should be delayed , critics argue , until these and other risk factors have been mitigated .

the fmlob has implications for congress , in terms of both its appropriations and oversight responsibilities .

large - scale financial modernization efforts have the potential to generate more timely and accurate financial data , which are needed for effective oversight of agency programs and operations .

as previously noted , however , modernization initiatives require substantial funding and often fail to produce the intended results .

the house subcommittee on government management , finance , and accountability , has held several hearings on the initiative , although no bills have been introduced .

this report provides background information on the fmlob's origins and goals , and presents the arguments of supporters and critics of the initiative .

finally , it discusses the project's implementation status .

in the spring of 2004 , omb launched a series of interagency task forces to determine if services commonly found in numerous agencies , called lines of business , might be provided in a more efficient manner .

the financial management task force determined that "significant savings" over a 10-year period were possible if the government consolidated agency financial systems and standardized the related business processes .

in order to realize these savings , the task force recommended that the government establish centralized shared service providers ( ssps ) to which agencies would transfer their core financial management functions , rather than invest in modernizing existing agency systems .

initial support for the fmlob , while widespread , was qualified by concerns over the pace of implementation .

by the time omb released the migration planning guidance in september 2006 , the department of labor had awarded a contract to a private firm for hosting components of its financial system , the department of commerce had announced plans to begin consolidating its financial management platforms , the office of personnel management had selected the bureau of public debt as its ssp , and the environmental protection agency had begun evaluating proposals for software , integration , and hosting services .

some observers said that the initiative , given its scope and complexity , was moving too quickly , and that agency migration efforts should have been delayed in order to reduce the risk of costly mistakes .

a survey of chief financial officers ( cfos ) and other federal financial managers , for example , found "almost no" opposition to using ssps in principle , so long as the quality of service and the cost of migration met expectations .

the survey also revealed that one of the "greatest fears" of agency officials was that they would invest millions of dollars into migrating to ssps , only to discover that their service provider was not capable of delivering the promised services .

one reason for this concern was that some of the designated federal ssps were components of departments that were themselves not ffmia compliant .

some managers also suggested that small agencies — those with a budget of less than $100 million — might realize greater gains in efficiency from migrating to ssps than larger agencies .

overall respondents said that they wanted more evidence of the capabilities of potential ssps , more guidance on agency recourse should an ssp fail to meet performance expectations , and more time to consider their options before migrating .

similarly , a report by the national academy of public administration ( napa ) endorsed the objectives of the fmlob while expressing concerns about its implementation .

in the report , which was prepared at the request of the house subcommittee on government management , finance , and accountability , napa stated that the move to a shared services environment "makes a great deal of sense," citing its potential to reduce operating costs and free agency cfos and their staff to focus on core program activities .

many of the cfos interviewed for the report were , however , concerned about moving core accounting and reporting functions outside their purview , an opinion that napa shared .

the report also said that economies of scale might not always result from consolidation , particularly if some agencies contract with multiple ssps for different elements of their financial management system .

napa recommended delaying further migrations to allow additional review , discussion , and analysis of these issues .

private sector observers also offered qualified support for the initiative .

at fmlob hearings held in march 2006 , stan soloway , the president of the professional services council ( psc ) , called the strategic underpinnings of the initiative "sound and rational ... the right thing to do. .

he cautioned , however , that the benefits of shared services might not be realized if agency leadership and staff are not "involved and fully invested" in the initiative .

additionally , he questioned whether sufficient attention had been paid to the need for the fmlob to connect with other lines of business , particularly the human resources line of business ( hrlob ) , where travel systems will need to interface with financial systems .

if poor planning caused the government to change its requirements during implementation , soloway said , then the costs of the initiative might rise .

pricewaterhousecooper partner joe kull also testified at the march 2006 hearings .

kull , a former omb deputy controller , said agencies should not be required to meet an "arbitrary timeframe" for implementation , asserting that government projects like fmlob have often failed because agencies had not invested sufficient resources in educating , training , and communicating with employees about the initiative .

kull also said that it was "critical" for agencies to improve their internal controls prior to migration — even though those improvements might take several years — because core systems are only as good as the data flowing into them .

agency financial systems would thus continue to be limited by weak internal controls even after migration , and presumably those problems would be more difficult to correct when core functions were hosted by a third party .

one union , the american federation of government employees ( afge ) , strongly criticized the initiative , largely over omb's policy on the application of circular a - 76 to migration competitions .

as previously discussed , agencies are only required to follow the provisions of a - 76 when migrating more than 10 full - time positions to an ssp , and a - 76 is optional when 10 or fewer full - time employees are involved .

in hearings on the fmlob held in june 2006 , the afge argued that by making a - 76 optional in some cases , agencies were , in effect , authorized to transfer federal jobs to private contractors without giving agency employees the opportunity to compete for them , a practice called "direct conversion. .

an omb official said the afge had misinterpreted the policy , stating that while a - 76 is optional in some instances , a public - private competition is required for every migration , regardless of the number of employees involved .

omb's migration planning guidance , released three months after the hearings , clarifies this point , explicitly stating that direct conversions are not authorized .

in a march 16 , 2010 , memorandum , omb identified several steps that had been completed in implementing the fmlob .

among these , omb noted that it had developed and issued standard business processes for a number of core financial management functions , a competition framework for fmlob migrations , and a financial services assessment guide .

in its fy2007 federal financial management report ( ffmr ) , omb set as a target to migrate a majority of agencies to ssps by fy2011 , but its fy2009 ffmr did not reference any migration goals .

the migration status update provided in the fy2009 ffmr noted that five agencies have selected a commercial ssp — the departments of agriculture , labor , and housing and urban development , the environmental protection agency , and the office of personnel management — but it is not clear what stage of migration those agencies are currently in , or when other agencies might begin migrating .

gao has recommended that omb finalize and publish a migration timeline as soon as possible .

