on january 22 , the senate passed h.r .

4986 , a revised version of h.r .

1585 , the fy2008 national defense authorization act , thus clearing the bill for the president , who had vetoed the original version of the bill on december 28 .

the president vetoed the initial version because of one section which would allow victims of terrorist actions perpetrated by saddam hussein's regime to sue the current iraqi government for damages in u.s. courts .

the president said this provision would allow plaintiffs to tie up in lawsuits billions of dollars worth of iraqi assets , thus hamstringing that country's efforts at economic reconstruction and political reconciliation .

the revised defense bill , which would allow the president to exempt iraq from the provision at issue , would authorize all but $215 million of the $696.4 billion that was the president's amended request for national defense - related funding in fy2008 — the same amount as was authorized the vetoed bill .

the only other differences between h.r .

1585 and h.r .

4986 were provisions added to the later bill that would make retroactive to january 1 , 2008 a 3.5% pay raise for military personnel and the reauthorization of various bonuses , including enlistment and reenlistment bonuses .

according to press reports , white house officials have said the president will sign the revised defense bill , h.r .

4986 .

on november 13 , the president signed into law the conference report on the fy2008 defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3222 , p.l .

110-114 ) , which would provide $460.3 billion in new budget authority for activities of the department of defense .

the house had approved the compromise version of the bill november 8 by a vote of 400-15 and the senate adopted it by voice vote the same day .

in general , the appropriations bill funds only dod's base budget — its activities other than the conduct of ongoing military operations in iraq and afghanistan .

the only exception to that rule is the conference report's inclusion of $11.6 billion to purchase mine - resistant , ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicles , which are designed to better protect their occupants against land - mines than conventional vehicles .

the conference report also includes a continuing resolution that would allow federal agencies to continue operating , through december 14 , 2007 , even if their regular appropriations bills for fy2008 have not been enacted .

because none of the regular fy2008 appropriations bills had been enacted by october 1 , when the new fiscal year began , a continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

52 ) , passed by the house september 26 by a vote of 404-14 and by the senate september 27 by a vote of 94-1 , provided for continued funding the government through november 16 .

funding for dod under that continuing resolution is based on the amount appropriated in the fy2007 dod appropriations act ( p.l .

109-289 ) , which funded both the dod base budget and a so - called bridge fund of $70 billion to pay for war costs in the opening months of the fiscal year .

h.j.res .

52 also provided an additional $5.2 billion to purchase mrap vehicles .

neither the house - passed nor the senate - passed versions of h.r .

3222 addressed the president's request to fund ongoing military operations in iraq and afghanistan in fy2008 , which will be dealt with in a separate bill .

budget amendments in july and october increased the president's initial request for $141.7 billion to cover war - fighting costs in fy2008 to $189.3 billion .

on november 14 , by a vote of 218-203 , the house passed h.r .

4156 , a bill that would provide $50 billion to cover war costs pending congressional action early next year on the balance of the president's request .

the bill also would require dod to begin withdrawing u.s. forces from a combat role in iraq and would set a non - binding goal of removing u.s. forces in that country from all but a few supporting roles by december 2008 , for which reason the president said he would veto the bill .

on november 16 , the senate rejected a motion to end debate on the h.r .

4156 by a vote of 53-45 ( with 60 votes required to invoke cloture ) .

earlier the same day , the senate rejected by a vote of 45-53 a cloture motion relating to a republican - sponsored bill , s. 2340 , that would provide $70 billion for war costs with no limitations on u.s. deployments .

house - senate conferees also have agreed on a conference report to the fy2008 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2642 / s. 1645 ) that includes $21.4 billion for dod military construction and family housing programs .

however , the agreement on that bill was incorporated into the conference report on h.r .

3043 , the fy2008 labor , hhs and education appropriations bill .

the house approved the combined conference report november 6 by a vote of 269-142 , but the senate rejected it november 7 on a point of order .

 ( for full coverage , see crs report rl34038 , military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies: fy2008 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

on february 5 , 2007 , the white house formally released to congress its fy2008 federal budget request , which included $647.2 billion in new budget authority for national defense .

in addition to $483.2 billion for the regular operations of the department of defense ( dod ) , the request includes $141.7 billion for continued military operations abroad , primarily to fund the campaigns in iraq and afghanistan , $17.4 billion for the nuclear weapons and other defense - related programs of the department of energy , and $5.2 billion for defense - related activities of other agencies .

 ( note: the total of $647.2 billion for national defense includes an adjustment of - $275 million for omb scorekeeping .

dod figures for the base budget do not add to the formal request in omb budget documents. ) .

the requested "base" budget of $483.2 billion for dod — excluding the cost of ongoing combat operations — is $46.8 billion higher than the agency's base budget for fy2007 , an increase of 11% in nominal terms and , by dod's reckoning , an increase in real purchasing power of 7.9% , taking into account the cost of inflation .

in requesting an additional $141.7 billion to cover the anticipated cost for all of fy2008 of ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan , the administration has complied with congress's insistence that it be given time to subject that funding to the regular oversight and legislative process .

nevertheless , since the administration has requested that these funds be designated as "emergency" appropriations , they would be over and above restrictive caps on discretionary spending , even though the fy2008 combat operations funding request of $141.7 billion is 29% as large as the regular fy2008 dod request .

on july 31 , the administration increased its request for dod war - fighting costs in fy2008 by $5.3 billion to procure mrap vehicles .

on october 22 , the administration increased its war - costs request by an additional $42.3 billion , bringing the total to $189.3 billion .

congress began action on the annual defense authorization bill with the house armed services committee approving its version of the bill ( h.r .

1585 ) in a session that began may 9 , and with house passage on may 17 .

the senate armed services committee marked up its version , s. 567 , on may 24 and reported the measure as a clean bill ( s. 1547 ) on june 5 .

the following tables provide a quick reference to congressional action on defense budget totals .

additional details will be added as congressional action on the fy2008 defense funding bills proceeds .

table 3 shows the administration's fy2008 national defense budget request by budget sub - function and , for the department of defense , by appropriations title .

the total for fy2007 also represents , in part , requested funding .

it includes $93.4 billion in fy2007 supplemental appropriations that the administration requested in february 2007 .

in may , however , congress actually approved $99.4 billion for the department of defense , $6.0 billion more than the administration had asked for .

table 4 shows the recommendations on defense budget authority and outlays in the house and senate versions of the annual budget resolution , h.con.res .

99 and s.con.res .

21 .

these amounts are not binding on the armed services or appropriations committees .

table 5 shows congressional action on the fy2008 defense authorization bill by title .

technically , this table shows the budget authority implications of the provisions of the bill .

for mandatory programs , the budget authority implication is the amount of budget authority projected to be required under standing law .

the table also follows the common practice of the house and senate armed services committees , which is to show as the "budget authority implication" of the bill , the amounts expected to be available for programs within the national defense budget function not subject to authorization in the annual defense authorization bill .

except for some mandatory programs , the authorization bill does not provide funds but rather authorizes their appropriation .

appropriations bills may provide more than authorized , less than authorized , or the same as authorized , either in total or for specific programs .

appropriations bills may provide no funds for programs authorized and may provide funds for programs not authorized .

in practice , defense appropriations bills often follow the amounts authorized , however .

table 6 shows congressional action on the fy2008 defense and military construction appropriations bills .

the table does not show funding for defense - related activities of agencies other than the defense department , except for about $1.0 billion for the intelligence community .

in particular , it does not include $17.4 billion requested for defense - related nuclear energy programs ( nuclear weapons and warship propulsion ) of the energy department .

table 7 shows house and senate appropriations committee allocations of funds under section 302 ( b ) of the congressional budget act , for defense and military construction / veterans affairs appropriations bills compared to allocations for other , non - defense bills .

the "302 ( b ) " allocations are a key part of the appropriations and budget process .

a point of order holds against any bill that exceeds its 402 ( b ) allocation .

in recent years , appropriations have trimmed allocations for the defense appropriations bill , freeing up more money for non - defense appropriations .

the effect on defense was mitigated by the available of emergency appropriations for defense .

in effect , emergency appropriations for war costs have been used indirectly to finance higher non - defense appropriations .

several aspects of the department's fy2008 budget request and its projected budgets through fy2013 raise questions about the affordability of dod's plan as a whole and about the balance of spending among major elements of the defense budget .

 ( 1 ) dod ' s funding plan for fy2008-fy2013 , excluding the cost of military operations in iraq and afghanistan , projects that the department ' s base budget will increase in real purchasing power , after adjusting for inflation , by 8.0% between fy2007 and fy2008 and by another 3.5% in fy2009 before declining slightly over each of the following four years .

but the tightening fiscal squeeze on the federal government may put strong downward pressure on the defense budget ; and the unbudgeted funds needed for ongoing military operations abroad may compound the problem .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) agree that the current mix of federal programs is fiscally unsustainable for the long term .

the nation's aging population combined with rising health costs are driving an increase in spending for federal entitlement programs which , in turn , will fuel rising deficits compounded by a steadily increasing interest on the national debt .

the upshot is that , if total federal outlays continue to account for about 20% of the gdp and federal revenues remain at about their current level , total federal spending on discretionary programs , in terms of real purchasing power , would have to be sharply reduced to meet the goal of a balanced federal budget by 2012 and then to cover the rising costs of medicare , medicaid and social security resulting partly from the retirement of baby boomers .

to protect dod from this fiscal vise , some have recommended that the defense budget ( excluding the cost of ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan ) be sustained at 4% of gdp — a share of the national wealth that dod last claimed in fy1994 .

but that proposal would have to overcome the thus far intractable political challenges of increasing federal revenues , reducing discretionary non - defense spending , and / or restraining the growth of entitlement costs .

 ( 2 ) although the administration has submitted a budget proposal to cover the cost of ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan in fy2008 that is separate from its " base " budget request for the year , it may be difficult , as a practical matter , for congress to subject the request for cost - of - war appropriations to the same oversight it applies to regular , annual defense spending requests .

if the congressional defense committees mark up the fy2008 defense funding bills on their usual schedules , as the house and senate armed services committees are doing with respect to the annual defense authorization bill , they will have had to review in less than four months both the president's $482 billion request for the base dod budget and the additional $142 billion requested for operations in iraq and afghanistan .

the burden may be compounded by the fact that the congressional defense committees may not have time - tested analytical tools with which to scrutinize the request for ongoing combat operations , as they do for reviewing the base budget .

moreover , for most of that four month period , members of congress , and the defense funding committees in particular , have been deeply preoccupied with debate over the administration's fy2007 emergency supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r .

1591 ) to pay for combat operations in iraq and afghanistan , legislation that has become the vehicle for congressional efforts to reduce the involvement of u.s. troops in iraq .

in addition , since dod does not include the forecast cost of ongoing operations in its projections of defense budget requests in future years , except for a $50 billion placeholder for fy2009 included in the fy2008 request , congress has not been given a clear sense of how severely the federal government's overall fiscal squeeze may constrain future defense budgets .

 ( 3 ) dod projects that its total budget will remain approximately constant , in real terms , from fy2009 through fy2013 .

but for years , most of the major components of the defense budget have shown a steady cost growth , in excess of the cost of inflation .

thus , the relatively flat defense budgets planned would have to accommodate other types of costs that also seem to be escalating almost uncontrollably , notably including ( 1 ) the rising cost of health care for personnel still on active service , retirees and their dependents , ( 2 ) operations and maintenance costs that have been increasing since the korean war at an average of 2.5% per year above the cost of inflation , and ( 3 ) new weapons that are expected to dramatically enhance the effectiveness of u.s. forces , but which carry high price tags to begin with and then , all too often , substantially overrun their initial cost - estimates .

 ( 4 ) one of the most powerful drivers of dod ' s internal cost squeeze , the steady increase in the cost of military personnel , would be compounded by the president ' s recommendation — in line with congressional proposals — to increase active - duty army and marine corps end - strength .

between fy1999 and fy2005 , the cost of active - duty military personnel , measured per - service - member , grew by 33% above inflation , largely because of congressional initiatives to increase pay and benefits .

a large fraction of the increased cost is due to increases in retired pay and greatly expanded medical benefits for military retirees .

this year , the administration has proposed ( and the congressional defense committees have urged for years ) an increase in active - duty end - strength that would add 92,000 soldiers and marines to the rolls , thus increasing the services' fixed costs by at least $12 billion annually ( once the start - up costs of the policy have been absorbed ) .

at the same time , the navy and air force are cutting personnel levels to safeguard funds for weapons programs .

the air force is cutting about 40,000 full - time equivalent positions and the navy about 30,000 .

one issue is whether these cuts will be used , directly or indirectly , not to pay for air force and navy weapons programs , but for army and marine corps end - strength increases .

 ( 5 ) the navy ' s ability to sustain a fleet of the current size within realistically foreseeable budgets may especially problematic .

after years of criticism from members of congress who contended that the navy was buying too few ships to replace vessels being retired , the service released in february a long - range shipbuilding plan that would fall just short of the navy's current goal of maintaining a fleet of 313 ships .

but the plan assumes that the defense department , which bought seven ships in fy2007 and is requesting the same number in fy2008 , would buy between 11 and 13 ships in each of the following five years .

the plan assumes that amount appropriated for new ship construction would rise from a requested $12.5 billion in fy2008 to $17.5 billion in fy2013 ( in current - year dollars ) .

considering the fiscal demands likely to put downward pressure on future defense budgets , funding the navy's plan may be challenging .

but even if the navy got the annual shipbuilding budgets it plans to request , it might not be able to buy all the ships it plans as quickly as it plans to do so , because of escalating costs and delays in some of the new types of ships slated to comprise the future fleet .

in the past , navy cost and schedule forecasts later proven to be overly optimistic have led to long - range shipbuilding plans that promised increases in shipbuilding budgets in the "out - years" that have not been realized .

unachievable shipbuilding plans may discourage the navy and congress from weighing potential tradeoffs between , on the one hand , construction of promising new designs and , on the other hand , building additional ships of types already in service and upgrading existing vessels .

 ( 6 ) the services ' plans to modernize their tactical air forces suffer from the type of excessive budgetary and technological optimism that also afflicts the shipbuilding plan .

roughly midway through a 40-year , $400 million effort to replace the post - vietnam generation of air force , navy and marine corps fighter planes with versions of the air force's f - 22a , the navy's f / a - 18e / f , and the tri - service f - 35 ( or joint strike fighter ) , the services' plans have been buffeted by escalating costs , slipping schedules and external budget pressures .

in the case of the f - 22a , this produced a current budget plan that will buy only 183 planes rather than the 381 the air force says it needs .

similarly , the navy and marine corps have reduced the total number of f - 35s they plan to buy from 1,089 to 680 .

adjustments like this are easier to make with aircraft budgets that fund dozens of units annually costing tens of millions of dollars apiece than it is with shipbuilding budgets that fund a handful of units each year , many of which cost upwards of a billion dollars apiece .

but while it may be easier for the services to deal with the consequences of optimistic tactical aircraft recapitalization plans than it is for the navy to manage the shipbuilding program , there is a similar underlying problem .

if the services' long - range plans assume budgets , costs , technical breakthroughs and production schedules that will not be realized , a service may delay and , ultimately , increase the cost of upgrades to planes already in service that will have to be kept combat - ready until the new craft are fielded: the military services accord new systems higher funding priority , and the legacy systems tend to get whatever funding is remaining after the new systems' budget needs are met .

if new aircraft consume more of the investment dollars than planned , the buying power and budgets for legacy systems are further reduced to remain within dod budget limits .

however , as quantities of new systems have been cut and deliveries to the warfighter delayed , more legacy aircraft are required to stay in the inventory and for longer periods of time than planned , requiring more dollars to modernize and maintain aging aircraft .

for the seventh year of war operations since the 9 / 11 attacks , dod originally requested $141.7 billion , 29% of the amount it is requesting for all routine dod activity in fy2008 .

for the first time since the 9 / 11 attacks , the administration has submitted a request for war funding for the full year to meet a new requirement levied in the fy2007 john warner national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-364 ) .

since fy2003 , congress has funded war costs in two bills , typically a bridge fund included in the regular dod appropriations act to cover the first part of the fiscal year and a supplemental enacted after the fiscal year has begun .

on july 31 , 2007 , the administration requested an additional $5.3 billion to purchase mine resistant ambush program vehicles ( mraps ) , bringing the total to $147 billion for fy2008 .

on september 26 , secretary of defense robert gates announced that the administration would be requesting an additional $42.3 billion .

with those funds , the total request for fy2008 would be $189.3 billion , 14% above the fy2007 enacted level and 62% above the fy2006 enacted level .

the administration's original fy2008 global war on terror ( gwot ) request of $141.7 billion is similar to its fy2007 funding request for fy2007 war costs with certain exceptions: funds are not included to support the higher troop levels announced by the president in january 2007 or to increase the size of the army and navy ( included in the baseline ) and lesser amounts are requested to train afghan and iraqi security force ( see table 8 ) .

in testimony , secretary of defense gates characterized the fy2008 gwot request as "a straightline projection for forces of 140,000 in iraq" because funding for the surge is only included through september 30 , 2007 , the end of fy2007 .

in mid - september 2007 , general petraeus recommended and the president decided to extend the current troop increase of about 30,000 in iraq for an additional four months in fy2008 .

on september 26 , 2007 , secretary gates announced that the administration will be submitting a request for an additional $42 billion for war costs in fy2008 , including about $6 billion for the extension of the troop surge .

if troop levels were to fall further later in the year — as secretary gates recently suggested might occur — less funds might be needed .

on september 26 , 2007 , the house passed h.j.res .

52 , a continuing resolution to fund government operations temporarily until passage of the regular appropriations acts .

that resolution includes funds for both dod's baseline program and war costs , as well as the $5.3 billion requested for mraps in late july .

both the house and senate are expected to pass a continuing resolution to fund fy2008 government operations before the end of the fiscal year on september 30 , 2007 .

according to dod , the original fy2008 war request includes $109.7 billion for iraq and $26.0 billion for afghanistan and other counter - terror operations .

that request supports a total of 320,000 deployed personnel including 140,000 in iraq and 20,000 in afghanistan .

dod does not explain the difference between the 160,000 military personnel deployed in iraq and in afghanistan and the additional 160,000 deployed elsewhere supporting those missions .

following is a brief summary of some of the other issues that may emerge during congressional action on the fy2008 defense authorization and appropriations bills , based on congressional action on the fy2007 funding bills and early debate surrounding the president's fy2008 budget request .

military pay raise .

the budget request would give military personnel a 3% pay raise effective january 1 , 2008 , thus keeping pace with the average increase in private - sector wages as measured by the department of labor's employment cost index ( eci ) .

some , contending that military pay increases have lagged civilian pay hikes by a cumulative total of 4% over the past two decades or so , have called for a 3.5% raise to close that so - called pay - gap .

defense department officials deny any such pay - gap exists , maintaining that their proposed 3% increase would sustain their policy of keeping military pay at about the 70 th percentile of pay for civilians of comparable education and experience .

congress mandated military pay - raises of eci plus ½% in fy2000-fy2006 .

but for fy2007 , the administration requested an increase of 2.2% , equivalent to eci , and congress ultimately approved it , rejecting a house - passed increase to 2.7% .

army and marine corps end - strength increases .

the budget request includes $12.1 billion in the fy2008 base budget and an additional $4.9 billion in the fy2008 war - fighting budget toward the administration's $112.3 billion plan to increase active - duty end - strength by 65,000 army personnel and 27,000 marines by 2013 .

most of the additional personnel are slated for assignment to newly created combat brigades and regiments , which would expand the pool of units that could be rotated through overseas deployments , thus making it easier for the services to sustain overseas roughly the number of troops currently deployed in iraq and afghanistan .

this recommendation marks a new departure for the administration , which has resisted for several years calls by the congressional defense committees for such an increase in troop - strength .

on the other hand , the proposal might be challenged by members who wonder how the services , in a time of tightening budgets , will afford the roughly $13 billion annual cost of the additional troops .

the proposal also might be opposed by members skeptical of future extended deployments on the scale of the current missions in iraq and afghanistan .

tricare fees and co - pays .

for the second year in a row , the administration's budget proposes to increase fees , co - payments and deductibles charged retirees under the age of 65 by tricare , the defense department's medical insurance program for active and retired service members and their dependents .

the increases are intended to restrain the rapid increase in the annual cost of the defense health program , which is projected to reach $64 billion by fy2015 .

the budget request also reduces the health program budget by $1.9 billion , the amount the higher fees are expected to generate .

the administration contends that these one - time increases would compensate for the fact that the fees have not be adjusted since they were set in 1995 .

the administration also is requesting a provision of law that would index future increases in tricare fees to the average rate of increase in health care premiums nationwide .

as was the case last year , the administration proposal is vehemently opposed by organizations representing service members and retirees , which contend that the defense department has failed to adequately consider other cost - saving moves and that retiree medical care on favorable terms is appropriate , considering the unique burdens that have been borne by career soldiers and their dependents .

any future tricare fee increases , some groups contend , should be indexed to increases in the consumer price index ( cpi ) rather than to the much more rapid rise in health insurance premiums .

last year , congress blocked the proposed fee increases for one year and established a study group to consider alternative solutions to the problem of rising defense health costs .

that panel is slated to issue interim recommendations in may , 2007 .

national guard representation on the joint chiefs of staff .

a number of national guard units have been stripped of equipment needed for other units deploying to iraq , leaving the units at home ill - prepared either to train for their military mission or to execute their domestic emergency role as the agent of their state governor .

some members of congress and organizations that speak for the guard contend that this situation reflects the regular forces' dismissive attitude toward guard units , which should be counterbalanced by making the chief of the national guard bureau a member of the joint chiefs of staff , and elevating him to highest military rank — general ( 4 stars ) — from his current rank of lieutenant general ( 3 stars ) .

congress has rejected these proposals before , but in march a congressionally chartered commission studying national guard and reserve component issues endorsed the higher rank , while opposing the joint chiefs membership .

national guard stryker brigades .

governors , members of congress and national guard officials from several states have called on congress to equip additional guard combat units with the stryker armored combat vehicle , which currently equips five active - duty army brigades and one national guard brigade ( based in pennsylvania ) .

stryker brigades deployed in iraq report the eight - wheeled armored cars to be rugged under fire and agile ; and because they move on oversize tires rather than metal caterpillar tracks like the big m - 1 tanks and bradley troop carriers that equip some guard units , strykers would be more versatile in domestic disaster - response missions , since they could travel on streets and roads without tearing them up .

perhaps as important as the stryker units' vehicular capability is the surveillance and information network that is part of a stryker brigade .

it cost about $1.2 billion to equip the pennsylvania guard unit as a stryker brigade .

future combat systems .

the fy2008 budget request contains $3.7 billion to continue development of the army's future combat system ( fcs ) , a $164 billion program to develop a new generation of networked combat vehicles and sensors that gao and other critics repeatedly have cited as technologically risky .

that critique may account for the fact that , last year , congress cut $326 million from the administration's $3.7 billion fy2007 request for the program .

ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan also highlight the concern of some that fcs will be a more efficient way to fight the kind of armored warfare at which u.s. forces already excel while offering no clear advantage in fighting the sort of counter - insurgency operations that may be a major focus of u.s. ground operations for some time to come .

particularly because the fy2008 request includes the first installment of procurement money for fcs ( $100 million ) , critics may try once again to slow the project's pace , at least for the more technologically exotic components not slated for deployment within the next five years .

nuclear power for warships .

congress may use the fy2008 bills to continue pressing the navy to resume the construction of nuclear - powered surface warships .

all u.s. subs commissioned since 1959 have had nuclear - powerplants because they give subs the extremely useful ability to remain submerged , and thus hard to detect , for weeks at a time .

all aircraft carriers commissioned since 1967 also have been nuclear - powered ships .

but because nuclear - powered surface ships cost significantly more to build and operate than oil - powered ships of comparable size , the navy has built no nuclear - powered surface vessels since 1980 , and has had none in commission since 1999 .

proponents of nuclear power long have contended that this focus on construction costs has unwisely discounted the operational advantages of surface combatants that could steam at high speed for long distances , without having to worry about fuel consumption .

in recent years , they have cited rising oil prices to argue that nuclear - powered ships may not be much more expensive to operate than oil - fueled vessels .

in 2006 , a navy study mandated by the fy2006 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

109-163 , section 130 ) concluded that nuclear power would add about $600 million to $700 million to the cost of a medium - sized warship , like the navy's planned cg ( x ) cruiser , and that such a ship's operating cost would be only 0-10% higher than an oil - powered counterpart , provided crude oil costs $74.15 or more , per barrel ( as it did a various times during 2006 ) .

congress might add to the fy2008 bills provisions that would require certain kinds of warships to be nuclear - powered in the future .

alternatively , it might require the navy to design both oil - powered and nuclear - powered versions of the cg ( x ) , the first of which is slated for funding in the fy2011 budget .

littoral combat ships .

congress will closely scrutinize the navy's most recent restructuring of its plan to bulk up the fleet with a large number of small , fast littoral combat ships ( lcs ) intended to use modular packages of weapons and equipment to perform various missions .

in fy2005-fy2007 , navy budgets funded six lcss being built to two different designs by two contractors , lockheed and northrop grumman .

the navy plans to select one of the two designs which would account for all the lcss built beginning in fy2010 .

but in march 2007 , responding to escalating costs in the first few lcs ships under construction , the navy restructured the program , cancelling contracts for three of the ships already funded and reducing the number of lcs ships requested in the fy2008 budget from three to two .

in the fy2008 defense bills , congress might endorse the navy's action , add funds for additional ships in fy2008 , or take additional steps to ensure that lcs construction costs are under control before additional ships are funded .

virginia - class submarines .

members may try to accelerate the navy's plan to begin in fy2012 stepping up the production rate of virginia - class nuclear - powered attack submarines from one ship per year to two .

because of the scheduled retirement after 30 years of service of the large number of los angeles - class subs commissioned in the 1980 and 1990s , the navy's sub fleet will fall short of the desired 48 ships ( out of a total fleet of 313 navy vessels ) from 2020 until 2033 .

in addition to approving the navy's fy2008 request for $1.8 billion to build a sub for which nuclear reactors and other components were funded in earlier years and $703 million for reactors and components that would be used in subs slated for funding in future budgets , congress may add more so - called "long lead" funding for an additional sub for which most of the funding would come in fy2009 or fy2010 .

the navy says it would need an additional $400 million down payment in fy2008 to make it feasible to fund an additional sub in fy2010 .

but navy officials also argue that buying an additional sub before 2012 could throw future navy budgets out of balance .

f - 35 ( joint strike fighter ) .

congress may reject the administration's proposal to drop development of the general electric f - 136 jet engine being developed as a potential alternative to the pratt & whitney f - 135 engine slated to power the f - 35 joint strike fighter .

congress has backed development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 since 1996 and last year rejected the administration's proposal to terminate the program , adding $340 million to the fy2007 defense funding bills to continue the alternate engine program .

defense department officials , noting that they would save $1.8 billion by ending the alternate engine program , contend that because of improvements in the process of designing and developing jet engines , it would not be imprudent to rely on a single type of engine to power what likely will be the only u.s. fighter plane in production after about 2015 .

many members are skeptical of that argument , citing the poor reliability demonstrated in the late 1970s by the pratt & whitney f - 100 engine that powered both the f - 15 and f - 16 , a problem the caused congress to mandate development of an alternative ( ge - built ) engine .

supporters of the dual engine approach also contend that competition between the two engine manufacturers produced significant savings in f - 15 and f - 16 engine costs , a claim disputed by some analyses .

c - 17 production and c - 5 upgrades .

there appears to be strong support in congress for fielding a larger fleet of long - range cargo jets big enough to heavy army combat gear than defense department plans would fund .

as in past years , the result may be a combination of congressional actions that would ( 1 ) restrict the ability of the air force to retire older c - 5a planes and ( 2 ) fund additional c - 17 planes , beyond the 190 the air force plans to buy .

in march 2006 , the defense department's first "post 9 / 11" review of its long - range transportation needs concluded that the services' long - range airlift needs could be met , with acceptable risk , by the air force's plan to upgrade fleet of 109 c - 5s ( divided between "a" and newer "b" models ) and to buy a total of 180 c - 17s .

rejecting the department's analysis on several grounds , congress barred retirement of any c - 5s and added 10 c - 17s to the fy2007 defense funding bills .

the most conspicuous change in this issue since then has been the administration's decision to enlarge the army and marine corps , a move which , arguably , requires a larger airlift fleet .

air force tanker procurement .

the $315 million requested in fy2008 to develop a new mid - air refueling tanker to replace the air force kc - 135s well into their fifth decade of service may become a vehicle for congressional action intended to bolster the position of either boeing or the team of northrop grumman and airbus , who are competing for the contract in a contest scheduled to be decided late in 2007 .

immediately at issue is a contract for 179 refueling planes .

but follow - on contracts may bring the number of planes ultimately purchased to 540 .

new nuclear warhead .

differences over the future role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security planning may crystalize into a debate over the $119 million requested in the fy2008 national defense budget to continue development of a so - called reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) , which is intended to replace warheads that were built in the 1970s and 1980s and have been kept in service longer than initially planned .

that total includes $89 million for the national nuclear security administration of the department of energy and $30 million for the navy .

the new warhead is intended to be easier to maintain than aging types now in service and to be deployable without breaking the moratorium on nuclear test explosions the u.s. government has observed since 1992 .

supporters argue that rrw is needed because of concerns that maintenance of currently deployed warheads may prove increasingly difficult in the long term .

on the other hand , critics of the rrw program contend that fielding new warheads of an untested type might build political pressure to resume testing eventually .

moreover , they contend , that the program to extend the service life of existing warheads without testing has proven successful for more than a decade and should become even more reliable because of advances in understanding of the physics of current weapons .

since the funds requested in fy2008 would allow the rrw program to cross a critical threshold , from design and cost analysis to the start of detailed development work , members who want to rein in the program have a strong incentive to use the fy2008 funding bills to do it .

non - nuclear trident missile warhead .

months after congress denied most of the $127 million requested in fy2007 to develop a non - nuclear warhead for the trident long - range , submarine - launched ballistic missile , the administration has requested $175 million for the program in fy2008 .

the argument in favor of the program is that it would allow u.s. forces to quickly strike urgent or mobile targets anywhere in the world , even if no u.s. forces were located nearby .

on the other hand , some skeptics of the program argue that the system would require precise , virtually real - time intelligence about targets that may not be available and that other countries — including some like russia and china that are armed with long - range , nuclear - armed missiles — might misinterpret the launch of a conventionally - armed u.s. missile as an indication that they were under nuclear attack .

some members may try to slow the program , as congress did last year .

missile defense budget .

if only because it is the largest acquisition program in the budget , the $8.9 billion requested in fy2008 for the missile defense agency would draw close scrutiny because of the stringent budget limits within which the defense committees are working .

but there also may be some efforts to cut that request that are rooted in the long - running debate that continues over how soon missile defense would be needed , and over the relative effectiveness of the many anti - missile systems under development .

efforts are likely to reduce funding for some of the more technologically challenging programs , such as the airborne laser ( abl ) , which has encountered several delays and for which the administration has requested $549 million in fy2008 .

another possible target for congressional cuts is the $300 million requested to begin work on a third anti - missile site in eastern europe .

touted by the administration as a defense against a possible threat from iran , the proposal to field anti - missile interceptors in poland has been denounced by russia .

revisiting brac .

because of well - publicized cases of inadequate care received by some iraq war veterans at walter reed army medical center , which is slated for realignment as one of the recommendations made by the 2005 base realignment and closure ( brac ) commission , and approved by president george w. bush , critics of some other brac actions may be encouraged to try to slow or reverse those decisions .

if successful , such efforts might unravel the entire base closure process , which was designed to prevent members from politicking to save any one particular base from closure .

since 1989 , the requirement that congress and the president deal with each of the four sets of recommended closures as a package , on a "take it or leave it" basis , has highlighted the potential savings of the entire package of closures while preventing supporters of any one base from rounding up support for saving their site from closure on the grounds that , considered in isolation , closing it would save very little .

but since the furor over walter reed has at least prompted some public calls for reconsidering that particular brac decision , critics of other closures may argue that changes in circumstance since 2005 require a re - look at other parts of the brac package .

in addition , jurisdictions anticipating a large population influx as they acquire organizations formerly housed at installations being closed , may seek impact assistance to expand their transportation , utility , housing , and education infrastructures .

contract oversight .

because of several recent cases in which high profile weapons acquisition programs have been hobbled by escalating costs and technical shortcomings , members may want to review the management of individual programs and the evolution over the past decade or so of the defense department's acquisition management process with an eye toward using the fy2008 funding bills to strengthen the government's hand in dealing with industry .

secretary of the navy donald c. winter and chief of naval operations adm. michael g. mullen have declared that the navy intends to reclaim some of the authority over ship design it has ceded to industry and members may look for ways to jump - start that effort as they deal with , for instance , the troubled littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program .

similarly , members intent on imposing congressional priorities on the army's future combat system ( fcs ) may question the amount of managerial discretion the army has vested in the lead system integrator: a private entity — in this case , a team of boeing and said — hired to manage a large , complex program that consists of more than a dozen vehicles and sensors linked by a computer network .

one rationale for the outsourcing to industry of management roles previously filled by pentagon acquisition managers is that the defense department no longer has the in - house expertise needed to manage such complicated acquisitions .

some members may want the defense department to come up with a long - term plan to restore enough in - house expertise to make the government a smarter customer .

the conference report on h.r .

3222 would provide $460.3 billion to cover the cost of all dod activities in fy2008 except for military construction ( which routinely is funded in separate legislation ) and the cost of ongoing military operations in iraq and afghanistan .

the conference report does , however , include $11.6 billion in emergency funding to accelerate the procurement of mine - resistant ambush protected ( mrap ) vehicles , which are being rushed to u.s. units in iraq and afghanistan because they provide better protection for their occupants against land mines and roadside bombs compared with the protection afforded by conventional troop carriers .

excluding the added mrap funds , h.r .

3222 would make a net reduction of $3.55 billion from the president's request for non - war costs falling within the scope of the bill .

however , among the thousands of specific increases and decreases the bill would make to the president's request are a handful of large reductions , totaling $3.5 billion which , the conferees maintain , would have no adverse impact on dod operations .

these large reductions include: $1.35 billion to take account of changes in the economic assumptions on which the fy2008 request was based when it was being drafted during fy2006 ; $507 million to compel the department to reduce its travel costs and persuade its contractors to operate more efficiently ; $540 million rescinded from prior year appropriations and , thus , available to replace new budget authority that would have been provided by h.r .

3222 ; $500 million requested by the navy and air force for training exercises by units that would be deployed in iraq ; $628 million to reduce the cash balances held by various revolving funds used to finance maintenance activities ; in addition to funding the dod base budget for fy2008 , the conference report on h.r .

3222 also includes a short - term continuing resolution that will allow federal agencies to continue operating through december 14 , 2007 , even if their fy2008 appropriations bill has not been enacted .

in general , the cr allows agencies to spend money at the same rate as if their fy2007 appropriation had simply been extended .

however , it provides infusions of additional funds for three programs: $3 billion for the department of housing and urban development's "road home" program , intended to assist persons whose homes were damaged by hurricanes katrina and rita ; $2.9 billion for disaster relief efforts of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; $500 million for the wildfire fighting efforts by the forest service and the bureau of land management .

crs report 98-756 , defense authorization and appropriations bills: fy1970-fy2008 , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) crs report mm70099 , fy2008 defense budget: issues for congress - seminar slides , by [author name scrubbed] et al. , february 12 , 2007 .

crs report rl33405 , defense: fy2007 authorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33900 , fy2007 supplemental appropriations for defense , foreign affairs , and other purposes , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33427 , military construction , military quality of life and veterans affairs: fy2007 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33837 , congressional authority to limit u.s. military operations in iraq , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33803 , congressional restrictions on u.s. military operations in vietnam , cambodia , laos , somalia , and kosovo: funding and non - funding approaches , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rs20775 , congressional use of funding cutoffs since 1970 involving u.s. military forces and overseas deployments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33110 , the cost of iraq , afghanistan , and other global war on terror operations since 9 / 11 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33298 , fy2006 supplemental appropriations: iraq and other international activities ; additional hurricane katrina relief , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl32170 , instances of use of united states armed forces abroad , 1798-2008 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33532 , war powers resolution: presidential compliance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33571 , the fy2007 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl33537 , military medical care: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33446 , military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33449 , military retirement , concurrent receipt , and related major legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31334 , operations noble eagle , enduring freedom , and iraqi freedom: questions and answers about u.s. military personnel , compensation , and force structure , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22443 , border security and military support: legal authorizations and restrictions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33153 , china naval modernization: implications for u.s. navy capabilities — background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31404 , defense procurement: full funding policy — background , issues , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22149 , exemptions from environmental law for the department of defense ( dod ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21754 , military forces: what is the appropriate size for the united states ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22266 , the use of federal troops for disaster assistance: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32123 , airborne laser ( abl ) : issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32888 , the army ' s future combat system ( fcs ) : background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22120 , ballistic missile defense: historical overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32347 , " bunker busters " : robust nuclear earth penetrator issues , fy2005-fy2007 , by jonathan medalia .

crs report rl33067 , conventional warheads for long - range ballistic missiles: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31673 , f - 22a raptor , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33240 , kinetic energy kill for ballistic missile defense: a status overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20851 , naval transformation: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32418 , navy attack submarine procurement: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32109 , navy ddg - 1000 and ddg - 51 destroyer programs: background , oversight issues , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33955 , navy force structure: alternative force structure studies of 2005 - background for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20643 , navy ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carrier program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33741 , navy littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program: background , oversight issues , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32513 , navy - marine corps amphibious and maritime prepositioning ship programs: background and oversight issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31957 , nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance: u.s. programs in the former soviet union , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32572 , nonstrategic nuclear weapons , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32929 , the reliable replacement warhead program: background and current developments , by jonathan medalia .

crs report rl33745 , sea - based ballistic missile defense — background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33543 , tactical aircraft modernization: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32476 , u.s. army ' s modular redesign: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31623 , u.s. nuclear weapons: changes in policy and force structure , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21048 , u.s. special operations forces ( sof ) : background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33640 , u.s. strategic nuclear forces: background , developments , and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

