unanimous consent agreements are special orders of the senate that are agreed to without objection by the chamber's membership .

fundamental to the management of the contemporary senate , these devices are typically employed to structure floor proceedings and to expedite the chamber's business .

two general types of unanimous consent permeate senate operations: "simple" and "complex. .

both types set aside the rules , precedents , or orders of the senate via the unanimous concurrence of all senators .

a simple unanimous consent request addresses routine matters , such as dispensing with quorum calls or requesting that certain staff aides have floor privileges .

to be sure , there are occasions when a simple unanimous consent request can have policy consequences , such as an objection to setting aside an amendment or dispensing with the reading of an amendment .

simple unanimous consent requests have been used since the first congress .

for example , a senate rule adopted on april 16 , 1789 , stated: every bill shall receive three readings [prior] to its being passed ; and the president [of the senate] shall give notice at each , whether it be first , second , or third ; which readings shall be on three different days , unless the senate unanimously directs otherwise .

the focus of this report is on the complex variety: their historical origin , some benchmarks in their evolution , and how they came to be reflected in the senate's rulebook .

complex agreements establish a tailor - made procedure for virtually anything taken up by the senate , such as bills , joint resolutions , concurrent resolutions , simple resolutions , amendments , nominations , treaties , or conference reports .

as two senate parliamentarians wrote: there is a fundamental difference between the senate operating under a unanimous consent agreement and the senate operating under the standing rules .

whereas the senate rules permit virtually unlimited debate , and very few restrictions on the right to offer amendments , these agreements usually limit time for debate and the right of senators to offer amendments .

senators generally accept the debate and amendment restrictions common to most unanimous consent agreements largely for two overlapping reasons: they facilitate the processing of the senate's workload , and they serve the interests of individual lawmakers .

based on trust , and reached after often protracted negotiations , unanimous consent agreements are the equivalent of "binding contracts" that can only be changed or modified by unanimous consent .

it is not clear when the senate actually began to employ unanimous consent agreements to limit debate or to fix a time for a vote on a measure .

perhaps the first instance occurred in the mid - 1840s .

on march 24 , 1846 , senator william allen , d - oh , stated that the senate had been debating a joint resolution concerning the oregon territory for more than two months , and it was now time to proceed to a final vote on the matter .

noting that the senate neither allowed for the previous question ( a motion employed in the house to end debate ) nor adopted resolutions directing that a vote should occur at a specific time , senator allen pointed out that it was the senate's habit to have "a conversational understanding that an end would be put to a protracted debate at a particular time. .

a senate colleague suggested that allen delay several days before making such a request .

two days later senator allen again asked that the senate informally agree to fix "a definite day on which the vote might be taken. .

the senate , he said , should simply refuse to adjourn until there is a final vote .

no action occurred on allen's recommendation .

on april 13 , 1846 , however , a consensus developed among senators that a final vote on the joint resolution should occur three days later .

finally , after spending around 65 days debating the matter , the senate on april 16 enacted the joint resolution .

indeed , if this was the first time that the senate employed something like a unanimous consent agreement to end debate and precipitate a vote on a measure , there is little question that these accords became both more commonly used and more sophisticated in their procedural features .

by 1870 , noted two scholars , unanimous consent agreements "were being used with some frequency. .

these early unanimous consent agreements were , "as they are today , time - limitation agreements that provided for the disposal of a measure by a specified time. .

an april 24 , 1879 , exchange illustrates the practical use of these accords for limiting debate and setting the time for a vote .

the exchange is reminiscent of what occurs in today's senate .

the president pro tempore .

the chair will once more state the proposition and again ask the senate whether there be any objection to it .

the proposition is , that at three o'clock to - morrow , all debate on this bill shall cease , and the senate shall then proceed to vote upon the pending amendment or amendments that may be offered , and finally on the bill itself without debate .

mr. conkling .

that is right .

the president pro tempore .

is there objection to that understanding .

the chair hears none , and it is agreed to .

bill managers apparently took the initiative in propounding unanimous consent agreements .

their increasing use in subsequent decades led one senator , roger mills , d - tx , to complain that the senate "reaches its vote on all questions like the historic diet of poland , by the unanimous agreement of the whole , and not by the act of the majority. .

other issues associated with these early accords also sowed confusion among the membership .

many of the complaints stemmed from the fact that the early unanimous consent agreements were often viewed "as an arrangement simply between gentlemen" and could , as a president pro tempore once said , be "violated with impunity by any member of the senate. .

to reduce the confusion , the senate adopted a new rule .

the fundamental objective of rule xii was to clarify several uncertainties associated with these senatorial contracts .

in the early 1900s , the senate took modest steps to reduce some of the confusion associated with unanimous consent agreements , such as requiring these accords to be submitted in writing to the desk , read to the chamber , and "printed on the title page of the daily calendar of business as long as they were operative. .

more changes were in the offing , however .

two overlapping factors explain why the senate agreed to a formal rules change to govern these accords .

first , there were a couple of ambiguities associated with these accords that continued to arouse contention and confusion .

past precedents simply did not adequately address these recurring problems .

second , a riveting event — a senator was caught by "surprise" when a unanimous consent agreement was entered into — underscored the need for a formal rule ( rule xii ) to clear up issues associated with these "gentlemen's agreements. .

today , in a period of heightened individualism and partisanship , unanimous consent agreements tend to be piecemeal , such as establishing debate limits on a number of discrete amendments without limiting the number of amendments or specifying a time or date for final passage of the legislation .

still , compared with the compacts promulgated during the early 1900s , today's accords are often broader in scope , more complex , and involve more procedural detail .

a large body of precedents has even evolved to govern "how [unanimous consent agreements] are to be interpreted and applied in various situations. .

in short , unanimous consent agreements are essential to the processing of the senate's workload and protecting the procedural prerogatives of individual senators .

