climatic effects of pollution: carbon dioxide is being added to the earth's atmosphere by the burning of coal , oil and natural gas at the rate of 6 billion tons a year .

by the year 2000 there will be about 25% more co 2 in our atmosphere than at present .

this will modify the heat balance of the atmosphere to such an extent that marked changes in climate , not controllable through local or even national efforts , could occur .

possibilities of bringing about countervailing changes by deliberately modifying other processes that affect climate may then be very important .

president ' s science advisory panel , 1965 for more than a century , scientists have known that adding carbon dioxide and certain other gases to the atmosphere could warm the earth , as expressed in the quote above .

during the past decade , mounting scientific evidence and public debate have generated interest in the u.s. congress to understand climate change , and potentially to address related emissions of carbon dioxide , methane , and additional gases generated by human activities .

these human - related emissions have accumulated in the atmosphere , raising concentrations dramatically .

for example , carbon dioxide emissions associated mostly with fossil fuel combustion and land clearing have increased atmospheric concentrations by one - third since the industrial revolution , from about 280 parts per million ( ppm ) in 1850 to 380 ppm today .

investment in science and technological research has been the cornerstone of the federal strategy since the 1960s .

great strides have been made to collect observations of relevant earth processes ; to develop a variety of models to analyze and forecast atmospheric , ocean , land , and related economic and energy systems ; and to understand the potential impacts of climate change on humans and ecosystems .

research has been conducted by universities , governmental agencies , research institutions , and the private sector .

a history of climate change science funding is provided in table 1 .

most u.s. funding has gone to researchers through the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the department of energy ( doe ) , as well as smaller amounts through other u.s. agencies and the governments of other nations .

research collaboration across countries , gaining efficiencies and insights across boundaries , has proceeded through the international biosphere / geosphere program , the world meteorological organization ( wmo ) , and others .

the products — data , models , and analyses — have been peer - reviewed , repeated , reproduced or contradicted , debated , and updated .

dozens of assessments of various aspects of climate change science have been conducted by public multi - disciplinary bodies , including the national academy of science ( nas ) , the u.s. congress's former office of technology assessment , and the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) .

the ipcc is the preeminent international body charged with periodically assessing technical knowledge of climate change .

it draws on thousands of scientists with expertise on all aspects of climate change .

the fourth assessment report ( ar4 ) of the ipcc assessment is being issued as several reports in 2007 .

a summary of selected key findings of the science assessment is provided below in "intergovernmental panel on climate change — climate change 2007: the physical science basis. .

many governments use the ipcc assessments as one input to their policy deliberations .

the u.s. government has been a primary supporter of the ipcc assessment , by sponsoring much of the research and monitoring that underpins the assessment , as well as many experts representing a broad range of views on specific topics , and by coordinating both external expert and governmental peer reviews of the reports .

the continuing scientific process has resulted in an understanding of climate change that is increasingly robust and has withstood a multitude of challenges ; in most respects , the evolving science confirms the broad conclusions made in previous decades by the preponderance of scientists .

many details and complexities , however , remain nebulous .

although most scientists are confident in their current understanding of climate change , they are less certain about the future magnitude , timing , and geographic details .

climate change has become a highly debated issue in which the u.s. congress has maintained an active and continuing interest .

congress has provided tens of billions of dollars for research and additional programs ( almost $5 billion in fy2006 ) .

it established the global change research program ( usgcrp ) in the global change research act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-606 ) , aimed at understanding and responding to global change , and requiring a scientific assessment for the president and congress at least every four years , as well as annual reports on activities and budget .

the senate in 1992 ratified the framework convention on climate change , which contains commitments from the united states and other parties to improve the science and cooperate internationally on it , as well as to communicate about climate change to the public .

the first and only national assessment was released by the executive branch in 2000 .

our changing planet , an annual report to congress , outlines climate - related research progress and strategies .

various committees have held hearings to oversee existing programs and to consider further options .

there has been general consensus regarding the benefits of additional scientific and technological research ; however , long - standing debate exists about whether and how to attempt to achieve mitigation or adaptation through federal legislative action .

as additional action is considered , an understanding of climate change science may help inform consideration of relative priorities , the scope of action , and timing , among other issues .

this report presents an overview of the science of climate change and its potential impacts .

it provides highlights on the impacts of climate change itself ; it does not address the mitigation of climate change ( eg , by controlling greenhouse gas emissions ) nor the economic issues associated with it .

this report is organized into four topics: climate change and impacts that have been observed .

forces that are understood to be causing recent climate change .

projections of future climate change and impacts .

implications of climate change science for policy .

this report represents a snapshot of the science of climate change , which will continue to evolve .

it will be updated periodically to reflect new peer - reviewed evidence and the developing state of scientific understanding .

scientists agree that the earth's climate is changing .

the average global surface temperature has increased since the industrial revolution , by about 0.6 to 0.9 o celsius ( 1.1 to 1.6 o fahrenheit ) from 1880 to today .

the u.s. temperature has risen at roughly twice the global average rate since the 1970s .

the global climate of the past few decades is likely approaching , or has already passed , the warmest since the rise of human civilizations around 12,000 years ago .

precipitation in the 20 th century has increased by about 2% , more in the high northern latitudes , while drying has occurred in parts of the tropics , especially in the sahel and southern africa .

extreme precipitation events have increased in most of the few locations where data are adequate for analysis .

the following sections cover observed climate change .

the initial section describes changes in the climate measured around the globe , first in temperature , then precipitation , then extreme events .

the subsequent section describes climate changes specific to the united states .

the last section on observed climate change identifies findings from the study of climate centuries to millenia ago that have relevance to consideration of recent and potential future climate change .

scientific research has revealed a number of changes in the earth's climate system in the past century .

this section addresses changes observed in human and ecological systems that may be associated with , and perhaps caused by , the observed climate changes .

impacts of climate change over the past few decades are visible on human activities and ecosystems .

there is a likely bias that favors the reporting of detected changes , rather than the reporting of no changes .

nonetheless , observations confirm that most biological and physical systems studied are responding to warming and other climate changes over the 20 th century in ways scientists would expect , but there have also been some surprises .

the northern boundary of successful corn production in the united states has migrated north by 100 miles over the past three decades , according to an official of the dupont corporation .

one study explained roughly 25% of corn and 32% of soybean yield trends in certain counties in the midwest and northern great plains by observed temperature trends from 1982 to 1998 .

some salmon fisheries in parts of alaska have seen record catches , benefitting from warmer temperatures , while in western alaska , the pacific northwest and canada , salmon stocks have decreased , having passed the upper limits of their temperature tolerance , according to the alaska regional assessment group for the u.s .

global change research program .

in the u.s. west , decreasing trends in mountain snowpack and earlier snowmelt have altered the timing of stream flows .

this has significant implications for flood control , irrigation and summer drying of vegetation .

studies continue to conclude that higher temperatures increase the risks of heat - related illnesses and deaths , that these vary by location , and that the risks are elevated in some regions , older and younger age categories , and impoverished populations .

in europe during the summer of 2003 , as many as 52,000 people died prematurely in the most severe heat wave in at least 500 years .

one study concluded it was very likely that human - driven climate change had more than doubled the risk of occurrence of such an extreme heat event .

significant preparedness and emergency response systems in a number of cities have substantially lowered the local risks of mortality during heat waves over the past two decades .

significant impacts of the warming climate are reported in ecological systems on every continent .

of more than 1,600 species analyzed by two researchers , more than half show changes in their phenologies , the timing of their life events ( such as egg - laying or blossoming dates ) , or their distributions ( where they are found ) , systematically and dominantly in the direction expected from regional climate changes .

through the 1990s , oceanic plankton productivity has varied with sea surface temperatures , with warming significantly lowering productivity .

this raises concerns among scientists because plankton are a major food source for many marine species .

coral bleaching , triggered by some heat episodes , has become increasingly widespread in many reef regions , including hawaii , the caribbean , and australia's great barrier reef .

in addition , elevated concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are absorbed by , and are acidifying , the world's oceans , posing risks to shell - forming organisms and marine food chains .

warming and drying in southeast alaska and the western united states from the late 1980s to the present have resulted in pest outbreaks and fires , destroying property , increasing fire management costs and loss of life , reducing economic forest production , and emitting severe air pollution with consequent health impacts .

record high temperatures and droughts have also triggered extensive fires in argentina , greece , south africa , and other locations .

some species , populations , and individuals have shown benefits from warming conditions , whereas others that are more reliant on cool habitats have been adversely affected or lost competitiveness .

mountain glaciers have contracted worldwide over at least the past 200 years , with evidence that the rate of melting or flow has accelerated in recent decades , including in argentina , bhutan , canada , india , kyrgystan , nepal , switzerland , tanzania , uganda , venezuela , and the united states .

the glacial ice sheets of greenland are melting overall , with an apparent acceleration in the period 2003 to 2005 .

in western antarctica , accelerated ice melting and loss contrasts with accumulating ice in east antarctica because of increased precipitation .

with loss of buttressing sea ice , glacial flows have sped up in the past decade in parts of western antarctica .

record low arctic sea ice extent in 2005 , at 5.6 million square kilometers , was 20% less than the 1970 to 2000 median .

polar bears , which rely on sea ice to access food , have experienced a significant decrease in cub survival rates from 2001 to 2006 in the beaufort sea area .

rising absolute sea levels ( unaffected by vertical land movement ) is attributable to expansion of the oceans' waters as they warm , and inflow of water from melting glaciers .

the evidence is strong that the earth's climate is changing ; the forces thought to be driving observed climate changes are discussed below , including the evidence that human activities , particularly greenhouse gas emissions , have contributed a large influence on top of ongoing natural variability .

the earth's climate is driven by the energy balance of the sun's radiation coming into and leaving the earth's atmosphere .

the more active the sun , the closer the earth to the sun , or the greater the ability for the sun's energy to penetrate the atmosphere and be absorbed by the earth , the greater will be the warming tendency on earth .

on the other hand , the less active the sun , the farther the earth is from the sun , the more the earth's atmosphere or surface reflect the radiation back out to space , the greater the cooling tendency .

the tilt of the earth's axis in its orbit around the sun , making one or the other hemisphere closer to the sun most of the year , drives the heating and cooling of the seasons outside of the tropics .

scientists understand well the fundamental drivers of the earth's climate through geologic time ; for example , how the pattern of an irregular orbit around the sun has led to regular climate swings in and out of ice ages , or how massive volcanic eruptions can spew particles into the atmosphere that block incoming radiation and cause temporary cooling .

until human populations grew to large numbers — from a population of about 5 million around 10,000 years ago to over 6 billion today — the global climate was almost certainly not influenced by human activities .

however , human clearing of land , use of fossil fuels for energy , and other activities have greatly changed the surface of the earth and the composition of the atmosphere , leading almost certainly to changes the earth's climate through the past 150 years .

during this period , the population grew from about 1.3 billion in 1850 to about 6.5 billion today , associated with land clearing , increasing affluence , a switch from wood to fossil fuels , and industrialization — all increasing greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric concentrations .

the ipcc science assessment concluded in 2007 that "most of the observed increase in globally averaged temperatures since the mid - 20 th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations. .

the remainder of this section summarizes scientific knowledge of how human activities influence climate change ; the human components are described because these are most readily addressed by public policies .

in addition , greenhouse gases are particularly implicated in recent climate change and are the target of numerous programs and proposals intended to stabilize climate change .

natural forcings , over which humans generally have limited control , are discussed in the appendix .

methods to compare the relative roles of human and natural forcings and conclusions that attribute a large part of observed warming to human activities are discussed at the end of this section .

the terms radiative forcing , non - radiative forcing , and gwp ( see "the concept of radiative and other forcing of the earth's climate" above ) , will be used in the following sections to explain and compare the contributions of different agents to observed and future climate change .

a forcing may lead to a change in climate .

in response to the climate change , other components of the earth system may also adjust , resulting in feedbacks to the climate that can either amplify ( positive feedbacks ) or dampen ( negative feedbacks ) the initial change in climate .

a number of researchers have concluded from observing natural forcings and variability that large climate changes can be triggered by very small changes in forcings because of feedbacks that amplify the initial change .

much of the discussion of future climate change is based on projections produced by computer models that represent as completely as possible the relevant factors that are today understood to influence the climate ( including the effects of past climates ) .

these models are incomplete , as scientific understanding of the relevant factors and processes is continuously developing .

however , climate models have improved substantially over the past decade , and experts believe that many now do a better job of representing the current and historical climates .

it is disagreement about the ability of these models to predict future climate change that drives much of the current climate change debate .

this section explains how projections of climate are produced and provides the range of forecasts provided by the many climate analysis institutions around the world .

most studies indicate , and experts generally agree , that growth of greenhouse gas forcing , if it continues unabated , will raise global average temperatures well above natural variability .

the 2007 ipcc scientific assessment concluded , "[f]or the next two decades a warming of about 0.2 o c [0.36 o f] per decade is projected for a range of [sres] emission scenarios .

even if the concentrations of all greenhouse gases and aerosols had been kept constant at year 2000 levels , a further warming of about 0.1 o c [0.2 o f] would be expected. .

it further found , "[t]he best estimate for the low [sres] greenhouse gas emission] scenario ( b1 ) is 1.8 o c ( likely range is 1.1 o c to 2.9 o c ) [3.2 o f ( likely range is 2.0 o f to 5.2 o f ) ] , and the best estimate for the high scenario ( a1f1 ) is 4.0 o c ( likely range is 2.4 o c to 6.4 o c ) [5.2 o f ( likely range is 4.3 o f to 9.5 o f ) ]. .

it will be many years to decades before the wide range of uncertainty in global average temperature increases can be narrowed with confidence .

 ( see "use of models for climate analysis" below . ) .

climate models generally predict more heat waves , droughts , and floods ; extreme cold episodes are predicted to decrease ; the centers of continents are likely to experience summer warming and dryness .

scientists expect precipitation will be more intense when it occurs ( therefore also increasing runoff and the risk of flooding ) .

but it will be substantially harder to establish the range of possible changes in the hydrologic cycle — or even direction of change for some regions — both because there are fewer historical observations on which to build scientific understanding , and because the physical constraints are weaker .

scientists expect atmospheric and ocean circulation are likely to change as well .

studies have found that future climate change will not be evenly distributed geographically or temporally: even if the global mean temperature were to change very little , regional climate changes could be dramatic because of the uneven distribution of forcings by different agents and the connectedness of regions within the climate system .

although almost all regions are expected to experience warming , some regions are projected to become wetter while others become drier .

future climate change is not likely to proceed smoothly , as often depicted by averaged model results , but to swing up and down around a rising average , as has occurred in the past .

this variability around a rising average may complicate the detection and prediction of change .

though the ability of scientists to understand and model changes is advancing , there will remain major uncertainties in the forecasting of local and seasonal climate changes that accompany global warming .

climate models are not yet adept at capturing extreme events or abrupt changes , and there is significant potential of important climate "surprises" that models may not predict .

it is unclear how serious future changes may be , given the climate variability to which humans and ecosystems are already adapted .

another complication in forecasting climate change is the importance of feedbacks — both positive and negative .

a national research council report concluded that feedbacks in the climate system have , many times in the geologic record , amplified small initial climate perturbations into major climate cycles with global mean temperature swings of 5 o to 6 o c. the close linkage , over hundreds of thousand of years , between past temperature swings and carbon dioxide and methane concentrations in the atmosphere strongly suggests that temperature change can trigger strong positive amplifications through the carbon cycle and water vapor feedbacks .

current models include such feedbacks , but they are very uncertain .

the most important and uncertain feedbacks affecting future climate projections include water vapor feedback , cloud feedbacks , vegetation feedbacks , and albedo .

thus , while most climate scientists conclude with high confidence that future climate change , forced by greenhouse gases , land use change , and natural factors , is probable , the magnitude , rapidity , and details of the changes are likely to remain unclear for many years , or even decades .

there is near unanimity among climate model projections that ( 1 ) past human emissions have committed the climate to some change over the next few decades , and ghg emissions emitted from now on will begin to dominate global warming by mid - century , and ( 2 ) feedbacks to the carbon cycle tend to be positive , amplifying initial warming by greenhouse gases .

the latter suggests also that climate change may reduce the effectiveness of carbon uptake by oceans and vegetation , and that more warming would require proportionately greater ghg emission reductions to stabilize the climate system .

the federal government and other institutions have invested billions of dollars in researching climate change over more than five decades .

human emissions of greenhouse gases have increased exponentially since the industrial revolution , leading to higher concentrations of carbon dioxide , methane , and other gases than have existed for hundreds of thousands ( maybe millions ) of years .

measurements demonstrate with increasing confidence that the earth's climate has been warming , especially in the past few decades , and changing in other ways .

science cannot explain the recent patterns of climate change without including the influence of elevated greenhouse gas concentrations .

although many uncertainties remain concerning the future magnitude , rate , and other details of climate change , a preponderance of scientists conclude that greenhouse gases emitted by fossil fuel use and other human activities are virtually certain to induce global average warming by at least 1.8 o c ( 3.2 o f ) over the 21 st century — or as high as 4 o c ( 5.2 o f ) , and possibly more than 6 o c ( more than 9 o f ) .

these scientists assert that some warming is virtually inevitable , because of the accumulation of past emissions in elevated atmospheric concentrations of ghg .

the time lags inherent in the climate system are an important aspect affecting the effectiveness of various policy options .

 ( see "time lags in the climate system" below ) .

these conclusions raise a number of questions that may help direct further research or science to support public policy decisions: what do policy - makers need to know from climate science in order to decide whether to address climate change further ? .

are research priorities aligned with needs , and are realistic objectives and timetables established , to answer key questions of prospective decision - makers ? .

are appropriate mechanisms in place for communication between researchers and decision - makers of many types ? .

considering the risks and possible consequences of decision options , how much confidence in the science ( or specific conclusions ) do decision - makers need in order to make choices ? .

do researchers know what decision - makers need from them ? .

what are realistic estimates from researchers of when critically needed information can be provided at the desired level of confidence ? .

are decision - makers' expectations consistent with the time necessary for rigorous research and assessment ? .

since all uncertainties cannot be eliminated , are appropriate , useful risk decision tools and management regimes in place ( or planned ) to facilitate use of the best scientific information for different types of decisions ( eg , resource management , ghg control policies , financial decisions ) ? .

is there a process to incorporate learning over time , as well as legal and institutional adjustments , to adapt to emerging scientific information ? .

do communication channels exist to ensure that relevant decision - makers ( in congress , agencies , states , localities , businesses , and households ) have access to useful and reliable information to make appropriate and timely decisions ? .

are effective cooperative mechanisms ( inter - governmentally and internationally ) useful and in place to gain efficiencies and share insights , and yield results that are compatible with national goals ? .

current and emerging science also provides key information for policy - makers that may help to resolve the details of specific decisions , such as: is it timely to act now ? .

over what timeframe should actions be taken ? .

what are the options for action and their relative effectiveness , including consideration of — scope of greenhouse gases or other forcing agents to cover ; — benefits and costs of investing to learn more , or acting now , or both ; — mechanisms to monitor achievements and refine strategies , etc. ? .

what is the appropriate balance between research , acting on current knowledge , adapting to anticipated change , and informing decision - makers ( public and private ) of choices and implications ? .

there are a number of bills before the 110 th congress proposing a diversity of approaches to address climate change and greenhouse gas reductions .

there also likely will be more hearings , both legislative and oversight .

thus , assuring that the best scientific underpinning is available for policy - related deliberations will remain a priority .

the earth's climate is variable , and scientists understand , to varying degrees , the forces that have driven climate changes of the past .

many factors contribute to changes in climate , regionally and globally , and no single factor acts alone .

the principal natural factors determining climate through geologic time include the earth's orbit around the sun , solar activity , ocean variability , volcanoes , release of methane clathrates from the ocean bed , and chaotic variability .

human activities have grown to a scale especially over the past century that it is almost certain that these human activities have contributed to the climate change observed in recent decades .

this appendix provides brief information on the principal identified natural drivers of climate .

the human activities affecting climate — the principal reason demanding current policy attention — are described in the " human activities that influence climate change " section above .

earth's orbit around the sun the shape of the earth's orbit around the sun is not perfectly round .

the earth's axis is tilted , and wobbles as it turns .

these and other orbital behaviors are fairly well understood and predictable in the ways they influence the earth's climate .

generally , when the earth is closer to the sun , the earth receives more incoming radiation and warms .

solar activity several aspects of solar activity have been suggested as contributors to climate change , although they remain disputed: total solar irradiance , the ultraviolet component of irradiance , cosmic rays , and earth / solar magnetism .

although the validity and magnitude of these remain in dispute , cosmic rays and earth / solar magnetism remain particularly complex and poorly understood .

the variability of the sun's total irradiance , or how much solar energy the sun emits toward the earth , influences the earth's climate , although its significance is disputed .

on long time scales , solar variability could have a large influence , as on the cold temperatures of the little ice age , but quantification of the solar role in climate variability over periods of centuries to millenia is poor .

for example , while some scientists have found evidence that the sun's activity may have been relatively high during the medieval warm period , other scientists have found no evidence that estimated variability of sun's total irradiance has been sufficient to drive climate variations over the past 1,000 years .

for example , one study of recent climate , using a very simple model , found that solar variability may have accounted for approximately 40% of climatic variability over the past 140 years , in addition to internal ( unexplained ) variability , greenhouse gas forcing, and other geophysical factors .

satellite measurements from 1978 dramatically improved the measurement of solar activity ; while there is a clear correlation between solar sunspots and an 11-year radiation cycle , some scientists conclude that variations in solar output have been too small since 1978 to have significantly induced the observed global warming of the past three decades .

solar output of ultraviolet light has been postulated as causing the maunder minimum ( around 1650 to 1710 ) of the northern hemisphere's little ice age , when scientists believe that the sun was relatively quiet and emitted less ultraviolet light .

this , in turn , may have reduced the ozone in the stratosphere .

ozone is a greenhouse gas that warms the earth , so the reduction of ozone in the stratosphere due to less ultraviolet light may have cooled the northern hemisphere on average by a few tenths of a degree centigrade .

some scientists have found that estimated ultraviolet variance since 1915 correlates poorly with global average temperature .

ocean variability at least one scientist has hypothesized that the natural dynamics of ocean systems may be periodic and have an influence at least on regional or hemispheric climates .

understanding of the oceans may also elucidate factors that can trigger abrupt climate changes .

for example , evidence exists that periods of increased freshwater flow to the north atlantic and arctic oceans from the laurentide ice sheet ( over canada ) may be responsible for abrupt and significant climate events in nw europe that took place in the late - glacial and early holocene .

volcanic eruptions the presence of certain aerosols , or tiny particles suspended in the atmosphere , can reflect sunlight away from the earth .

over geologic time , and in certain recent eruptions , the aerosols jetted into the atmosphere have caused significant cooling for one to several years after an eruption .

about 71,000 years ago , an eruption of mt .

toga in present - day indonesia thrust about 2,800 times as much aerosol dust into the atmosphere as the mt .

st. helens eruption of 1980 , and may have been sufficient to cause a six - year volcanic winter and instigate a 1,000-year ice age .

more recently , in 1992 , the eruption of mt .

pinatubo was sufficient to lower global average temperatures significantly for a few years .

release of methane clathrates from ocean beds methane is a potent greenhouse gas .

methane clathrates ( or methane hydrates ) are a form of ice with methane trapped in their cystalline structures that exist at cold temperatures and high pressures on the earth's ocean floor and in arctic continental shelves ( the latter of which may be very shallow or even above ground ) .

some hypothesize that the sudden release of methane clathrates may have been implicated in the earth's most severe extinction event , which occurred suddenly about 252 million years ago , resulting in a 5 o c temperature increase globally , and with an estimated loss of about 96% of marine species and 70% of terrestrial vertebrate species .

another rapid warming , thought by some to have been caused by massive releases of methane clathrates or carbon dioxide , and accompanied by major extinctions , occurred at the beginning of the paleocene - eocene thermal maximum or the initial eocene thermal maximum .

sea surface temperatures rose between 5 o and 8 o c , and in the high arctic , sea surface temperatures rose to about 23 o c / 73 o f. ( today's mean annual temperature at the north pole is around - 20 o c / - 4 o f. ) there is corroborating evidence in a rapid color change of ocean sediments that normal deposition of white calcite shells of ocean animals stopped for some 50 thousand years , which may have occurred with accompanying ocean acidification .

 ( see "carbon dioxide and ocean acidification" above . ) .

water vapor water vapor exists naturally in the earth's atmosphere and is the most important greenhouse gas ( see " greenhouse gases " section ) , accounting for around two - thirds of the 33 o c of additional warming our planet receives because of the presence of its atmosphere .

however , a change in water vapor content of the atmosphere can have warming or cooling effects , depending on where it is in the atmosphere , in latitude and altitude .

warmer temperatures globally will tend to increase the water vapor in the atmosphere , a positive feedback that tends to amplify the warming .

to the degree that certain clouds increase , especially low clouds , with increased water vapor , a negative feedback may result , reducing the warming .

much of the warming predicted by climate models in response to ghg results from amplification by increased water vapor in the atmosphere from the initial increase in ghg - forced temperature .

feedbacks to clouds are among the least understood processes and account for large differences among climate model results .

although significant scientific advances in understanding clouds have been made since the year 2000 , it will be at least several years before these are fully incorporated into scientific assessments , and no doubt considerable uncertainty will remain for decades .

chaotic variability climate scientists say that there is natural or "chaotic" variability in the climate system , meaning that there is a certain amount of random or unexplained behavior of the climate .

to some degree , this natural variability reflects what science has not identified , cannot explain , or does not find a regular statistical pattern to describe .

the presence of unexplained variability does not mean that scientists cannot make meaningful and useful statements about the past or future ; it means that there is an amount of uncertainty , resulting from unidentified or poorly understood factors or randomness , that will remain in forecasts of the future .

