on july 31 , 2006 , president fidel castro provisionally ceded political power to his brother raúl "for several weeks" in order to recover from intestinal surgery .

as a result , in a proclamation signed by fidel , raúl castro became first secretary of the communist party , commander in chief of the revolutionary armed forces ( far ) , and president of the council of state and government , top positions that fidel had held .

although cuba has remained a hard - line communist state under fidel castro since the 1959 cuban revolution , fidel's announcement that he was temporarily ceding political power to his brother raúl could be the beginning of a political transition .

at the same time that he ceded power to raúl , fidel castro tapped six other high - ranking government officials on a provisional basis for key roles in health , education , and energy projects .

he delegated the job of promoting public and international health projects to current minister of public health josé ramón balaguer cabrera .

on education , he designated josé ramón machado ventura and esteban lazo hernández , both members of the political bureau ( politburo ) of the communist party and both vice presidents of the council of state .

on energy , he designated carlos lage , a vice president of the council of state and executive secretary of the council of ministers .

fidel also directed lage , as well as foreign minister felipe perez roque and central bank president francisco soberón valdés , to form a commission to manage and prioritize funds for health , education , and energy programs .

at this juncture , there is sparse information coming out of cuba about fidel castro's medical condition and whether he will be able to resume his role as head of the political system and the communist party .

on august 13 , 2006 , fidel's 80 th birthday , cuba's newspaper juventud rebelde published the first photographs of castro since his surgery , along with a message from castro indicating that his recovery would not be short .

castro promised to fight for his health , and urged his supporters to be optimistic , but cautioned that they should "be prepared for any adverse news. .

some observers had been questioning why raúl castro had not been seen in public , although his public role in greeting visiting venezuelan president hugo chávez on august 13 , 2006 , has appeared to put these questions to rest .

although cuba has undertaken some limited economic reforms in recent years , politically the country remains a hard - line communist state .

until his most recent decision to step down while recuperating from surgery , fidel castro ruled since the 1959 cuban revolution , which ousted the corrupt government of fulgencio batista .

soon after taking power , castro laid the foundations for an authoritarian regime by consolidating power and forcing moderates out of the government .

in april 1961 , castro stated that the cuban revolution was socialist , and in december 1961 , he proclaimed himself to be a marxist - leninist .

from 1959 until 1976 , castro ruled by decree .

the castro government adopted a constitution in 1976 , later amended in 1992 and 2002 , which set forth the communist party as the leading force in the state and society .

the 2002 amendments stated that "socialism and the revolutionary political and social system in the constitution ... are irrevocable , and cuba will never again return to capitalism. .

castro has dominated the communist party through his position as first secretary of the political bureau , the party's leading decision - making institution .

he has dominated the government through his position as president of the council of ministers , the highest executive branch authority , and as president of the council of state , which makes legislative decisions on behalf of the national assembly of people's power when it is not in session .

as president of the council of state , castro has continued as both head of state and government since the promulgation of the 1976 constitution .

for a number of years , fidel's brother raúl , as first vice president of the council of state , has been the officially designated successor ( pursuant to article 94 of the constitution ) , and slated to become head of state and head of government with fidel's departure .

raúl also has served as first vice president of the council of ministers , as minister of the revolutionary armed forces ( far ) , and as second secretary of the communist party .

his position in the party was confirmed at the last congress held in october 1997 during which fidel publicly endorsed raúl as his political successor .

although many observers believe that the eventual demise of cuba's communist system of government is inevitable , there is considerable disagreement over when or how this may occur .

some point to fidel castro's age and increasing fragility in recent years and predict that the regime will collapse when castro is not at the helm .

other observers stress that fidel is still not out of the picture and that the cuban government has a plan for the permanent succession of his brother raúl .

they point to cuba's strong security apparatus and the extraordinary system of controls that prevents dissidents from gaining popular support .

before fidel's recent surgery , observers discerned several potential scenarios for cuba's future when fidel either dies in office or departs the political scene because of age or declining health .

these fit into three broad categories: the continuation of a communist government ; a military government ; or a democratic transition or fully democratic government .

over the years , although u.s. policymakers have agreed on the overall objective of u.s. policy toward cuba — to help bring democracy and respect for human rights to the island — there have been contrasting schools of thought about how to achieve that objective .

most of the debate has centered on the wisdom of u.s. economic sanctions on cuba .

some have advocated a policy of keeping maximum pressure on the cuban government until reforms are enacted , while continuing efforts to support the cuban people .

others argue for an approach , sometimes referred to as constructive engagement , that would lift some u.s. sanctions that they believe are hurting the cuban people , and move toward engaging cuba in dialogue .

still others have called for a swift normalization of u.s. - cuban relations by lifting the u.s. embargo .

while there has been growing sentiment in congress over the past several years to ease sanctions on cuba , legislative efforts to make changes to the economic embargo have not been enacted .

president bush has threatened to veto several appropriations bills if they contained any provisions weakening cuba sanctions .

at this juncture , congress and the administration essentially agree that any change in the u.s. sanctions - based policy toward cuba will only be triggered by substantial movement toward democracy on the island .

in the new context of fidel's provisional transfer of power to his brother raúl , observers have advocated two general policy approaches to contend with cuba's transition process: 1 ) a stay - the - course or status - quo approach that would maintain the u.s. dual - track policy of isolating the cuban government while providing support to the cuban people ; and 2 ) an approach aimed at influencing the cuban government and cuban society through increased contact and engagement .

beyond the current isolation - versus - engagement policy debate on cuba , moving toward normalization of u.s. relations with cuba will raise a number of important longer - term policy issues for the united states .

these include the restoration of diplomatic relations , compensation to u.s. citizens and companies for their properties expropriated in cuba , trade relations , the status of the u.s. naval base at guantanamo bay , and cuban migration to the united states .

within the context of deteriorating u.s. - cuban relations in the early 1960s , the united states broke relations with cuba in january 1961 in response to a cuban demand to decrease the staff of the u.s. embassy within 48 hours .

in 1977 , under the carter administration , the two countries signed an agreement for the establishment of an interests section in each capital .

these two interests sections in havana and washington essentially operate as embassies , although not in name and without accredited ambassadors , and occupy the former embassy buildings of each country .

full normalization of diplomatic relations to the ambassadorial level would most likely only occur after an overall improvement in relations .

this would include progress in dealing with the issue of compensation for the expropriated properties of u.s. citizens .

in 1972 , the foreign claims settlement commission ( fcsc ) , an independent agency within the department of justice , certified 5,911 claims of u.s. citizens and companies that had their property confiscated by the cuban government through april 1967 , with 30 u.s. companies accounting for almost 60% of the claims .

the original value of the claims was $1.8 billion , but with interest , the value of the claims is today estimated at about $7 billion .

many of the companies that originally filed claims have been bought and sold numerous times .

earlier this year , the fcsc initiated a second cuban claims program with a filing deadline of august 11 , 2006 , for properties confiscated after may 1 , 1967 .

there are a variety of potential alternatives for restitution / compensation schemes to resolve the outstanding claims , but it is evident that resolving the issue would entail considerable negotiation and cooperation between the two governments .

in terms of trade , cuba could become one of the most significant u.s. trade partners in the caribbean basin upon the normalization of relations .

for example , since late 2001 , when u.s. agricultural exports were first allowed pursuant to certain restrictions under the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 , cuba has purchased more than $1.3 billion in u.s. agricultural products .

beyond the overall trade embargo , cuba also is currently denied normal trade relations treatment pursuant to the trade act of 1974 and is excluded from participation in the u.s. preferential trade programs for the caribbean basin region .

u.s. sugar imports from cuba are also specifically prohibited .

lifting these sanctions could have a significant impact on the level of trade between the two countries .

cuba's population of 11 million and its two - way foreign trade of almost $9.9 billion in 2005 ( $2.7 billion in exports and almost $7.2 billion in imports ) point to the country becoming the largest u.s. trade partner in the caribbean absent economic sanctions .

with the normalization of u.s. - cuban relations , the status of the u.s. naval base at guantanamo bay would most likely change .

the mission of the base , which dates back to 1903 , has changed over time and currently includes being the location of a u.s. military prison for detainees in the war against terrorism .

as set forth in a 1934 u.s. - cuban treaty , the u.s. presence at guantanamo can only be terminated by mutual agreement or by abandonment by the united states .

however , a provision in the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-114 , section 201 ) states that once a democratically - elected cuban government is in place , the united states will be prepared to enter into negotiations to return the base or to renegotiate the present agreement under mutually agreeable terms .

with regard to cuban migration , normalization of relations could bring about change to the u.s. policy , set forth in the cuban refugee act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-732 ) , popularly known as the cuban adjustment act , that allows the attorney general and now the secretary of homeland security to permit undocumented cubans arriving in the united states to stay and adjust to permanent resident status within one year .

in 1996 , congress approved legislation ( p.l .

104-208 , division c , title vi , section 606 ) that conditions the repeal of the cuban adjustment act upon a presidential determination that a democratically - elected cuban government is in power .

