health insurance coverage facilitates access to health care and protects individuals and families from catastrophic health expenses .

both the market and government have important roles in helping ensure the availability , affordability , and adequacy of private health insurance .

in 2006 , about two - thirds of americans had private coverage , including about 60% with employment - based and 9% with directly purchased health insurance .

in the same year , about 27% of the population had government benefits through medicare , medicaid , and military health programs .

about 16% of the population was uninsured .

the market for private insurance excels in creating new products and adapting to changing demand , but is not set up to ensure that everyone gets coverage .

consumers who are sick or poor may not be able to find adequate insurance at an affordable price , while others may decide that premiums are more than they are willing to pay .

if health insurance were another good or service , people might not care about consumers who cannot afford it or choose not to buy it .

but many think that health insurance and the health care it pays for are different from other goods and services .

government helps ensure access to health coverage where the market might not .

it does this through public programs , such as medicare and medicaid , and through policies that affect the market for private insurance .

federal policies include tax subsidies and regulations .

subsidies make health insurance more affordable for consumers and employers , and regulations help ensure access to insurance and the adequacy of benefits .

states play a fundamental role in regulating health insurers and the products they sell .

functions vary by state , and may include licensing insurance companies and agents , ensuring financial solvency through standards and oversight , approving rates , and assessing insurance companies to fund programs for consumers .

of course , there is no bright line between the market and government .

market limitations prompt government policies , and government policies in turn shape market trends .

in addition , differences among state policies and the interaction between federal and state requirements create a complex landscape for consumers , employers , and insurers who wish to buy or provide health benefits .

this report analyzes the roles of the market and government in providing , financing , and regulating private health insurance .

it focuses on federal policy , and shows that although both the market and government play important roles , both also have limitations .

by generating diverse insurance products and by adapting to different and changing conditions , the market for private health insurance provides choices for consumers and employers who have different needs and preferences .

government plays a role in helping ensure access to health coverage .

in 2007 , federal spending on medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) is expected to total $634 billion .

these programs serve primarily older , low - income , and disabled people , populations that otherwise would have difficulty finding adequate and affordable coverage in the private market .

for vulnerable individuals who lack access to employer - paid insurance , government benefits may be the only viable alternative .

in addition to providing health benefits for vulnerable populations , the federal government uses tax and regulatory policy to influence the market for private health insurance .

tax policy supports access to care through subsidies for insurance and medical care expenses , while regulatory policy supports access by laying ground rules that affect the availability and adequacy of insurance coverage .

in the 110 th congress , committees in both the house and the senate have held hearings and developed legislation regarding access to and the adequacy of private insurance .

for example , the senate budget committee has held a series of hearings on health care costs and universal coverage .

in addition , committees in both the house and senate have reported legislation that would regulate private insurance .

one set of house and senate proposals would extend and expand federal requirements affecting mental health coverage under group health insurance policies .

another set would prohibit the use of genetic information by insurers in making enrollment determinations and setting insurance premiums .

state policy makers have been more proactive in pursuing policies to increase the availability and affordability of private health insurance .

for example , both massachusetts and maine currently are implementing a variety of initiatives with an eye to achieving universal coverage .

these initiatives include insurance market reforms , requirements on employers and consumers , public subsidies for private insurance , and the expansion of public coverage under medicaid .

in california , policy makers continue to debate the merits of different approaches for achieving universal health coverage .

these approaches include requiring individuals to have coverage , requiring employers to make contributions for health benefits , and adopting a statewide single - payer system .

both government and the market have important roles in helping ensure the availability , affordability , and adequacy of private health insurance .

the market excels in creating new products and adapting to changing demand , but is not set up to guarantee that everyone gets coverage .

government complements the market through tax and regulatory policies aimed at improving access to coverage and the adequacy of benefits .

ideally , these policies would reflect widely held social values , but setting priorities is difficult .

should the priority be affordability , and if so , for whom ? .

for consumers and employers purchasing insurance ? .

for taxpayers who subsidize coverage ? .

or should the priority be facilitating access to benefits ? .

again , for whom ? .

for workers ; for people with lower income ; for people who are older , sick , or disabled ; or for everyone ? .

policymakers face a challenge in improving access to health insurance , while making efficient use of limited public resources and avoiding unnecessary regulations that might hinder market innovation .

