the debate in congress over whether and how to address possible future climate change is intensifying .

often , the role of the u.s. agriculture sector is invoked in this debate .

agriculture is a source of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , which many scientists agree are contributing to observed climate change .

agriculture is also a "sink" for sequestering carbon , which partly offsets these emissions .

carbon sequestration ( the capture and storage of carbon ) in agricultural soils can be an important component of a climate change mitigation strategy , limiting the release of carbon from the soil to the atmosphere .

congress is considering a range of climate change policy options , including ghg emission reduction programs that would either mandate or authorize a cap - and - trade program to reduce ghg emissions .

in general , the current legislative proposals would not require emission reductions in the agriculture and forestry sectors .

however , some of these proposals would allow farmers and landowners to generate offsets in support of a cap - and - trade program .

other proposals that congress has considered would give farmers and landowners a share of available allowances ( or credits ) for sequestration and / or emission reduction activities .

these offsets and allowances could be sold to facilities ( eg , power plants ) covered by a cap - and - trade program .

some bills have also specified that the proceeds from auctioned allowances be used to promote certain activities , including farmland conservation and developing bio - energy technologies .

this report is organized in three parts .

first , it discusses the extent of ghg emissions associated with the u.s. agriculture sector , and cites current and potential estimates for u.s. agricultural soils to sequester carbon and partly offset national ghg emissions .

second , the report describes the types of land management and farm conservation practices that can reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon in agricultural soils , highlighting those practices that are currently promoted under existing voluntary federal agricultural programs .

the appendix provides a summary primer of the key background information presented in these first two sections .

finally , the report provides a brief overview of legislative action within the ongoing energy and climate debate in congress to enact changes to existing laws and regulations affecting primarily the energy - producing sectors and other sectors thought to be contributing to ghg concentrations .

many of these energy and climate bills include provisions that could involve farmers and landowners by allowing agriculture and forestry - based carbon offsets and allowances and / or by allowing for farm - based biofuels , biomass residues , and dedicated renewable energy crops .

more detail on these bills is available in other crs reports .

this report also describes provisions enacted in the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) that could expand the scope of existing farm and forestry conservation programs in ways that could more broadly encompass certain aspects of these climate change initiatives .

this farm bill provision is also invoked in most energy and climate bills in order to establish an advisory committee to oversee implementation of agricultural and forestry carbon offsets .

the report concludes with a discussion of some of the types of questions that may be raised regarding the role of the u.s. agriculture sector in the broader climate change debate .

this report does not address the potential effects of global climate change on u.s. agricultural production .

such effects may arise because of increased climate variability and incidence of global environmental hazards , such as drought and / or flooding , pests , weeds , and diseases , or temperature and precipitation changes that might cause locational shifts in where and how agricultural crops are produced .

this report also does not address how ongoing or anticipated initiatives to promote u.s. bioenergy production may effect efforts to reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon , such as by promoting more intensive feedstock production and by encouraging fewer crop rotations and planting area setbacks , which could both raise emissions and reduce carbon uptake .

agriculture is a both a source and a sink of greenhouse gases , generating emissions that enter the atmosphere and removing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and storing it in vegetation and soils ( a process known as sequestration ) .

sequestration in farmland soils partially offsets agricultural emissions .

despite this offset , however , the u.s. agriculture sector remains a net source of ghg emissions .

existing conservation and farmland management programs administered at both the federal and state levels often encourage the types of agricultural practices that can reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon .

these include conservation , forestry , energy , and research programs within existing farm legislation .

these programs were initiated predominantly for other production or environmental purposes , and few specifically address climate change concerns in the agriculture and forestry sectors .

however , some usda and state - level programs have started to place additional attention on the potential for emissions reduction and carbon storage under certain existing programs .

agricultural conservation and other farmland practices broadly include land management , vegetation , and structures that can also reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon , such as: land retirement , conversion , and restoration — conversion / restoration to grasslands , wetlands , or rangelands ; and selected structural barriers , such as vegetative and riparian buffers , setbacks , windbreaks ; cropland tillage practices — reduced / medium - till , no - till , ridge / strip - till vs. conventional tillage ; soil management / conservation — soil supplements / amendments , soil erosion controls ; precision agriculture practices , recognized best management practices ; cropping techniques — crop rotations , cover cropping , precision agriculture practices , efficient fertilizer / nutrient ( including manure ) and chemical application ; manure and feed management — improved manure storage ( eg , anaerobic digestion , methane recovery ) ; and improved feed efficiency , dietary supplements ; grazing management — rotational grazing , improved forage practices ; bioenergy / biofuels substitution — on - farm use , replacing fossil fuels or deriving bioenergy from land - based feedstocks , renewable energy ; and e nergy efficiency and energy conservation ( on - farm ) .

in general , conservation programs administered by usda and state agencies encourage farmers to implement certain farming practices and often provide financial incentives and technical assistance to support adoption .

participation in these programs is voluntary , and farmers may choose to discontinue participating in these programs .

the effectiveness of these practices depends on the type of practice , how well the practice is implemented , and also on the length of time a practice is undertaken .

these programs are generally designed to address site - specific improvements based on a conservation plan developed with the assistance of usda or state extension technical and field staff that considers the goals and land resource base for an individual farmer or landowner .

such a conservation plan is typically a necessary precursor to participating in usda's conservation programs .

although not the focus of this report , forestry practices that reduce emissions and / or sequester carbon include afforestation and reforestation ; forest management ( such as harvest for long - term wood products , reduced - impact logging , certified sustainable forestry , thinning / release , and fertilization ) ; pruning ; and avoided deforestation and forest degradation .

congress is currently considering a range of energy and climate policy options .

in general , the current climate proposals would not require ghg emission reductions in the agriculture and forestry sectors .

however , if enacted , provisions in these bills could potentially raise farm input costs for fossil fuels , fertilizers , energy , and other production inputs .

these higher costs could potentially be offset by possible farm revenue increases should farmers participate in carbon offset and renewable energy provisions that are part of this legislation .

for example , within cap - and - trade proposals being debated in congress are provisions that could provide tradeable allowances to certain agricultural industries , and provisions that could establish a carbon offset program for domestic farm - and land - based carbon storage activities .

in addition , the renewable energy provisions contained in these bills could potentially expand the market for farm - based biofuels , biomass residues , and dedicated energy crops .

these and related bills and issues are currently being debated in congress .

more detailed information on these bills is provided in other crs reports .

the omnibus 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) included a new ecosystem services market provision that expanded the scope of existing farm and forestry conservation programs in ways that could more broadly encompass certain aspects of these climate change initiatives .

the 2008 farm bill's so - called environmental services market provision seeks to facilitate the participation of farmers and landowners in environmental services markets , focusing first on carbon storage .

this provision was also intended to help address some of the measurement and quantification issues surrounding agricultural and forestry carbon credits , as well as to expand existing voluntary conservation and other farm bill programs , providing incentives that could accelerate opportunities for agriculture and forestry to reduce emissions associated with climate change , adopt energy efficiency measures , and produce renewable energy feedstocks .

the 2008 farm bill provision seeks to "establish technical guidelines that outline science - based methods to measure the environmental services benefits from conservation and land management activities in order to facilitate the participation of farmers , ranchers , and forest landowners in emerging environmental services markets. .

the intended purpose of these technical guidelines is to develop ( 1 ) a procedure to measure environmental services benefits ; ( 2 ) a protocol to report these benefits ; and ( 3 ) a registry to collect , record , and maintain the benefits measured .

the provision also requires that usda provide guidelines for establishing a verification process as part of the protocol for reporting environmental services , but it allows usda to consider the role of third parties in conducting independent verification .

in carrying out this directive , usda is directed to work in consultation with other federal and state government agencies , non - governmental interests , and other interested persons as determined by usda .

however , the enacted bill did not specifically address funding for this provision .

nevertheless , the inclusion of this provision in the farm bill is expected to expand the scope of existing farm and forestry conservation programs in ways that will more broadly encompass certain aspects of the climate change debate .

for more detailed background information , see crs report rl34042 , provisions supporting ecosystem services markets in u.s. farm bill legislation .

in addition , this farm bill provision is invoked within the current energy and climate legislation .

for example , h.r .

2454 would expand this provision to establish an independent advisory committee to provide advice on establishing and implementing a carbon offset program for domestic agricultural and forestry practices .

in december 2008 , usda announced it would create a federal government - wide "conservation and land management environmental services board" to assist usda with the "development of new technical guidelines and science - based methods to assess environmental service benefits which will in turn promote markets for ecosystem services including carbon trading to mitigate climate change. .

a federally chartered public advisory committee will advise the board , and will include farmers , ranchers , forest landowners , and tribal representatives , as well as representatives from state natural resource and environmental agencies , agriculture departments , and conservation and environmental organizations .

usda's press release also announced that usda was establishing a new office of ecosystem services and markets ( oesm ) , which will provide administrative and technical assistance in developing the uniform guidelines and tools needed to create and expand markets for ecosystem services in the farming and forestry sectors .

in march 2009 , the house agriculture committee issued a climate change questionnaire , which was distributed to more than 400 organizations , to solicit input on proposals to reduce ghg emissions .

the published survey responses are available on the committee's website and highlight some concerns , as well as the potential market opportunities issues for farmers and landowners .

these and other issues were discussed at a house agriculture committee hearing in june 2009 , and also at subsequent senate agriculture committee hearings in july and september 2009 as part of the committees' review of pending climate legislation .

similar issues were raised at a 110 th congress subcommittee hearing of the senate agriculture committee in may 2008 .

although the current legislative proposals do not specifically include agricultural operations among "covered entities" under a mandatory emissions cap , some interest groups continue to question whether certain types of agricultural operations could eventually be brought in under some proposals .

still others continue to argue that u.s. agriculture will be affected by anticipated climate legislation in terms of generally increasing energy and production input costs that will negatively impact the farming sector .

the extent to which the agricultural and forestry sectors will participate in an offset and allowance program continues to be actively debated in congress .

the inclusion of provisions that allow for agriculture and forestry offsets and allowances as part of a cap - and - trade scheme has been generally supported by a broad - based industry coalition .

this coalition consists of agricultural groups representing commodity crops , livestock and dairy , the american farm bureau federation , the national farmers union , the american farmland trust , and other agriculture support and utility companies .

former senators and majority leaders bob dole and tom daschle are also advocating on behalf of the bipartisan policy center that farmers be fully integrated into any cap - and - trade program .

most groups , including many within the environmental community , generally support the inclusion of carbon offset projects within a cap - and - trade scheme since this is likely to help contain overall costs of a carbon reduction program .

the inclusion of agriculture and forestry offsets with a carbon reduction program , however , has remained controversial since the kyoto protocol negotiations during the 1990s .

during those negotiations , there was marked disagreement among countries and interest groups , arguing either for or against the inclusion of offsets from the agriculture and forestry sectors .

the eu's ghg emission program , the emission trading system ( ets ) , which was established in 2005 , does not provide for agricultural or forestry projects and activities .

among the reasons are ( 1 ) pragmatic concerns regarding measurement and verification , given the sheer number of farmers and landowners , and ( 2 ) ideological concerns about granting too much flexibility in how emission reductions are met , which could undermine overall program goals .

among the areas of concern regarding biological sequestration offsets are those highlighted in two previous sections of this report , " uncertainty estimating emissions " and " uncertainty estimating carbon sinks . .

in summary , primary areas of concern include permanence / duration , given that land uses can change over time ( eg , forest lands to urban development , other natural events such as fires or pests ) ; measurement / accounting , given that biological sequestration measurement is difficult and estimates can vary , actual emission reduction or sequestration depends on site - specific factors ( eg , location , climate , soil type , crop / vegetation , tillage practices , farm management , etc .

 ) ; effectiveness , the success of the mitigation practice will depend on the type of practice , how well implemented and managed by the farmer or landowner , and the length of time the practice is undertaken ; additionality / double counting , given that some of the activities generating offsets would have occurred anyway under a pre - existing program or practice , and thus may not go beyond business as usual ( bau ) ; and / or given that some reductions may be counted by another program ( eg , attributable to other environmental goals under various farm conservation programs ) or toward more than one ghg reduction target ; and leakage , given that reductions in one place could result in additional emissions elsewhere .

a more detailed discussion of some of these issues is available in various reports by crs , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and other groups .

following is a list of questions that may be raised as congress continues to consider the role of the agriculture and forestry sectors as part of the broader climate change debate .

emissions reductions .

should carbon sequestration efforts be balanced by incentives to obtain additional emissions reductions in the agriculture sector through improved conservation and farm management practices , which could have a more immediate , direct , and lasting effect on overall ghg emissions ? .

how might the existing regulatory framework for controlling air pollutants affect the climate change debate ? .

what are the potential options for reducing ghg emissions at u.s. farming operations ? .

how might cost concerns be addressed that limit broader adoption of manure management systems and also feed management strategies at u.s. livestock operations ? .

carbon sequestration .

what are the upper limits of carbon capture and storage initiatives in the agriculture sector ? .

for example , are such carbon sinks temporary or long - lasting , and what limits exist on their storage value ? .

do they rely appropriately on the willingness of landowners to adopt or continue to implement a particular conservation practice ? .

do they rely too heavily on the willingness of landowners to convert existing farmland to open space or prevent the conversion of existing farmland to non - farm uses ? .

are they cost - effective when compared to sinks in other sectors ? .

how might concerns regarding uncertainty be addressed when measuring and estimating the amount of carbon sequestered in agricultural soils ? .

carbon offset or credit markets .

what is the federal role in possibly expanding existing conservation programs in conjunction with efforts to create new market opportunities for farmers by developing a carbon credit trading system ? .

how will usda implement the new 2008 farm bill provision directing the department to work with other agencies and organization to establish guidelines and standards for measuring agricultural and forestry environmental benefits , including carbon storage ? .

what are the potential measurement , monitoring , enforcement , and administrative issues of implementing a carbon credit trading system involving the agriculture and forestry sectors ? .

how would stored carbon be measured and verified ; how much compensation would be available and for how long ; what are required management practices ; and which accounting methodologies should be used ? .

would such a system operate under a voluntary or a mandatory framework ? .

farm b ill programs .

are there opportunities to expand existing federal conservation and land management programs to achieve greater emissions reduction and carbon sequestration in the agriculture sector ? .

how might emissions reduction and carbon sequestration be integrated with the many other goals of conservation programs , such as improved soil quality and productivity , improved water and air quality , and wildlife habitat ? .

which programs or practices are the most beneficial and cost - effective ? .

are there ways to rank applications from farmers under existing programs to grant a higher weight to proposals to address climate change goals ? .

are there existing state programs that effectively address climate change and could be adopted at the federal level ? .

bioenergy promotion .

how might ongoing or anticipated initiatives to promote u.s. bioenergy production , such as corn - based or cellulosic ethanol , affect the options for land management or conservation strategies that could increase carbon uptake on agricultural lands and in agricultural soils ? .

might broader climate change goals be affected by increased agricultural production in response to corn - based ethanol ? .

for example , might previously retired land be brought back into corn production or might this result in more intensive corn production , including fewer crop rotations and planting area setbacks , which could raise emissions and reduce the amount of carbon sequestered ? .

are there other competing commercial crops that might be used as a feedstock for ethanol that could also affect emissions and carbon uptake potential ? .

energy efficiency .

what are the opportunities for improved on - farm energy efficiency and conservation ? .

how might these be integrated into the broader framework on climate change mitigation in the agriculture sector ? .

safeguarding u.s. agricultural production .

among the possible effects of global climate change on agricultural production are increased climate variability and increased incidence of global environmental hazards , such as drought and / or flooding , pests , weeds , and diseases , or location shifts in where agriculture is produced .

climate change in some locations increases the yields of some crops .

some u.s. production regions are likely to fare better than others .

are additional initiatives needed in the u.s. agriculture sector to prepare for the potentially effects of global climate change that might impact u.s. agricultural production and food security ? .

which regions and crops might be "winners" or "losers" and how can transitions be eased ? .

