violence in the home is not a new phenomenon .

jeffrey l. edleson , a researcher who hasstudied domestic violence extensively , dates it back to the roman empire , and reports that theincidence of family violence has not changed over the years as much as its visibility .

 ( 1 ) edleson , who is the directorof the minnesota center against violence and abuse , observes that the most recent victims offamily violence to receive attention are children who witness violence between adults in their homes .

carla smith stover of the yale university child study center noted in an overview of domesticviolence research that a large body of studies have indicated that exposure to domestic violence hasharmful effects on children's emotional and behavioral development .

some researchers havereported data demonstrating that childhood exposure to such violence is associated with coexistingand potential indications of child behavioral and psychiatric problems .

 ( 2 ) stover reported that someresearchers believe that exposure to such violence can "affect children's cognitive functioning,initiative , personality style , self - esteem , and impulse control. .

 ( 3 ) furthermore , such childrenmay be at greater risk for child abuse and neglect .

stover cited research that found an estimated 60%to 75% of families in homes where such violence occurred had children who also were physicallyabused .

 ( 4 ) the impact on children of domestic violence was an issue of interest in the 109th congress.the first session of the 109th congress ended with the passage of the violence against women anddepartment of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-162 ) , which contained new initiativesto address concerns about children and youth exposed to and victimized by domestic violence .

thisreport discusses existing federal programs and initiatives that have been established to assist suchchildren and youth , and new provisions enacted in p.l .

109-162 .

since 1999 , several federal programs and initiatives have been created specifically to addressconcerns related to children who witness domestic violence .

the programs include the safe startprogram ( administered by the department of justice's ( doj's ) office of juvenile justice anddelinquency prevention , or ojjdp ) , safe havens for children program ( sponsored by doj's officeof violence against women , or vawo ) , and the safe and bright futures for children initiative andthe demonstration of enhanced services to children and youth who have been exposed todomestic violence ( both administered by the department of health and human services , or hhs ) .

the latter two programs are partially funded through proceeds from the stop family violencepostage stamp that was created through the stamp out domestic violence act of 2001 , section 653of the treasury and general government appropriations act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-67 ) .

the u.s. postalservice was directed to issue a semi - postal stamp in order to allow the public a direct and tangibleway to contribute to domestic violence funding .

the stamp was issued for sale on october 8 , 2003 .

to date , proceeds from the stamp have generated $3.03 million .

stamps will not be issued afterdecember 31 , 2006 .

 ( 5 ) in addition , the greenbook initiative is a federal multi - agency demonstration project thatimplements the suggested guidelines for policy and practice of the national council of juvenile andfamily court judges "greenbook" designed to assist child welfare , domestic violence agencies , andfamily courts to respond more effectively when domestic violence and child maltreatment occursimultaneously .

the federal assistance programs and the greenbook initiative are discussed below .

as noted earlier , the violence against women and department of justice reauthorizationact of 2005 ( vawa 2005 , p.l .

109-162 ) reauthorized the safe havens for children program .

inaddition to reauthorizing the safe havens program , vawa 2005 created several new programsintended to serve youth victims of domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

theseprograms are all included in titles iii and iv of p.l .

109-162 .

 ( 53 ) .

the attorney general , in consultation with hhs , is authorized to award grants to eligibleentities to operate programs to assist youth who are victims of domestic and dating violence , sexualassault , and stalking .

to receive such a grant , an eligible entity must be a nonprofit,nongovernmental group with the primary purpose of providing services that assist teen and youngadult victims of domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking ; a community - based groupspecializing in intervention and prevention services for such youth ; a tribe or tribal organization thatprovides services primarily to assist tribal youth or tribal victims of such violence ; or a nonprofit,nongovernmental organization that provides services for runaway or homeless youth affected bydomestic or sexual abuse .

grantees must use funds for designing or duplicating and implementing programs andservices using intervention models for domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking toaddress the needs of youth who are victims of such violence .

programs must include directcounseling and advocacy , and linguistically , culturally , and community - relevant services forunderserved populations ( or linkages to such services ) , and may also include mental health , legaladvocacy , work with public officials to help reduce or eliminate violence , and ( subject to a 25%limit ) additional services such as child care , transportation , educational assistance , and respite care .

not less than 7% of the program funds must be available for three - year grants to indian tribesor tribal groups .

the attorney general must use no more than 2.5% of appropriated funds in anyyear for administration , monitoring , and grant evaluations ; and use not less than 5% of appropriatedfunds in any year for technical assistance .

vawa 2005 authorizes $15 million to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2007 through2011 for program grants .

the attorney general , through the director of vawo , is authorized to make two - year grantsto eligible entities to assist young victims of dating and domestic violence , sexual assault , andstalking who are between the ages of 12 and 24 .

the purpose of the grant is to encourage the courts,domestic violence and sexual assault service providers , youth groups and service providers , violenceprevention programs , and law enforcement agencies to cross - train and collaborate so thatcommunities can create and carry out procedures to protect and more generally and efficiently serveyoung victims .

also , grantees are encouraged , where necessary , to work with other entities such ascommunity - based supports that address the safety , health , mental health , social service , housing , andeconomic needs of youth who are victims of domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , andstalking .

to be eligible for a grant , an applicant must collaborate with a victim service provider thathas a documented history of effective work regarding domestic and dating violence , sexual assault,or stalking , and the impact of such violence on young people ; and must partner with a court or lawenforcement agency .

collaborations also may include batterer intervention or sex offender treatmentprograms with specified knowledge about and experience working with youth offenders ; community - based youth groups that address specific concerns and problems youth face ; schools orschool - based programs intended to furnish intervention and prevention services to young peopleexperiencing problems ; faith - based groups that address problems faced by youth ; health care entities ( that are eligible to be reimbursed under medicaid ) , including providers that focus on the specialneeds of youth ; education programs targeted toward informing teens about hiv and other sexuallytransmitted diseases ; indian health service , tribal child protective services , the bureau of indianaffairs , or the federal bureau of investigation ; or may include law enforcement agencies connectedwith the bureau of indian affairs that provide tribal law enforcement .

eligible entities must use grant funds to assess and analyze available services for teen andyoung adult victims .

entities must determine pertinent barriers to such services in a particular area,and work jointly to develop community protocols to address the problems .

furthermore , eligibleentities must use funds to create and enhance connections and collaborations between domesticviolence and sexual assault service providers and , where appropriate , law enforcement agencies,courts , federal agencies , and other groups addressing the safety , health , mental health , social service,housing , and economic needs of young victims of abuse .

when awarding grants , the vawo director must give priority to groups submittingapplications in partnership with community organizations and service providers that primarily workwith young people , particularly teens , and have shown a commitment to working jointly with othergroups to cooperatively solve problems related to domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , andstalking in youth populations .

not less than 10% of appropriated funds in any year must be available to indian tribalgovernments to create and sustain collaborations among pertinent tribal justice and social servicesdepartments , or domestic violence or sexual assault service providers , to provide culturallyappropriate services to indian women or youth .

the vawo director must not use more than 2.5%of funds in any year to monitor and evaluate grants , or more than 2.5% of funds in any year foradministration .

up to 8% of funds in any given year must be available for technical assistance toprograms .

no later than one year after the grant period ends , the vawo director must prepare , submitto congress , and make widely available summaries containing information about the activitiesimplemented by the grantees , and related initiatives the vawo director conducted to draw attentionto dating and domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking , and how they affect young victims .

vawa 2005 authorizes $5 million in each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for the programgrants .

this new program is intended to support efforts by providers of services for domestic ordating violence victims , courts , law enforcement , child welfare agencies , and other pertinentprofessionals and community groups to develop collaborative responses and services , and providecross - training to improve community responses to families that experience such violence .

the hhssecretary , through the family and youth services bureau and in consultation with vawo , mustaward two - year competitive grants to eligible entities to carry out the grant purpose .

vawa 2005 authorizes $5 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for thesegrants .

for each fiscal year , the hhs secretary must use no more than 3% of the funds forevaluation , monitoring , site visits , grantee conferences , and other administrative costs .

also , thesecretary must set aside no more than 7% for grants to indian tribes to develop programs addressingchild maltreatment and domestic or dating violence that are operated by , or in partnership with , atribal group ; and set aside up to 8% of funds for technical assistance and training to be conductedby groups that have demonstrated expertise in forming collaborations for community and systemresponses to families experiencing both child maltreatment and domestic or dating violence .

thesecretary also must consider the needs of underserved populations ( 54 ) when awarding grants .

to be eligible for a grant , an entity must collaborate with a state or local child welfare agencyor indian tribe , a provider of domestic or dating violence victim services , or a law enforcementagency or bureau of indian affairs providing tribal law enforcement .

also , an entity may includea court and any other such agencies or private nonprofit groups and faith - based groups with theability to effectively assist the child and adult victims served by the collaboration .

the attorney general , through the vawo director , is authorized to award three - yearcompetitive grants under what is termed the "supporting teens through education and protectionact of 2005," or step act , to middle schools and high schools that work with domestic violenceand sexual assault experts .

such grants are intended to empower schools to train schooladministrators , faculty , counselors , coaches , health care providers , security employees and other staffregarding the needs , concerns of , and impact on students who experience domestic and datingviolence , sexual assault , or stalking ; to develop and implement policies for students eitherexperiencing or who are perpetrators of such violence ; to provide support services for students andschool staff for developing and enhancing effective prevention and intervention methods for studentsand personnel experiencing such violence ; to provide students with developmentally appropriateeducation programs regarding such violence and the effects of experiencing those forms of violenceby adjusting the existing curricula activities to the relevant student population ; to work with existingmentoring programs and develop strong mentoring programs to assist students in understandingviolence and recognizing violent behavior and how to prevent it , and how to address their feelingsappropriately ; and to conduct evaluations assessing the effects of such programs and policies so thatdeveloping the programs can be enhanced .

the vawo director must distribute to middle and high schools any existing doj , hhs , andeducation department policy guidance and curricula concerning the prevention of domestic anddating violence , sexual assault , and stalking , and the effect of such violence on children and youth .

to be eligible to receive a grant , entities must be in a partnership that includes a public,charter , tribal , or nationally accredited private middle or secondary school , a department ofdefense - administered school under 10 u.s.c .

2164 or 20 u.s.c .

921 , ( 55 ) a group of schools or aschool district ; a domestic violence victim service provider with a history of working on domesticviolence that also understands the effects of violence on children and youth ; and a sexual assaultvictim service provider ( such as a rape crisis center , a program serving tribal sexual assault victims,or a coalition or other nonprofit nongovernmental group conducting a community - based sexualassault program ) with a history of successful work regarding sexual assault that also understands theimpact of such violence on children and youth .

partnerships also may include a law enforcementagency ; the state , tribal , territorial or local court ; nonprofit nongovernmental groups and serviceproviders addressing sexual harassment , bullying , or gang - related violence in schools ; and any othersuch agencies or nonprofit nongovernmental groups with the ability to effectively assist adult , youth,and minor victims .

when awarding grants , the director must give priority to entities that have submittedapplications in partnership with relevant courts and law enforcement organizations .

entities that aremembers of partnerships must jointly prepare and submit a report to the director every 18 monthswith details about activities they have undertaken with grant funds , and any additional informationrequired .

within nine months after the first full grant cycle is completed , the director must publiclydistribute ( including through electronic means ) model policies and procedures that were developedand implemented by grantees in middle and secondary schools .

vawa 2005 authorizes $5 million to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2007 through2011 for program grants .

the funds will remain available until expended .

the attorney general is authorized to make grants to higher education institutions orconsortia for developing and strengthening security and investigation methods to fight domestic anddating violence , sexual assault , and stalking on campuses , and for developing and strengtheningvictim services for women on campuses .

consortia may consist of campus personnel , studentgroups , campus administrators , security personnel , and regional crisis centers allied with theinstitutions .

the attorney general must award three - year competitive grants and contracts , through thevawo director , in amounts of not more than $500,000 for individual higher education institutions,and not more than $1 million for consortia of such institutions .

the attorney general must makeevery effort to guarantee equitable participation of public and private higher education institutionsin grant activities ; ensure fair geographic grant distribution among the various regions of the nation ; and ensure unbiased grant distribution to tribal colleges and universities and traditionally blackcolleges and universities .

vawa 2005 authorizes $12 million for fy2007 , and $15 million for each of fiscal years2008 through 2011 for this effort .

grantees may use funds for personnel , training , technical assistance , data collection , andother equipment ; training of campus administrators , security personnel , and staff who serve oncampus disciplinary or judicial boards that develop and put into practice procedures and services tomore efficiently identify and respond to domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalkingcrimes ; implementing and operating violence education programs to prevent domestic and datingviolence , sexual assault , and stalking ; developing , augmenting , and strengthening victim servicesprograms on campuses ; establishing and distributing or otherwise providing assistance andinformation about options for victims to take punitive or other legal action ; developing , installing,or enlarging data collection and communication systems related to domestic and dating violence,sexual assault , and stalking crimes on campus ; making capital improvements on campus to addresssuch crimes ; and improving coordination among campus administrators , security personnel , andlocal law enforcement .

each grantee must submit a biennial performance report to the attorney general , or fundingwill be suspended .

furthermore , when the grant period is completed , the institution must file aperformance report with the attorney general and the secretary of education about the activitiesundertaken and an assessment of the effectiveness of those activities in achieving the purposes listedabove .

in addition , the attorney general must submit a report to congress no later than six monthsafter the end of the fiscal year for which grants were awarded .

the report must summarizeinformation about the number of grants and amounts awarded , and provide an evaluation of theprogress made under the grants , a statistical summary of the people served , and an assessment of theeffectiveness of programs funded .

the attorney general is authorized , through the vawo director and in consultation withthe secretary of hhs , to make two - year competitive grants to eligible entities for alleviating theimpact of domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking on children exposed to suchviolence , and for reducing the risk of becoming future victims of such violence .

vawa 2005authorizes $20 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for this effort .

when awarding grants , the vawo director must consider the needs of underservedpopulations , and must not award less than 10% of funds to indian tribes for funding of tribal projects,up to 8% for technical assistance programs , and not less than 66% to programs for assisting childrenexposed to domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking ; or for training , coordinating,and advocating for programs that serve such children and youth .

to be eligible for a grant , an entity must be a victim service provider ; tribal nonprofitorganization or community - based group with a documented history of successful work concerningchildren and youth exposed to domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking ; or a state,territorial , tribal , or local government agency that is partnered with such entities .

grantees must prepare and submit an application to the director containing whateverinformation is required , and at a minimum , describe the policies and procedures the entity has orplans to adopt to increase and guarantee the safety of children and their nonabusing parent who havebeen or are experiencing exposure to violence , and also such individuals who are alreadyexperiencing domestic and / or dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking ; and guaranteelinguistically , culturally , and community - relevant services to underserved populations .

the attorney general , through the vawo director and in consultation with the secretaryof hhs , must make two - year competitive grants to home visitation programs , jointly working withvictim services providers to develop and implement model policies and steps to train home visitationservice providers about addressing domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalkingsituations in families experiencing such violence or that are at risk of violence , in order to reduce theeffects of that violence on children , preserve safety , improve parenting skills , and put an end tointergenerational cycles of violence .

the director must consider the needs of underserved populations , award not less than 7%of appropriated funds for tribal projects , and award up to 8% of funds for technical assistanceprograms .

vawa 2005 authorizes $7 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for eligibleentities to conduct the programs .

to receive a grant , an eligible entity must be a national , federal , state , local , territorial , ortribal home visitation program that provides services to pregnant women or young children and theirparent or primary caregiver in their permanent or temporary home or other familiar surroundings ; or a victim services group or agency that works together with a national , federal , state , local,territorial , or tribal home visitation program .

grantees must prepare and submit an appropriate application to the director in the mannerrequired , describing the policies and procedures they intend to adopt to improve upon or guaranteethe safety and security of children and their nonabusing parent in homes experiencing domestic anddating violence , sexual assault , or stalking ; guarantee linguistically , culturally , andcommunity - relevant services for underserved communities ; ensure adequate training by victimservice providers to home visitation program staff ; and guarantee that relevant state and local victimservice providers and coalitions are aware of the activities of groups receiving grants and areincluded as training partners , where possible .

the attorney general , through the vawo director and in consultation with the secretaryof hhs , must make two - year competitive grants to eligible entities for the purpose of developingand increasing programs to get men and youth to participate in preventing domestic and datingviolence , sexual assault , and stalking by helping them develop mutually respectful and nonviolentrelationships .

when awarding grants , the director must consider the needs of underserved population,award not less than 10% of funds to indian tribes , and award up to 8% of funds for technicalassistance to grantees and non - grantees working in this area .

vawa 2005 authorizes $10 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for the grantprograms .

eligible entities include nonprofit , nongovernmental victim service providers or coalitions ; community - based child or youth services groups that have demonstrated experience and skill inaddressing the needs and concerns of youth ; and state , territorial , tribal , or local government unitspartnered with either of those organizations just mentioned , or a program providing culturallyspecific services .

eligible entities must use funds to develop or improve upon community - based projects,including gender - specific programs that encourage children and youth to seek nonviolentrelationships to reduce the risk of becoming either victims or perpetrators of domestic and datingviolence , sexual assault , or stalking ; or such entities with experience in conducting public educationcampaigns addressing domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking must establish publiceducation and community efforts to encourage men and boys to become allies with women and girlsto prevent violence against females .

grantees can use no more than 40% of the funds to create and disseminate media materials .

the hhs secretary , acting through the national center for injury prevention and controlat the centers for disease control and prevention , is authorized to make grants to entities forsupporting research to study prevention and intervention programs to foster the understanding ofsexual and domestic violence committed by and against adults , youth , and children .

such entitiesmust include sexual assault coalitions and programs , research groups , tribal organizations , andacademic institutions .

research must include evaluating and studying best practices for reducingand preventing violence against women and children , including through strategies focused onunderserved communities .

vawa 2005 authorizes $2 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 to carry outthis study .

the attorney general , through vawo , is authorized to make grants to states for conductinga campaign to increase public awareness about issues related to domestic violence against pregnantwomen .

vawa 2005 authorizes such sums as necessary to carry out this effort for each of fiscalyears 2006 through 2010 .

