over the past century , particularly in recent decades , scientists have documented increases in global temperature and sea levels , decreases of sea ice in the arctic , and melting of continental ice sheets and mountain glaciers .

there is increasing evidence that human activities are at least partially responsible for some of these effects .

this is based upon the combination of two conclusions .

first , global temperature increases are linked in some manner to the measurable increases of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) concentrations in the atmosphere .

second , human activities ( eg , fossil fuel combustion , industrial processes , and deforestation ) have contributed to the increased concentration of ghg emissions in the earth's atmosphere .

the link between ghg emissions and climate change has motivated efforts to achieve reductions of emissions .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations' framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , which called on industrialized countries to initiate ghg reduction .

however , in early 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the unfccc 1997 kyoto protocol , which called for legally binding commitments by developed countries to reduce their ghg emissions .

over the past decade , the federal government has promulgated or proposed a variety of voluntary and regulatory actions that , while not specifically seeking to reduce ghg emissions , may have yielded emission reductions as a byproduct .

in the 110 th congress , members introduced multiple bills to address climate change issues in some fashion and enacted several pieces of legislation that contained climate change provisions .

in recent years , there has been some congressional support for a mandatory reduction program .

for example , the senate version of the energy policy act of 2005 included a "sense of the senate" resolution stating: it is the sense of the senate that congress should enact a comprehensive and effective national program of mandatory , market - based limits and incentives on emissions of greenhouse gases that slow , stop , and reverse the growth of such emissions at a rate and in a manner that , no .

1 , will not significantly harm the u.s. economy and , no .

2 , will encourage other action and key contributors to global emissions .

members in the 110 th congress introduced multiple bills that would have established some type of a mandatory emissions reductions program .

one of these proposals — the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008 ( s. 2191 / s. 3036 ) — was reported by the senate environment and public works committee ( december 2007 ) and debated in the senate in june 2008 .

in the absence of action by the federal government to establish a national program that directly addresses ghg emissions , a number of states ( and local governments , whose activities are not covered in this report ) have taken action in this arena .

states' efforts cover a wide spectrum , from developing climate action plans to setting mandatory ghg emission standards .

arguably , early state actions were largely symbolic .

in the late 1980s , vermont and oregon were the first states to set ghg reductions goals , but during the subsequent decade ( 1990-2001 ) , both states increased their ghg emissions: vermont by 18% and oregon by 30% .

however , a majority of states have more recently begun to develop their own climate change strategies or policies , with an increasing number of states adopting or proposing more significant provisions , including mandatory ghg reductions .

the motivating factors for the various states' actions may be as diverse as the actions themselves .

some actions are motivated by projections of climatic changes , such as sea level rise or agricultural impacts .

some states view their ghg policies as economic opportunities .

states want to position themselves for a "less - carbonized" future , by promoting , for example , alternative energy supplies , particularly sources available in - state .

other states champion ghg reduction policies because of the possible co - benefits: improved air quality , reduced traffic congestion , and less reliance on foreign energy supplies .

another motivating factor for state action is the possibility of catalyzing federal legislation .

this report covers state actions that directly and explicitly address ghg emissions ( see the text box below ) .

first , the report describes the different types of state actions , both individual and cooperative efforts , that are either proposed or under way , and highlights several of the more significant developments .

second , the report examines state actions from a federal policymaking perspective , including both the potential effects of state - led actions and their limitations .

mandatory programs to require ghg reductions represent the most aggressive end of the state action spectrum .

as with state actions overall , these programs can vary significantly in scope , stringency , and design .

mandatory programs are generating considerable interest and some controversy .

this section discusses the different types of mandatory programs and highlights the regional initiatives and individual state actions that are currently in effect or under development .

state emissions targets are goals by which a state can measure its progress in achieving ghg emissions reduction .

by themselves , state emissions targets do not directly reduce ghg emissions .

the targets are often established by the executive branch of state government ( eg , through an executive order ) and may not have the support of the state's legislative branch .

however , a target signals that state officials , at least from one branch of the government , consider climate change an important issue .

twenty states have established statewide targets for ghg emissions ( see table 1 ) .

three of the state targets — california , hawaii , and new jersey — are mandatory ( discussed above ) .

compared to the ghg limits and targets set on the international stage in past years , the state targets are less stringent .

the new england states' targets are similar , if not identical , because they are part of a cooperative plan developed in 2001 .

of the 20 states in table 1 , colorado , illinois , new mexico , and utah stand out because they have substantial coal production .

table 1 compares the states' ghg emissions in 1990 with emissions from the most recent years of available data .

the emissions data show the reductions states would need to make to meet their established targets .

although some of the states appear within reach of their 2010 targets , the most recent data from many of these states suggest that emissions are not decreasing , but at best are leveling off .

in some states — eg , arizona and florida — emissions have increased substantially in recent years .

more years of data are needed to evaluate progress , primarily because many of the states issued their ghg targets after 2003 .

moreover , the emissions targets were typically created in conjunction with ghg reduction policies — some of them mandatory limits on specific industries or segments of state activities — whose implementation may not be reflected in the available emissions data .

reliable ghg emissions data are a keystone component of any climate change program .

to implement effective solutions to climate change , policymakers need up - to - date and accurate information detailing the volume and sources of ghg emissions in their states .

precise monitoring is particularly vital for market - oriented approaches to ghg control .

whether a market - oriented program is based on tradeable emissions credits or a carbon tax , reliable and transparent emissions data would be the foundation for developing the allocation systems , reduction targets , and enforcement provisions .

at least 38 states have either completed or are in the process of preparing climate change action plans ( see figure 3 ) .

typically , state action plans are drafted by a climate change task force , composed of members with diverse backgrounds and expertise .

in general , task force members examine their state's sources of ghg emissions , and identify and rank the policy options that are most appropriate ( i.e. , cost - effective , politically feasible , etc. ) .

for controlling emissions in their state .

often the state action plan is made available for public comment , revised if necessary , and then submitted for approval to state officials .

reflecting the fact that states have different economic sectors , natural resources , and political structures , state climate change action plans can vary substantially .

some state action plans focus more on indirect , "no regrets" strategies , such as improved energy efficiency , which will likely yield benefits irrespective of climate change effects .

other state action plans are more comprehensive and recommend a portfolio of direct efforts that address ghg emissions .

although the state climate change action plans may recommend an array of policy options , the plans do not necessarily result in direct actions to reduce ghg emissions .

however , the number of completed state plans indicates the interest that a majority of states have in addressing climate change mitigation on some level .

the climate change activity in the states raises several issues that may be of interest to congress .

this section discusses some of the potential effects of state action in lieu of federal legislation .

this section also examines the limitations of state actions , both from a climate change policy perspective and in the context of legal challenges .

many states generate significant emissions of ghgs .

if individual u.s. states were classified as sovereign nations , 18 u.s. states would rank in the top 50 for nations that annually emit the primary ghg: carbon dioxide .

compared with other nations , texas , the combined midwest accord states , the wci states , the rggi states , and california rank as top carbon dioxide emitters ( table 2 ) .

almost half ( 23 ) of the states have joined one of the three regional emission ( all ghgs or just carbon dioxide ) reduction programs: the midwest accord , wci , and rggi .

the states in these regional programs account for a substantive percentage of u.s. carbon dioxide emissions ( about 38% ) .

however , the remaining 27 states are pursuing considerably less aggressive climate change policies .

with this range of state activity , it is difficult to predict the precise consequences of state - led climate change actions .

this section highlights possible effects from state actions .

a central argument in support of state climate change action is that states can serve as laboratories for policymaking .

states can test different ideas and policies on a smaller scale , and help determine which climate change solutions are most effective .

for example , there has been some debate regarding how a cap - and - trade program might work on a national level .

although the federal acid rain program , which involves sulfur dioxide emissions trading , is generally considered a success , emissions trading programs for other purposes have encountered problems during implementation .

state and regional programs offer the opportunity to iron out logistical details that are crucial in a cap - and - trade system: how high to set the emissions cap .

which sources to regulate .

how to allocate emissions allowances .

whether to allow the use of offsets as compliance alternatives .

whether to include a safety valve and , if so , how high to set it .

state programs can inform federal policymakers in other ways .

the political process by which states create climate change policy can be enlightening and perhaps adaptable on the federal level .

for instance , by examining the development and passage of state legislation , federal policymakers may better understand the motivations of different stakeholders and learn how best to frame the issues .

emission reduction programs will likely have economic effects on consumers , businesses and manufacturers , and possibly interstate commerce .

the most immediate effects of the emissions programs ( at least the ones furthest along in development ) will be on the automotive manufacturing and electricity generation sectors .

for automotive manufacturers , the california motor vehicle regulations — which at least 16 states have indicated they plan to implement if epa approves the waiver ( discussed above ) — will likely have the effect of dividing the market , potentially requiring the manufacture of a different class of cars to meet the new standards ( scheduled to apply in 2009 ) .

for automotive companies , this raises the issues of the technical means of meeting the standard , marketing , ensuring compliance , and pricing .

depending on how the emission limits are to be met , they may also influence fueling infrastructure .

state governments will need resources to enforce the standards .

consumers in regulated states may face higher prices for vehicles .

regarding the electric power industry , the mandatory reduction requirements will likely promote generation from low carbon - intensive fuels , while curtailing generation from high carbon - intensive fuels , such as coal .

the ghg performance standards in california and washington will reach into neighboring states as well , effectively barring electricity imports generated by conventional coal - fired power plants .

because coal - fired plants tend to produce lower - cost electricity , the result of these requirements may be to increase electricity prices within the states that limit emissions , and possibly lower prices in states without such emission standards .

if the ghg limitations lead to energy price increases in the regulated states , businesses and manufacturers may factor this cost into location decisions .

there is some concern that regulated industries will have a financial incentive to move ( and thus transfer jobs ) to states ( or nations ) that do not limit ghg emissions .

others fear that emission limits will raise the cost of living and doing business within those states , although in theory such effects can be at least partially addressed through the design of the emissions reduction program .

one concern shared by many observers , particularly industry stakeholders , is that state climate change programs ( in lieu of a federal program ) will create a patchwork of regulations across the nation .

a patchwork system of standards may hinder a company's efficiency and possibly create economic burdens for firms that operate in multiple states .

the prospect of regulations that vary from state to state is driving some companies to support a federal climate change program with comparable requirements across the entire united states .

climate change has been described as the "ultimate global commons problem. .

the global warming and climate impacts associated with increased ghg emissions in the atmosphere cannot be linked with specific emission sources .

unlike localized reductions in other air pollutants ( eg , sulfur dioxide , particulate matter ) , when an emissions source reduces its carbon dioxide emissions , it does not generate a corresponding local climate change benefit unless there are similar widespread reductions globally or at least in wide areas .

from a practical standpoint , the actions of one or a group of states or nations cannot by themselves reduce the global accumulation of ghg emissions in the atmosphere .

however , as discussed above , actions now under way by many states in the united states may create examples and / or models that will prove instructive in more widespread applications .

moreover , when business and industry have confronted a growing patchwork of state requirements , these sectors have historically begun to favor a national policy — as has begun to happen in the case of state - level actions on climate change .

however , the lack of a national program or a truly global approach to ghg emissions reductions does limit what individual states can accomplish in actually reducing ghg emissions and accumulations .

legal challenges may further limit the effectiveness of state action .

the possibility of legal challenges creates considerable uncertainty regarding the future of state climate change actions , particularly the more aggressive programs .

there are already several lawsuits against state actions that seek to regulate ghg emissions from motor vehicles .

as discussed above , the april 2007 supreme court decision ( massachusetts v. epa ) did not specifically address all of the plaintiffs' arguments , so uncertainty remains as to the resolution of these cases .

further litigation confronting other types of state action is anticipated .

however , many expected rggi to face a legal challenge when the first state's rule was officially issued , but that did not occur .

regardless , there is some question as to whether california's recently enacted ghg performance standards are constitutional .

arguably , the standards disproportionately impact the neighboring states that have historically exported coal - generated electricity to california consumers .

the legal arguments in these cases are beyond the scope of this report , but many observers conclude that it is difficult to predict how the courts will interpret and decide upon these issues .

for a more in - depth analysis of various legal issues regarding climate change , see crs report rl32764 , climate change litigation: a growing phenomenon , by [author name scrubbed] .

