this report discusses agricultural issues in world trade organization ( wto ) multilateral trade negotiations — the so - called doha round or the doha development agenda ( dda ) .

the initial focus is on the implications of the suspension of doha negotiations in july 2006 for future trade negotiations and the next u.s. farm bill .

the report discusses current efforts to revive the suspended negotiations , the reasons for the july 2006 suspension of negotiations , and the agreements reached at the december 13-18 , 2005 , hong kong ministerial meeting .

briefly discussed also are the role of the u.s. congress ; the major negotiating issues and proposals at play in the doha round ; the historical development of agricultural trade negotiations since the uruguay round ; and the potential economic benefits estimated to ensue from a successful trade agreement according to several recent studies .

numerous meetings between leading member countries of the world trade organization have been taking place since the july 2006 suspension of formal negotiations .

the pace of efforts to revive the doha development agenda multilateral trade negotiations has quickened as the expiration of fast - track or trade promotion authority for congressional consideration of trade agreements approaches .

tpa ( in title xxi of p.l .

107-210 ) expires june 30 , 2007 , unless the 110 th congress votes to extend it , and there is little likelihood that a comprehensive trade agreement could survive congressional debate without the expedited procedures that tpa provides .

some members of congress have discussed extending tpa either in its present form or with amendments that would give greater weight to labor and environmental considerations .

tpa authority would be needed for a speedy consideration of a multilateral trade agreement but also for various other free trade agreements that are currently being negotiated .

just as disagreement over agricultural issues was the principal cause of the july 2006 suspension of negotiations , agriculture has been at the center of efforts to restart the negotiations .

after resuming on november 16 , 2006 , negotiations have focused on various formulas for reducing trade - distorting subsidies and tariffs .

there have also been discussions at the political level involving presidents and prime ministers as well as trade ministers .

the political discussions have involved expressions of support for successfully concluding the round as well as expressions of willingness to reach satisfactory compromises on the issues dividing wto members .

in policy discussions , the united states is being asked by the european union ( eu ) and the developing countries , led by brazil and india , to make a more generous offer for reducing trade - distorting domestic support .

the united states is insisting that the eu and the developing countries agree to make more substantial reductions in tariffs and to limit the number of import - sensitive and special products that would be exempt from cuts .

import - sensitive products are of most concern to developed countries like the european union , while developing countries are concerned with special products — those exempt from both tariff cuts and subsidy reductions because of development , food security , or livelihood considerations .

brazil has emphasized reductions in trade - distorting domestic subsidies , especially by the united states ( some of which it successfully challenged in the wto u.s. - brazil cotton dispute discussed below ) , while india has insisted on a large number of special products that would not be exposed to wider market opening .

discussions have been particularly intense between the united states and the eu .

the u.s. president has met with the president of the european commission , and there have been several meetings between the u.s. trade representative and the eu commissioner for trade .

while u.s. and eu negotiators have not changed their official positions since suspension of negotiations as described below , there have been suggestions that each could show more flexibility: the united states might offer a greater percentage reduction in domestic support if the eu offered to reduce tariffs further and limit the number of import - sensitive products .

however , new offers on domestic support and market access by the united states and the eu are constrained by domestic political considerations .

neither u.s. nor eu farmers have professed a willingness to support further concessions on subsidies or tariffs .

no clear idea has yet emerged as to how much tariff reduction would be needed to match domestic subsidy cuts or vice versa to satisfy u.s. or eu farm interests .

while u.s. and eu agreement is a necessary condition for successfully concluding a doha round agreement , it is not sufficient .

the 1994 uruguay round was concluded due in large part to a u.s. - eu agreement on the major issues .

in doha round negotiations , however , developing countries are playing a major , even decisive , role .

brazil's position on both domestic support and tariff reduction ( discussed below ) is considered by many as a middle ground , although the united states has said that brazil's proposal for tariff reduction ( an average cut of 54% ) falls short of the kind of ambition in tariff reduction it has called for ( an average cut of 66% ) .

india , as a member of the g - 20 group of developing countries , has endorsed the g - 20 proposal , but has yet to demonstrate any flexibility in its demand for a large number of special product exemptions from new trade rules .

the next step in restarting the doha round negotiations will be an informal wto minister's meeting "on the margin" of the world economic forum in davos , switzerland , in january 2007 .

the aim of the meeting will be to take stock of trade ministers' views and , if possible , make decisions about resuming negotiations at the ministerial level .

around 30 trade ministers representing the full range of wto member country interests are expected to attend the meeting .

a successful davos meeting could result in a new schedule for resuming negotiations in the doha round , not a broad outline for resolving the main negotiating issues .

on july 24 , 2006 , the director general of the wto , pascal lamy , announced an indefinite suspension of further negotiations in the doha round .

the principal cause of the suspension was that a core group of wto member countries — the united states , the european union ( eu ) , brazil , india , australia , and japan — known as the g - 6 had reached an impasse over specific methods to achieve the broad aims of the round for agricultural trade: substantial reductions in trade - distorting domestic subsidies , elimination of export subsidies , and substantially increased market access for agricultural products .

the united states maintained that it had made an ambitious offer of reductions in trade supporting domestic support ( discussed below ) that had not been matched by agricultural tariff reductions by the eu or by market opening for agricultural and industrial products by brazil and india , both large developing countries .

the eu and brazil argued that the u.s. offer on domestic support did not go far enough in reducing trade - distorting support and would in fact leave the united states in a position to spend more on such subsidies than under the current wto ( uruguay round ) agreement on agriculture .

doha round negotiators were operating under a deadline effectively imposed by the expiration of u.s. trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which permits the president to negotiate trade deals and present them to congress for an up or down vote without amendment .

to meet congressional notification requirements under tpa legislation , an agreement would have to have been completed by the end of 2006 .

tpa expires on june 30 , 2007 .

some trade policy analysts think that reauthorization of tpa faces uncertain prospects in the 110 th congress .

some , however , suggest that congress might extend tpa temporarily if a doha round agreement seemed imminent , as was the case in 1994 for the uruguay round multilateral trade agreements .

a number of agreements had already been reached in the doha round agricultural negotiations , but they are contingent on a comprehensive agreement in the single undertaking ( "nothing is agreed until everything is agreed" ) that is the round and will now be put on hold .

those include an agreement by the eu to eliminate its agricultural export subsidies by the end of 2013 and an agreement by developed countries to extend duty and quota free access to 97% of the exports of the least developed countries .

the agreement at hong kong to provide early and ambitious subsidy reduction for cotton also is dependent on there being a comprehensive doha round agreement .

the wto will continue to provide aid for trade funds to help developing countries participate more fully in the world trade system .

aid for trade discussions were conducted outside the framework of doha round negotiations .

as a result of the suspension of the negotiations , a major source of pressure for u.s. farm policy change has dissipated .

the current farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) expires in 2007 , and many were looking to a doha round agreement on curbing trade - distorting domestic support to require changes in u.s. farm subsidies to make them more compatible with world trade rules .

the option of continuing current farm subsidy programs appears strengthened by the indefinite suspension and uncertain prospects of the doha talks .

legislation ( h.r .

4332 , h.r .

4775 , and s. 2696 ) already had been introduced in the 109 th congress to extend the 2002 farm bill by one year .

the american farm bureau , at its 2007 annual meeting just concluded , endorsed "the concepts of the 2002 farm bill" for its farm safety net features ( i.e. , the set of direct payments and price - related commodity support ) .

the united states must still meet obligations under existing wto agricultural agreements , which limit its trade - distorting spending to $19.1 billion annually .

some trade analysts think that there could be an increase in litigation by wto member countries that allege they are harmed by u.s. farm subsidies .

the expiration of the "peace clause" ( article 13 of the 1994 uruguay round agreement on agriculture ) means that wto member countries are no longer bound by an agreement to refrain from challenging each other's agricultural subsidy programs so long as commitments under the agreement are being met .

brazil's successful challenges of u.s. cotton subsidies and eu sugar subsidies in wto dispute settlement are cited as illustrations of the possible kinds of legal actions that wto members might take .

canada's recent challenge to u.s. corn and other farm subsidies appears aimed at influencing the next farm bill .

another consequence of the suspension of doha round negotiations is that the united states may pursue more aggressively bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

currently , the united states is negotiating nine ftas .

agreements with larger economies will be particularly attractive to u.s. agricultural interests .

the u.s. trade representative has indicated that in the near term priority will be given to negotiating ftas with such larger u.s. trading partners as korea and malaysia .

tpa procedures also apply to legislation to implement bilateral ftas , lending some urgency to the completion of ongoing negotiations in time to meet tpa deadlines for congressional notification .

congress also could choose to extend tpa for bilateral trade agreements .

on december 18 , 2005 , in hong kong , wto member countries reached agreement on a broad outline of negotiating objectives for liberalizing global trade in agriculture , manufactures , and services in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

however , only limited progress was made in reaching agreement on precise numerical formulas or targets ( termed "modalities" ) for liberalizing agricultural trade , the original aim of the hong kong ( hk ) ministerial .

the hong kong agreement set new deadlines for completing the doha round in 2006 ( see 0 ) .

none of these deadlines were met prior to the july 2006 announcement that the negotiations had been suspended indefinitely .

according to the hk agreement , modalities for cutting tariffs on agricultural products , eliminating export subsidies , and cutting trade - distorting domestic support would be agreed to by april 30 , 2006 .

based on these modalities , member countries would then submit comprehensive draft schedules by july 31 , 2006 .

the doha round would be concluded in 2006 .

completing negotiations by year's end would have allowed enough time to submit an agreement to congress before the expiration of the president's tpa authority in mid - 2007 .

if dda negotiations result in a trade agreement by the end of march 2007 , then congress would presumably take up legislation to implement it under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , or fast - track , procedures ( title xxi of p.l .

107-210 ) .

under fast - track , if the president meets the trade negotiating objectives established in the legislation and satisfies consultation and notification requirements in p.l .

107-210 , then congress would consider legislation to implement a trade agreement with limited debate , no amendments , and with an up - or - down vote .

however , unless it is extended by congress , tpa only covers trade agreements signed by july 1 , 2007 .

as such , tpa expiration is the effective deadline for u.s. participation in the doha round and for congressional consideration of implementing legislation .

congress could , of course , vote to extend tpa authority if it thought that progress was being made in doha round negotiations or for the purpose of considering promising bilateral free trade agreements .

how a doha round agreement on agriculture would affect the preparation of the next farm bill is uncertain .

tpa expiration coincides with the expiration of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) on september 30 , 2007 .

farm bill changes may be needed to meet u.s. commitments in a final dda agreement on agriculture .

most farm bill programs expire in 2007 , and new legislation is already under consideration in congress .

legislation was introduced in the 109 th congress to extend the 2002 farm bill for a year pending completion of the doha round negotiations ( h.r .

4332 , h.r .

4775 , and s. 2696 ) .

but with uncertainties surrounding the completion of the doha round , supporters of extending the farm bill contingent on a successful conclusion of wto negotiations are now calling for a more comprehensive rewrite of the 2002 law .

the american farm bureau federation has now withdrawn its insistence that the current farm bill be extended until a new wto agreement is reached and calls for a farm bill that includes the basic concepts of the 2002 farm law .

the economic and policy implications of trade liberalization are briefly reviewed at three levels: analysis of global trade and income effects ; existing u.s. policy context ; and analysis of u.s. domestic agricultural income and policy effects .

in estimating the economic benefits to the u.s. and world from a new round of trade liberalization , two points must be kept in mind .

first , based on the current proposals for reforming the domestic and trade policy of wto members , any agreement from the doha round will institute only a "partial" liberalization , i.e. , it will allow countries to maintain some policies ( whether domestic subsidies or border measures ) that continue to distort agricultural trade .

second , current proposals deal with setting limits on aggregate spending categories .

if adopted , each individual member country will ultimately decide how to implement their domestic policies so as to achieve the aggregate spending limits agreed to under a new trade agreement .

crs report rl32060 , world trade organization negotiations: the doha development agenda , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33697 , potential challenges to u.s. farm subsidies in the wto , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) : issues , options , and prospects for renewal , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21905 , agriculture in the wto doha round: the framework agreement and next steps , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33553 , agricultural export and food aid programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32278 , trends in u.s .

agricultural export credit guarantee programs and p.l .

480 , title i , fy1992-2002 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32916 , agriculture in the wto: policy commitments made under the agreement on agriculture , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl30612 , agriculture in the wto: member spending on domestic support , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs20840 , agriculture in the wto: limits on domestic support , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs21569 , geographical indications and wto negotiations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21712 , the african cotton initiative and wto agriculture negotiations , by [author name scrubbed] .

anderson , kym , and will martin , eds. , agricultural trade reform and the doha development agenda , ( new york: palgrave macmillan and the world bank , 2006 ) ; available at http: / / web.worldbank.org / wbsite / external / topics / trade / 0,,contentmdk:20517767~menupk:207652~pagepk:148956~pipk:216618~thesitepk:239071,00.html .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the effects of liberalizing world agricultural trade: a survey , dec. 2005 ; available at http: / / www.cbo.gov / ftpdocs / 69xx / doc6909 / 12-01-tradelib.pdf .

european commission , agriculture , international trade relations , http: / / europa.eu.int / comm / agriculture / external / wto / index_en.htm .

food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) , potential impacts on u.s. agriculture of the u.s. october 2005 wto proposal , fapri - umc report #16-05 , dec. 15 , 2005 ; available at http: / / www.fapri.missouri.edu / outreach / publications / 2005 / fapri_umc_report_16_05.pdf .

fapri , u.s. proposal for wto agricultural negotiations: its impact on u.s. and world agriculture , card working paper 05-wp 417 , december 2005 ; available at http: / / www.card.iastate.edu / publications / dbs / pdffiles / 05wp417.pdf .

office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , online information on u.s. trade negotiations and agreements , available at http: / / www.ustr.gov / .

polaski , sandra , winners and losers: impact of the doha round on developing countries , carnegie endowment report , march 2006. http: / / www.carnegieendowment.org / publications / index.cfm ? fa=view&id=18083&prog=zgp&proj=zted .

usda , fas , international trade policy division , online information on u.s. trade negotiations and agreements , http: / / www.fas.usda.gov / itp / policy / tradepolicy.asp .

usda , ers , world trade organization briefing room , http: / / www.ers.usda.gov / briefing / wto / .

wto , agriculture negotiations: backgrounder: the issues and where we are now , http: / / www.wto.org / english / tratop_e / agric_e / negs_bkgrnd00_contents_e.htm .

appendix a .

chronology of key events appendix b .

key players in the wto dda negotiations appendix c. key terms from the wto agreement on agriculture and the dd .

