in order to conduct foreign relations and promote the interests of their nationals located abroad , states ( i.e. , countries ) require secure means of communicating with their diplomats ( i.e. , representatives of a government who conduct relations with another government on its behalf ) and consular officers ( i.e. , representatives of a government who promote the government's commercial interests and provide assistance to its citizens located in another country ) stationed in other states .

to ensure that such channels of communication are preserved , states receiving foreign diplomats and consular officers have long accorded such persons with certain privileges and immunities on the basis of comity , reciprocity , and international agreement .

as political and economic contacts between states have grown , customary practices regarding diplomatic and consular immunities have increasingly been codified via bilateral or multilateral agreement .

these agreements not only describe the specific privileges and immunities to be accorded to foreign diplomats and consular officers by a receiving state , but also specify those privileges and immunities owed to other members of diplomatic and consular missions , as well as towards the family members of mission members .

in recent decades , international organizations have been viewed as a means by which states may conduct multilateral relations and cooperate on issues which are transnational in scope .

in order to ensure the autonomy of such organizations and prevent any member state from unreasonably interfering with organizational functions , many international organizations and their employees have been accorded certain privileges and immunities by their member states .

these privileges and immunities are typically similar in scope to those accorded to foreign diplomatic missions .

this report describes the privileges and immunities generally owed to foreign diplomatic , consular , and international organization personnel under u.s. law .

it does not discuss certain exceptions to these immunities that may apply to u.s. citizens and legal permanent residents who are employed by international organizations or foreign embassies or consulates .

the treaties and statutes discussed in this report are: the vienna convention on diplomatic relations ( diplomatic convention ) ; the vienna convention on consular relations ( consular convention ) ; the agreement regarding the headquarters of the united nations ( headquarters agreement ) ; the convention on the privileges and immunities of the united nations ( u.n. convention ) ; and the international organizations immunities act .

this report contains charts detailing the privileges and immunities provided by the legal authorities mentioned above , along with the personnel to whom such privileges and immunities apply .

it is important to note that the above - mentioned authorities are not exhaustive , and the scope of immunity due in any particular case may be governed in whole or in part by other instruments .

for example , the united states is a party to many bilateral consular conventions that contain immunities provisions .

in most instances , the other signatory is , along with the united states , a party to the consular convention .

in these cases , the instrument affording greater protection to each state's consular officers is controlling .

some countries with which the united states has a consular treaty are not parties to the consular convention .

the immunities accorded to consular personnel of such states are governed by the appropriate bilateral treaties , not by the authority discussed in this report .

furthermore , not all international organizations are covered by the international organizations immunities act ( ioia ) , or , as is the case with the united nations , are covered not only by the ioia but also by a number of international agreements .

even where immunities are governed generally by the authorities cited in the relevant chart , individuals serving in similar positions for different countries may nevertheless enjoy different immunities .

for example , the diplomatic relations act , which effectively adopted the standards of the diplomatic convention for domestic application , provides that the president may , on the basis of reciprocal treatment , specify immunities for individual countries that are more or less favorable than those under the convention .

both the diplomatic convention and the consular convention allow the united states to apply immunities restrictively where a particular country has applied immunity rules restrictively towards american representatives .

similarly , the ioia conditions certain immunities on the basis of treatment of american representatives abroad .

it must be emphasized that the immunities provided to foreign diplomats , consular officials , and employees of international organizations may be waived by the sending state or the appropriate international organization , with or without the consent of the individual involved .

on the other hand , certain individual acts may lead to a waiver of immunity .

for example , the initiation of civil proceedings by an otherwise exempt individual may preclude him from invoking immunity with regards to a directly - connected counterclaim .

another example of this type of personal waiver is the relinquishment of all immunity by consular employees and staff who undertake private gainful employment in the receiving state .

still another example is when a foreign person accorded immunity wishes to become a lawful permanent resident of the united states , in which case the person must waive the rights , privileges , immunities , and exemptions he would otherwise accrue on account of his occupational status .

finally , note that even where an individual enjoys immunity from jurisdiction , a person harmed by the immune individual nevertheless may have recourse to compensation under one of two statutes .

first , the diplomatic relations act requires that ( 1 ) each diplomatic mission in the united states ( including otherwise immune missions to international organizations ) , ( 2 ) members of these missions and their families , and ( 3 ) high ranking united nations officials all meet liability insurance requirements relating to the operation of motor vehicles in the united states .

second , the foreign sovereign immunities act provides that a foreign state shall not , with limited exception , be immune from suit for money damages being sought against it for harm occurring in the united states and caused by a wrongful nondiscretionary act of one of its officials or employees acting within the scope of duty .

the following sections provide an overview of the statutes and agreements governing the privileges and immunities accorded to foreign diplomats , consular officials , employees of international organizations , and related personnel .

the following charts list the major privileges and immunities accorded to persons working for foreign embassies , consulates , or international organizations ( including , specifically , the united nations ) .

when a treaty or international agreement makes reference to covered personnel receiving the same immunities accorded to persons covered by other treaties , the nature of such immunities is explained .

thus , for example , because the u.n. convention on privileges and immunities provides that certain u.n. personnel are to receive the same immunities as the receiving state accords diplomatic envoys , the chart detailing the immunities provided under the u.n. convention occasionally makes references to immunities provided to diplomats under the vienna convention on diplomatic relations .

it is important to note that the charts concerning the vienna convention on diplomatic relations and the vienna convention on consular relations only discuss those immunities accorded to persons who are not u.s. nationals or permanent residents .

diplomatic and consular officers working on behalf of a foreign state who are u.s. nationals or permanent residents only receive immunity for official acts performed in the exercise of their functions , while other diplomatic or consular personnel or members of their household families receive no immunities if they are u.s. nationals or permanent residents .

persons who are employed by international organizations or are foreign representatives to such organizations are provided with immunity regardless of whether they are u.s. nationals or permanent residents .

the united nations and specified officials , employees , and representatives to the organization are accorded a number of privileges and immunities by a series of interrelated statutes and treaties .

in some cases , the immunities accorded to the organization and specified officials , employees , and u.n. representatives are explicit ; in other cases , they are established via cross - reference to other sources of law .

this chart details the scope of such immunities , as governed by the international organizations immunities act , the u.n. convention on privileges and immunities , the u.n. headquarters agreement , and , by cross - reference , the vienna convention on diplomatic relations .

where appropriate , immunities provided by related u.s. statutes are also listed .

