at the end of fy2006 the veterans population in the united states was approximately 24 million , and of these 17.8 million were war veterans .

according to the va , the total veteran population is expected to decline to 21.7 million by 2011 , and 18.1 million by 2020 .

va attributes this decline to the number of veteran deaths exceeding the number of new separations from the military .

the largest population of veterans are living in california , followed by florida and texas ( figure 2 ) .

in fy2005 there were approximately 7.7 million veterans enrolled in the va health care system ( figure 3 ) .

most visns showed enrollments between 26% - 30% of the total eligible veteran population in those visns ; two visns ( visn 5 and visn 11 ) showed enrollments below 25% .

the total number of veterans enrolled in va's health care system is estimated to increase to almost 8.0 million veterans in fy2008 .

it should be noted that in any given year not all veterans seek care from va , either because they are not ill or because they have other sources of care such as private health insurance .

in fy2005 , vha provided care to approximately 4.9 million unique patients .

the greatest number of patients were in visns 4 , 8 and 16 .

each of these visns had more than 265,000 patients ( figure 4 ) .

the overall patient population reflects where the total veteran population is the largest .

during fy2007 , vha provided health care to about 5.2 million unique veteran patients .

these patients generated 64.4 million outpatients visits and almost 800,000 inpatient episodes of care .

according to vha estimates , the number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 109,000 between fy2007 and fy2008 .

and va is expected to treat about 5.3 million veteran patients in fy2008 .

patients in priority groups 1-6 ( described below ) — those veterans with service - connected conditions , lower incomes , special health care needs , and service in iraq or afghanistan — will comprise 75% of the total veteran patient population in fy2008 .

the house passed this measure on march 21 , 2007 , and the senate passed the house measure with an amendment on september 27 .

the bill was signed into law on november 5 , 2007 .

p.l .

110-110 , would , among other things , require the va to establish a comprehensive program for suicide prevention among veterans .

in carrying out this comprehensive program , the va must designate a suicide prevention counselor at each va medical facility .

each counselor is required to work with local emergency rooms , police departments , mental health organizations , and veterans service organizations to engage in outreach to veterans .

the act also requires the va to provide for research on best practices for suicide prevention among veterans .

p.l .

110-110 requires the secretary to provide for outreach and education for veterans and the families of veterans , with special emphasis on providing information to veterans of oif and oef and the families of such veterans .

the act requires va to provide for the availability of 24-hour mental health care for veterans and to establish a 24-hour hotline for veterans to call if needed .

 ( in july 2007 , the va established a national suicide prevention hotline for veterans .

the toll - free number , 1-800-273-talk [8255] , is staffed by mental health professionals 24 hours a day , 7 days a week ) .

the house passed this bill on may 23 , 2007 .

h.r .

612 as amended , would extend the eligibility period from two years to five years following discharge or release for veterans who served in combat during or after the persian gulf war , to receive hospital care , medical services , or nursing home care provided by the va , without having to prove that their condition is attributable to such service .

h.r .

612 also provides for an additional three years of eligibility for veterans discharged more than five years before the enactment of this act who have not enrolled .

the house passed h.r .

1470 on may 23 , 2007 .

the measure would require that chiropractic services be made available in not fewer than 75 vamcs by the end of december 2009 , and at all health care centers by the end of 2011 .

the house passed this measure on may 23 , 2007 .

h.r .

2199 , as amended , would require mandatory screening of veterans for traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) .

it would also require the va to establish a comprehensive program of care for post - acute traumatic brain injury rehabilitation .

h.r .

2199 , as amended , would require the va to establish tbi transition offices at each department polytrauma network site to coordinate health care and services to veterans who suffer from moderate to severe traumatic brain injuries .

furthermore , the measure , as passed by the house , would require the va to establish a registry of those who served in operation enduring freedom or operation iraqi freedom ( oef or oif ) who exhibit symptoms associated with tbi .

h.r .

2199 also includes two provisions to improve the quality of care provided to rural veterans .

it would create an advisory committee on rural veterans and establish a pilot program to provide readjustment counseling , related mental health services , and benefits outreach , through mobile vet centers .

this measure was passed by the house on july 30 , 2007 .

among other things , this bill contains a provision that would require the va to establish a vision education scholarship program under the health professional education assistance program .

those who receive a scholarship award would be required to work for three years in a va health care facility .

h.r .

1315 also mandates the secretary to provide financial assistance to students enrolled in a program of study leading to a degree or certificate in blind rehabilitation in a u.s. state or territory , provided they agree with applicable requirements .

the purpose of this scholarship is to increase the supply of qualified blind rehabilitation specialists for the va .

this bill was passed on july 30 , 2007 .

among other things , h.r .

2874 would allow va to establish a grant program for nonprofit entities to conduct workshops to assist in the therapeutic readjustment and rehabilitation of oef and oif veterans .

the amount of the grants would be limited to $100,000 for each calendar year , and there would be $2 million authorized each fiscal year to carry out the program .

the grant program would terminate on september 30 , 2011 .

it would also require the va to establish a grant program for rural veterans service organizations , state veterans' service agencies , and nonprofits to provide innovative transportation options to veterans in remote rural areas to travel to va medical facilities .

grant amounts would be limited to $50,000 , and the bill authorizes $3 million for each fiscal year from 2008 to 2012 to carry out the program .

h.r .

2874 would permanently authorize va's authority to provide higher priority health care to veterans who participated in project shipboard hazard and defense ( shad ) , project 112 , or related land - based tests .

under current law , va is authorized to provide higher priority health care to these veterans with any illness , without those veterans needing an adjudicated service - connected disability to establish their priority for care .

this special treatment authority will expire on december 31 , 2007 .

this measure would also extend through september 30 , 2009 , va's authority to require certain nonservice - connected veterans to pay a $10 per diem copayment when they receive va hospital care , and extend through october 1 , 2009 , va's authority to bill a service - connected patient's third - party insurance carrier for the cost of care va provides the veteran for any nonservice - connected condition .

h.r .

2874 would also require va to provide readjustment counseling and mental health services for oef and oif veterans .

such services would include contracting with community mental health centers in areas not adequately served by va and contracting with nonprofit mental health organizations to train oef and oif veterans in outreach and peer support .

it also directs va to conduct training programs for clinicians that have contracts with va to provide such services .

it would also require the va to ensure that va domiciliary programs are adequate in capacity and safety to meet the needs of women veterans .

furthermore , h.r .

2874 would reduce the time that a homeless veteran would have to wait to receive dental treatment from 60 days to 30 days .

under current law , va can provide dental services to eligible homeless veterans as long as they have been receiving care for a period of 60 consecutive days in a domiciliary , therapeutic residence , community residential care coordinated by va , or a setting for which the va provides funds for a grant and per diem provider .

h.r .

2623 was passed by the house on july 30 .

this bill would exempt all hospice care provided through va from copayment requirements .

under current law , a veteran receiving hospice care in a nursing home is exempt from any applicable copayments .

however , if the hospice care is provided in any other setting , such as in an acute - care hospital or at home , the veteran may be subject to an inpatient or outpatient primary care copayment .

by exempting all hospice care provided by the va regardless of the setting , h.r .

2623 would align the va health care system with the medicare program , which does not impose copayments for hospice care regardless of the setting .

s. 1233 , as amended , was ordered to be reported by the senate veterans' affairs committee on june 27 , 2007 .

this bill includes several provisions related to enhancing veterans health care .

as reported , s. 1233 would require va to develop individual rehabilitation and community reintegration plans for veterans and servicemembers with tbi who are being treated in the va health care system .

the plan would identify a case manager to oversee its long - term implementation and would specify dates for review of the plan .

the bill would also authorize the va to use non - va facilities for the implementation of rehabilitation and community reintegration plans for traumatic brain injury under certain specified circumstances .

s. 1233 , as reported , would require va to develop and implement a research , education , and clinical care program on severe tbi .

it also would authorize a five - year pilot program on assisted living services for veterans with traumatic brain injury and would require the va to provide age - appropriate nursing home care for veterans who suffer from severe tbi the veterans programs enhancement act ( p.l .

105-368 ) authorized priority eligibility for health care for a period of two years following discharge or release from active duty to any veteran who served in a combat theater of operations .

s. 1233 would extend the period from two to five years .

according to the committee report ( s.rept .

110-147 ) , this extension is necessary to ensure that veterans returning from combat receive health care during their transition from military service to civilian life and to address health care issues such as ptsd , which may take years to manifest .

s. 1233 would require va to establish a hospital quality report card initiative to inform veterans and their families of the quality and performance of va hospitals .

according to s.rept .

110-147 , "the initiative is intended to help veterans and their families to make informed health care choices. .

s. 1233 , as reported in the senate , would require the va to annually — by august 1 — to publish a notice in the federal register of which categories of veterans are eligible to be enrolled in va health care in the upcoming fiscal year .

furthermore , in any year in which the va proposes to stop enrollment , the va secretary would be required to provide to the house and senate va committees an estimate of the cost of enrolling all eligible veterans .

after the notice is published , the va would be required to wait 45 days before implementing any change in enrollment .

according to the committee report , "this notice - and - wait requirement would provide congress with an opportunity to oversee the enrollment of veterans in the veterans health administration , and to respond to any proposed limitation on enrollment. .

furthermore , it is the view of the committee that when resources are provided by congress to enable the va to keep pace with demand for services , the va health care system should be open to all veterans who seek care .

s. 1233 would require the va to establish a grant program to provide transportation options to veterans in rural areas .

under this grant program , va would provide grants for rural veterans' service organizations and community - based organizations to provide transportation to veterans in remote rural areas .

for each of fy2008 through fy2012 , $6 million would be authorized to be appropriated for this grant program .

the grants would be awarded to state veterans' service agencies , veterans service organizations , and qualified community transportation organizations .

among other things , s. 1233 would require va to establish demonstration projects on alternatives for expanding care for veterans in rural areas .

under the committee - reported measure , two demonstration projects would be required to be carried out in geographically dispersed areas .

it would require va to partner with the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and the indian health service ( ihs ) to expand care for native american veterans .

furthermore , s. 1233 would exempt veterans in priority group 4 ( veterans who have been determined by the va to be catastrophically disabled ) from paying copayments for nonservice - connected hospital care or nursing home care .

under current law , these veterans are required to pay copayments for all nonservice - connected care they receive from the va. s. 1233 , as reported in the senate , would increase reimbursement rates for travel to va medical facilities .

at present , eligible veterans are reimbursed at the rate of 11 cents a mile for routine visits and 17 cents a mile for compensation and pension exams .

under s 1233 , the va would reimburse qualifying veterans at the particular rate authorized for government employees under section 5707 ( b ) of title 5 u.s.c .

on november 14 , 2007 , the senate veterans' affairs committee ordered the following bills reported without amendment: s. 2004 ( to amend title 38 u.s.c .

to establish epilepsy centers of excellence in the veterans health administration of the department of veterans affairs ) , s. 2142 ( the veterans emergency care fairness act of 2007 ) , s. 2160 ( the veterans pain care act of 2007 ) , and s. 2162 ( mental health improvements act of 2007 ) .

the committee has not released the committee print versions of these bills .

