a provision in the ethics reform act of 1989 provides for an annual salary adjustment for leaders and members of the senate and house of representatives , the vice president , individuals in positions on the executive schedule ( ex ) , and federal justices and judges .

the adjustment is based on the percentage change in the wages and salaries ( not seasonally adjusted ) for the private industry workers element of the employment cost index ( eci ) , minus 0.5% ( december indicator ) .

it becomes effective at the same time as , and at a rate no greater than , the annual base pay rate adjustment for federal white - collar civilian employees under the general schedule ( gs ) .

the adjustment cannot , however , be less than zero or greater than 5% .

while this provision of the ethics reform act sets the rate of the judicial pay adjustment , a 1981 law provides that any salary increase for justices and judges must be "specifically authorized by act of congress hereafter enacted. .

the legislative , executive , and judicial officials are all hereafter referred to as federal officials in this report .

maximum basic pay rates for members of the senior executive service ( ses ) and certain senior - level positions are tied to the executive schedule .

an individual in an ses position ( 1 ) directs the work of an organizational unit ; ( 2 ) is held accountable for the success of one or more specific programs or projects ; ( 3 ) monitors progress toward organizational goals and periodically evaluates and makes appropriate adjustments to such goals ; ( 4 ) supervises the work of employees other than personal assistants ; or ( 5 ) otherwise exercises important policy - making , policy - determining , or other executive functions .

salaries for members of the ses are determined annually by agency heads "under a rigorous performance management system," and range from the minimum rate of basic pay for a senior level ( sl ) employee ( 120% of the minimum basic pay rate for gs - 15 ; $119,554 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) to either ex level iii ( $165,300 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have not been certified by the office of personnel management ( opm ) as making "meaningful distinctions based on relative performance," or ex level ii ( $179,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have been so certified .

total compensation for members of the ses in agencies whose performance appraisal systems "as designed and applied" have been certified by opm may be up to the vice president's salary ( $230,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) and up to ex level i ( $199,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have not been so certified .

table 2 , below , shows january 2004 through january 2011 salaries for the ses .

the minimum rate of basic pay for certain senior - level positions — positions classified above gs - 15 ( sl pay schedule ) and scientific or professional positions ( st pay schedule ) — is 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay for gs - 15 ( $119,554 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) .

sl and st employees in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have been certified by opm as making meaningful distinctions in performance , may receive basic pay up to level ii of the executive schedule ( $179,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) .

in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have not been so certified by opm , sl and st employees may receive basic pay up to level iii of the executive schedule ( $165,300 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) .

sl and st employees no longer receive locality pay .

total compensation for sl and st employees in agencies whose performance appraisal systems "as designed and applied" have been certified by opm may be up to the vice president's salary ( $230,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) and up to ex level i ( $199,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) in agencies whose performance appraisal systems have not been so certified .

table 3 , below , shows january 2004 through january 2009 salaries for sl and st employees in the washington , dc , and "rest of the united states" locality pay areas and nationwide for january 2010 and january 2011 .

the gs is the basic pay schedule for federal white - collar employees .

it is divided into grades of difficulty and responsibility of work .

there are 15 grades and 10 steps within each grade .

the duties attached to positions at each grade are stated in statute at 5 u.s.c .

§5104 .

those for a gs - 15 , the top level of the schedule , are these: ( a ) to perform , under general administrative direction , with very wide latitude for the exercise of independent judgment , work of outstanding difficulty and responsibility along special technical , supervisory , or administrative lines which has demonstrated leadership and exceptional attainments ; ( b ) to serve as head of a major organization within a bureau involving work of comparable level ; ( c ) to plan and direct or to plan and execute specialized programs of marked difficulty , responsibility , and national significance , along professional , scientific , technical , administrative , fiscal , or other lines , requiring extended training and experience which has demonstrated leadership and unusual attainments in professional , scientific , or technical research , practice , or administration , or in administrative , fiscal , or other specialized activities ; or ( d ) to perform consulting or other professional , scientific , technical , administrative , fiscal , or other specialized work of equal importance , difficulty , and responsibility , and requiring comparable qualifications .

gs employees receive an annual adjustment to basic pay and a locality - based comparability payment .

ex pay rates provide limitations on gs pay .

basic pay cannot exceed ex level v ( $145,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) ; basic pay and locality pay combined cannot exceed ex level iv ( $155,500 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) ; and total compensation cannot exceed ex level i ( $199,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) .

gs - 15 employees at the upper end of that pay grade in 18 locality pay areas are currently affected by the ex level iv cap on basic pay and locality pay combined as follows: employees at step 10 in the dallas - fort worth , tx ; denver - aurora - boulder , co ; miami - fort lauderdale - pompano beach , fl ; minneapolis - st. paul - st .

cloud , mn - wi ; philadelphia - camden - vineland , pa - nj - de - md ; portland - vancouver - beaverton , or - wa ; sacramento­ arden - arcade­ yuba city , ca - nv ; and seattle - tacoma - olympia , wa , locality pay areas .

employees at steps 9 and 10 in the boston - worcester - manchester , ma - nh - ri - me ; chicago - naperville - michigan city , il - in - wi ; detroit - warren - flint , mi ; hartford - west hartford - willimantic , ct - ma ; san diego - carlsbad - san marcos , ca ; and washington - baltimore - northern virginia , dc - md - va - wv - pa , locality pay areas .

employees at steps 8 , 9 , and 10 in the houston - baytown - huntsville , tx ; los angeles - long beach - riverside , ca ; and new york - newark - bridgeport , ny - nj - ct - pa , locality pay areas .

employees at steps 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 10 in the san jose - san francisco - oakland , ca , locality pay area .

table 4 , below , shows january 2004 through january 2011 salaries for employees at gs grade 15 in the washington , dc , and "rest of the united states" locality pay areas .

