immigration matters primarily come before federal appellate courts through petitions toreview final orders of removal by the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) , the highestadministrative body responsible for interpreting and applying immigration laws .

 ( 2 ) among other things , the biahears administrative appeals of rulings made by immigration judges ( ijs ) ordering aliens removedor denying applications for relief from removal .

if the bia upholds an order of removal against analien , the alien may petition the court of appeals in the appropriate federal circuit to review the bia'sdecision , ( 3 ) though in somecases such review may be very limited in scope .

 ( 4 ) pursuant to statute and court jurisprudence , judicial review of biadecisions is typically deferential , and the scope of such review is limited by statute to theadministrative record upon which the order is based .

 ( 5 ) perhaps accordingly , a substantial majority of bia rulings reviewedby federal appellate courts are upheld .

 ( 6 ) .

in most cases where judge alito has reviewed bia decisions , those decisions have beenunanimously upheld by the court .

however , when the court has split when deciding a case'soutcome , judge alito has typically been on the dissenting side , voting to uphold a bia decision thatthe majority votes to overturn .

 ( 7 ) typically , judge alito dissents in such cases because he believesthe majority has not been sufficiently deferential to the decisions of administrative authorities .

onthe other hand , judge alito has voted to remand some bia decisions where potentially importantdocumentation corroborating an alien's claims has been excluded without sufficient explanation .

a significant portion of immigration cases dealt with by judge alito have involved denialsof applications for asylum .

asylum is a discretionary form of relief from removal available to aneligible alien who is unwilling to return to his or her native country because of a well - founded fearof persecution on account of one of five characteristics: ( 1 ) race , ( 2 ) religion , ( 3 ) nationality , ( 4 ) membership in a particular social group , or ( 5 ) political opinion .

 ( 34 ) the ina specifies thatforced abortion or sterilization pursuant to a coercive population control program or resistance toundergoing such forced procedures constitutes persecution on account of political opinion .

 ( 35 ) although a few third circuit opinions involving asylum claims have been discussed in othersections of this report , this section discusses some notable opinions by judge alito that have focusedprimarily on issues relating to the substantive grounds for asylum eligibility .

at least two of thecases discussed below concern the bia's interpretation of the ina's asylum eligibility provisions.in cases where congressional intent is unclear or ambiguous , federal courts give significant deferenceto the bia's interpretation of the immigration laws it administers , so long as such interpretations are"based on a permissible construction of the [ina]. .

 ( 36 ) this standard is commonly referred to as " chevron deference"in reference to the supreme court case where the standard was formulated .

 ( 37 ) .

occasionally when reviewing an immigration claim , a federal court will have to examine themeaning of an immigration statute or regulation , rather than simply reviewing their application toa particular set of facts .

judge alito has generally read immigration statutes broadly , and in a fewcases , his statutory readings have been broader than those of some of his third circuit colleagues .

on one occasion , a position he took regarding the scope of an ina provision limiting federal judicialreview was subsequently rejected by the supreme court in deciding a case from another circuit .

while judge alito has generally upheld immigration authorities' interpretation of applicableregulations , in limited cases he has found these interpretations impermissible .

in the 2004 case of lee v. ashcroft , ( 51 ) a third circuit panel that included judge alito reviewed thedeportation orders of a married couple convicted of filing a false tax return which caused a taxdeficiency of over $50,000 .

the bia found that the aliens' convictions fell under the ina'sdefinition of an "aggravated felony," and therefore constituted deportable offenses .

although theina lists several crimes as aggravated felonies for deportation purposes , including an offense that"involves fraud or deceit in which the loss to the victim or victims exceeds $ 10,000," the only taxoffense specifically listed as an aggravated felony is the separate crime of tax evasion .

 ( 52 ) the majority overturned the bia's orders of removal , finding that when congress specifiedtax evasion as an aggravated felony , it clearly and unambiguously intended to designate it "as theonly tax crime that is a removable offense. .

 ( 53 ) accordingly , the aliens' convictions for a tax crime other thantax evasion did not make them deportable .

judge alito dissented , arguing that the aliens' taxoffenses plainly constituted offenses involving fraud or deceit , and were therefore "aggravatedfelonies" making the aliens deportable .

judge alito continued that congress's decision to specifytax evasion as an aggravated felony "may have been ... simply to make certain - even at the risk ofredundancy - that tax evasion qualifies as an aggravated felony .

while good statutory draftsmanshipseeks to avoid surplusage , other goals , such as certainty and the avoidance of litigation , aresometimes more important. .

 ( 54 ) responding to judge alito's dissent , the majority suggested thatwhile congress may indeed have wished for all tax offenses to potentially be considered aggravatedfelonies , "we must interpret what it has written by well - recognized rules of statutoryconstruction," ( 55 ) including maintaining the "longstanding principle of construing any lingering ambiguities indeportation statutes in favor of the alien. .

 ( 56 ) .

in 1996 , congress made substantial modifications to the ina via the enactment of theantiterrorism and effective death penalty act ( aedpa ) ( 57 ) and the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibilityact ( iirira ) , ( 58 ) including by restricting the availability of judicial review of removal orders .

among other things,former ina â§ 106 ( a ) ( g ) , which stated that "any alien held in custody pursuant to an order ofdeportation ... may obtain judicial review thereof by habeas corpus proceedings," ( 59 ) was eliminated , and a newprovision was added stating that final orders of deportation against certain categories of aliens would"not be subject to review by any court. .

 ( 60 ) in the 1999 case of sandoval v. reno , ( 61 ) a three - judge third circuit panel was required to determinewhether aedpa and iirira had eliminated court review of immigration decisions via habeasproceedings under 28 u.s.c .

â§ 2241 .

the majority held that habeas review could not be strippedfrom federal courts absent the clear intent of congress , and that aedpa and iirira did not expressa sufficiently clear intent to strip the courts of habeas jurisdiction over immigration matters .

inreaching this decision , the majority noted that the supreme court had "historically drawn a sharpdistinction between 'judicial review' ... and the courts' power to entertain petitions for writs of habeascorpus. .

 ( 62 ) themajority also noted that several circuit courts had previously reached the same conclusion that the1996 amendments to the ina did not eliminate federal habeas review of immigration decisions .

 ( 63 ) dissenting from the majority's conclusion that habeas jurisdiction remained over immigrationclaims , judge alito argued that congressional intent to eliminate federal habeas review was clear ; noting , for example , that a pertinent section of aedpa was entitled "elimination of custody reviewby habeas corpus. .

 ( 64 ) he further cited to a seventh circuit opinion which had reached the same conclusion regarding theelimination of habeas review .

 ( 65 ) despite arguing that the 1996 amendments to the ina limited review under the federal habeas statute , judge alito nevertheless believed that "any judicial reviewto which [an alien] is constitutionally entitled can and should be provided by means of a petition forreview filed in [the appropriate federal appellate] court. .

 ( 66 ) he further suggested that a prior third circuit opinion mightneed to be overruled so that the court could review certain non - constitutional legal claims raised byan alien even if review was eliminated under the federal habeas statute .

 ( 67 ) in the 2001 opinion of ins v. st. cyr , ( 68 ) the supreme court in a 5-4 opinion resolved the circuit splitconcerning the continued availability of habeas review in immigration proceedings , adopting theposition and reasoning of the majority in sandoval rather than that of judge alito .

justice o'connorwas one of the dissenters in st. cyr , and shared judge alito's view that the 1996 amendments to theina eliminated habeas review of immigration claims made by certain aliens .

in apparent responseto the court's ruling in st. cyr , congress amended the ina once again in 2005 to expressly eliminatehabeas review via the adoption of the real id act .

 ( 69 ) in doing so , however , it specified that no act provision limitingjudicial or habeas review was to be "construed as precluding review of constitutional claims orquestions of law raised upon a petition for review filed with an appropriate court of appeals inaccordance with [applicable ina provisions]. .

 ( 70 ) .

under supreme court jurisprudence , federal courts must defer to formal and informal agencyinterpretations of an ambiguous regulation , unless such interpretations are "plainly erroneous orinconsistent with the regulation. .

 ( 71 ) no such deference is warranted when the intent of a regulationis clear .

 ( 72 ) althoughjudge alito has typically upheld immigration authorities' interpretation and application ofimmigration regulations , an exception to this practice occurred in the 2004 case of soltane v. u.s.dept .

of justice .

 ( 73 ) in soltane , a nonprofit religious organization that provided services to mentally disabledyoung adults sought review of the denial of its visa petition on behalf of an alien employee .

the inaprovides that aliens who qualify as "special immigrants," including those engaged in a "religiousoccupation or vocation" on behalf of a religious organization , be granted preference visas .

 ( 74 ) immigration authoritieshad denied the organization's visa petition in part because the sponsored alien's proposed positionas a houseparent was deemed not to be a "religious occupation or vocation," as that term was definedunder regulation .

 ( 75 ) among other things , immigration authorities characterized the proposed position's houseparentduties as having "a wholly secular function , even if the facility is operated by a charitableorganization founded on religious principles. .

 ( 76 ) in a unanimous panel opinion written by judge alito , the court held that the denial of the visapetition was not supported by the record , because this denial was based on ( 1 ) an impermissiblereading of the pertinent regulation defining "religious occupation" as excluding religious occupationswith a secular component ; and / or ( 2 ) a factual determination of the secular nature of the houseparentposition which was not supported by substantial evidence in the record .

the circuit panel held thata job could qualify as a "religious occupation" under the regulatory definition of that term so longas it had "some religious significance," and noted that the pertinent regulation listed a number ofoccupations with secular components , such as "religious translator" and "religious counselor," asexamples of jobs falling under the definition of "religious occupation. .

 ( 77 ) the panel also chargedthese immigration authorities with describing the alien's job duties in a manner that "excluded anymention of the religious component of her duties" found in the administrative record , including herresponsibilities to teach and lecture mentally disabled young adults on religious values .

 ( 78 ) accordingly , the circuitpanel vacated and remanded the lower court's decision upholding immigration authorities' denial ofthe visa petition .

