the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) is both a grants statute and a civil rights statute .

it provides federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) .

the statute also contains detailed due process provisions to ensure the provision of fape .

originally enacted in 1975 , the act responded to an increasing focus on the education of children with disabilities , including judicial decisions requiring that states provide an education for children with disabilities if they provide an education for children without disabilities .

the 108 th congress passed major idea legislation ( p.l .

108-446 ) , which reauthorized and revised idea .

although much of the basic structure of idea has been retained , p.l .

108-446 does make a number of significant changes .

among these are the definition of "highly qualified" teachers , requirements for children's participation in state and local assessments , changes in the private school provisions , exceptions to certain financial requirements , changes in procedural safeguards , and changes in compliance monitoring to focus on student performance .

the u.s. department of education ( ed ) issued proposed regulations for p.l .

108-446 and issued final regulations on august 14 , 2006 .

ed issued additional regulations "to clarify and strengthen current regulations"on december 1 , 2008 .

although many of the regulatory provisions simply track the statutory language , reflect comments in the conference report , or include provisions in prior idea regulations , there are places where the regulations provide more guidance .

this report will analyze the regulations with an emphasis on those areas where additional guidance is provided .

the report also discusses provisions in p.l .

108-446 related to multi - year individualized education program ( iep ) demonstration programs and the infants and toddlers with disabilities provisions under part c of idea , for which ed has provided separate final notice or proposed regulations .

in its discussion of the proposed regulations , which presumably applies to the final rule , the department of education stated that we have elected to construct one comprehensive , freestanding document that incorporates virtually all requirements from the new law along with the applicable regulations , rather than publishing a regulation that does not include statutory provisions .

the rationale for doing this is to create a single reference document for parents , state personnel , school personnel , and others to use , rather than being forced to shift between one document for regulations and a separate document for the statute .

the organization of the final regulations differs from the previous regulations , with the final regulations generally following the structure of p.l .

108-446 .

subpart a of 34 c.f.r .

part 300 discusses the purpose and applicability of the regulations and includes definitions ; subpart b contains provisions relating to state eligibility and includes requirements for fape , the least restrictive environment , private schools , state complaint procedures and department of education procedures ; subpart c contains provisions for local educational agency eligibility ; subpart d contains provisions on evaluations , eligibility determinations , individualized education programs ( ieps ) , and educational placements ; subpart e contains the applicable procedural safeguards , including discipline procedures ; subpart f contains provisions on monitoring and enforcement , confidentiality and program information ; subpart g contains provisions on the grants , allotment , use of funds and authorization of appropriations ; and subpart h contains provisions on preschool grants for children with disabilities .

p.l .

108-446 includes a provision relating to regulations that was added to idea by p.l .

98-199 in 1983 in response to attempts at regulatory reform by the reagan administration .

this subsection prohibits certain changes in the idea regulations which would procedurally or substantively lessen the protections provided to children with disabilities under this act , as embodied in regulations in effect on july 20 , 1983 ( particularly as such protections related to parental consent to initial evaluation or initial placement in special education , least restrictive environment , related services , timelines , attendance of evaluation personnel at individualized education program meetings , or qualifications of personnel ) except to the extent that such regulation reflects the clear and unequivocal intent of congress in legislation .

this listing of areas in the statute is helpful in determining what changes congress might have interpreted as lessening the protections available to children with disabilities but it is not determinative as the list is illustrative , not limiting .

it is worth noting as the regulations are examined , that some of the provisions carried over from prior regulations are included due to the requirements of this section .

in addition , in at least one situation , an argument by a commenter that a proposed section of the regulations would violate this statutory requirement led ed to remove the section .

ed issued additional regulations "to clarify and strengthen current regulations"on december 1 , 2008 .

the areas covered by this addition to the idea regulations include ( 1 ) parental revocation of consent after consenting to the initial provision of services ; ( 2 ) a state's or local educational agency's ( lea's ) obligation to make positive efforts to employ qualified individuals with disabilities ; ( 3 ) representation of parents by non - attorneys in due process hearings ; ( 4 ) state monitoring , technical assistance , and enforcement of the part b program ; and ( 5 ) the allocation of funds , under sections 611 and 619 of the act , to leas that are not serving any children with disabilities .

these regulations took effect on december 31 , 2008 .

on april 9 , 2007 , ed published final regulations regarding flexibility for determining adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) under nclb .

these regulations amend the regulations related to the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) as amended by nclb as well as amending idea regulations .

the added provisions allow states to develop modified achievement standards for "a small group of students whose disability has precluded them from achieving grade - level proficiency and whose progress is such that they will not reach grade - level achievement standards in the same time frame as other students. .

because only 2% of students tested can be considered to achieve ayp under this rule , it is sometimes termed the "2% rule. .

in addition to amendments to the esea regulations , the federal register of april 9 , 2007 , also amends the idea regulations .

in addition to reiterating several requirements added to the title i regulations , a new paragraph adds several requirements , including the following: that states must ensure the participation of all children with disabilities in state and district - wide assessments , including those required under esea as amended by nclb ; that states must provide guidelines on testing accommodations so that accommodations do not invalidate assessment results ; that states and leas ( with respect to district - wide assessments ) must report the number of children with disabilities assessed under the various alternatives assessment alternatives ; and that states and leas ( with respect to district - wide assessments ) must use principles of "universal design," to the extent possible , in the development and administration of assessments .

the act authorizes the secretary of education to approve demonstration proposals from up to 15 states for implementing the multi - year iep pilot demonstration that p.l .

108-446 authorizes ( §614 ( d ) ( 5 ) ) .

these demonstrations would allow parents and leas to adopt ieps covering up to three years that coincide with the child's "natural transition points. .

the multi - year ieps must be optional for parents and based on their informed consent .

they must contain measurable annual goals linked to natural transition points .

the iep team must review the iep at each transition point and annually determine if progress is being made toward annual goals .

more frequent reviews are required if sufficient progress is not being made .

the secretary is required to report on the effectiveness of the demonstration programs .

in december 2005 , ed released proposed requirements and selection criteria for the multi - year iep demonstration .

the august 2006 final regulations provide no further guidance on this demonstration .

on july 6 , 2007 , the secretary issued a notice of final additional requirements and selection criteria for the demonstration .

the additional requirements note that states requiring assistance or intervention , as determined by the secretary under section 616 ( d ) , could have their participation in the demonstration terminated or be denied participation .

the additional requirements also provide materials and information that a state must provide in its proposal to participate in the demonstration .

these include provisions for implementing requirements of the act , such as assurances that participating leas will inform parents in writing and in their native language about the differences between the multi - year and iep and a standard iep and the parents' right to revoke their consent for the multi - year iep at any time .

the notice also included criteria for evaluating state proposals to participate in the demonstration .

 ( the notice does not solicit state proposals ; a separate federal register note will invite the submission of proposals "for a single one - time only competition. .

 ) these criteria include the significance of the proposal , the quality of the project design , and the quality of the management plan .

p.l .

108-446 authorizes a paperwork reduction pilot program ( §609 ) , which permits the secretary to waive for up to four years for up to 15 states statutory or regulatory requirements ( except civil rights requirements ) that applying states link to excessive paperwork or other non - instructional burdens .

the report accompanying the house bill explained the rationale for such a pilot: reducing the paperwork burden of the act is one of the committee's top priorities for the reauthorization of the act .

studies from the department show that the nation is facing a significant shortage of special education teachers , and many special educators leaving the field cite the burden of unnecessary paperwork as one of the primary reasons for their departure .

the bill includes a pilot program to allow states to demonstrate innovative and creative measures to reduce the paperwork burden .

this program is not meant to decrease any of the rights children have under the act , but is intended to allow those states who choose to participate to think creatively and innovatively about how to best meet the demands of the act while reducing the paperwork burden so school personnel can focus on educating children with disabilities .

in december 2005 , ed released proposed requirements and selection criteria for the paperwork reduction demonstration .

at the time of the release of the final idea regulations , final requirements for the demonstration had not been released .

part c of idea authorizes grants to states to develop and maintain early intervention programs for infants and toddlers with disabilities .

the idea infants and toddlers program has parallels with the provisions and requirements of part b ; however , these provisions and requirements differ in important respects from those of part b because this disabled population differs in significant ways from the mainly school - aged population served under part b .

for example , while part b eligibility is based on categories of disabilities ( §602 ( 3 ) ) , eligibility for part c programs is often based on a diagnosis of "development delay" that requires early intervention services ( §632 ( 5 ) ) .

instead of an iep , part c programs have individualized family service plans ( ifsps ) ( §636 ) , in recognition that services must be provided to the family as well as to the infant or toddler .

because infants and toddlers are served in a variety of locations ( including the home ) , part c services are to be provided in "natural environments in which children without disabilities participate" ( §632 ( 4 ) ( g ) ) "to the maximum extent appropriate" ( §635 ( a ) ( 16 ) ( a ) ) .

the 2004 reauthorization of idea ( p.l .

108-446 ) maintains the overall purposes and structure of part c with some additions and revisions .

arguably the most extensive addition is the option for states to adopt policies that would permit parents of a child receiving part c early intervention services to extend those services until the child is eligible to enter kindergarten ( §635 ( c ) ) .

under previous law and in states that choose not to adopt such a policy , these children would likely transition into a preschool program under section 619 , which authorizes funding for services for pre - school children with disabilities .

p.l .

108-446 has a series of requirements for a state policy to extend part c services ( §635 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) , including the following: informed written consent from parents that they choose this alternative ; annual notices to parents explaining the differences between the services received under the extended part c program and services that would be received under part b , and describing their rights under idea to move their child to a part b program ; and program educational components promoting school readiness and providing pre - literacy , language , and numeracy skills .

p.l .

108-446 clarifies that providing services under extended part c programs does not obligate the state to provide fape to children when they become eligible for the preschool program under section 619 ( states are obligated to provide fape under §619 ) ( §635 ( c ) ( 5 ) ) .

in addition , the act requires the secretary of education , once part c appropriations exceed $460 million , to reserve 15% of the appropriations for state incentive grants to states implementing extended part c services ( §643 ( e ) ) .

p.l .

108-446 makes other changes and additions to part c , including the addition of registered dietitians and vision specialists to the list of qualified personnel to provide part c services ( §632 ( 4 ) ( f ) ( viii and x ) ) ; addition of references to homeless infants and toddlers with disabilities and infants and toddlers with disabilities who are wards of the state , for example regarding the state eligibility requirement that early intervention services be made available to all infants and toddlers with disabilities ( §634 ( 1 ) ) ; addition to the requirements for the state application requiring policies and procedures for referral for services for infants and toddlers "involved in a substantiated case of child abuse" or "affected by illegal substance abuse , or withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal drug exposure" ( §637 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) and requiring state cooperation with early head start programs and other child care and early education programs ( §637 ( a ) ( 10 ) ) .

on may 9 , 2007 , the secretary published proposed regulations for part c of idea , which authorizes grants to support programs for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families .

the following discusses selected provisions of the proposed regulations .

the proposed regulations would add some definitions not currently included in the part c regulations and would modify certain current definitions .

the proposed regulations would add certain definitions that are currently included in part b regulations .

examples include definitions of "elementary school," "free appropriate public education ( fape ) ," "local educational agency ( lea ) ," and "state educational agency ( sea ) . .

these are examples of a general strategy to include in part c regulations provisions currently in other parts of the statute and other idea regulations that also apply to the part c program .

in addition , the proposed regulations add and modify definitions to reflect changes and modifications in the statute resulting from p.l .

108-446 .

for example , a definition of a "ward of the state" would be added to reflect the addition of that definition to the act ( §602 ( 36 ) ) .

examples of modifications to existing definitions include the following: adding provisions related to cochlear implants in the definition of health services ; adding to the definition of an infant or toddler with a disability a child previously served under part c who is eligible for services under the preschool program but who , at the state's discretion , continues to be served under part c until he or she enters kindergarten or elementary school to reflect the provision added by p.l .

108-446 ; adding registered dieticians and vision specialists to the list of qualified personnel in the definition of early intervention services and eliminating the terms "nutritionist" and "nurses" from the definition ; and adding clarifying language to the definition of a parent , which was expanded by p.l .

108-446 , to specify that the biological / natural parent is considered the parent unless a judicial order or decree identifies some other individual .

this clarification is similar to that in the part b final regulations ( 34 c.f.r .

§300.30 ) .

as noted above , an important change resulting from the 2004 idea amendments was to authorize states to adopt policies that would permit parents of a child receiving part c early intervention services to extend those services until the child is eligible to enter kindergarten ( §635 ( c ) ) .

the proposed regulations would provide requirements for implementing this state option .

in many cases , the proposed regulations repeat language in the act .

in addition , they would add further requirements .

for example , §303.211 ( a ) ( 2 ) would require state plans to specify the age range to which these services will be made available: whether it is ages 3 to 5 inclusive or a shorter time span , such as "from age three until the beginning of the school year following the child's fourth birthday" ( §303.211 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( ii ) ) .

in addition to standard requirements against commingling funds and against supplanting state and local funding that are in the statute ( §635 ( a ) ( 5 ) ) , the proposed regulations would add exceptions to prohibitions against reducing the level of expenditure that the act provides for leas under part b .

for example , if the number of infants and toddlers with disabilities decreases ( §303.225 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( i ) through ( iv ) ) , a state could reduce its level of expenditure without violating the maintenance of effort requirement .

there appears to be no parallel provision in this regard in part c of the act .

§303.225 ( c ) of the proposed regulations would add language that would prohibit part c lead agencies from charging indirect costs unless approved by the agency's "cognizant federal agency" or by the secretary of education .

in addition , the proposed regulations state that "the lead agency may not charge rent , occupancy , or space maintenance costs directly to the part c grant , unless those costs are specifically approved in advance by the secretary. .

 ( §303.225 ( c ) ( 3 ) ) .

the proposed regulations provide for procedural safeguards for parents and their infants and toddlers .

these include confidentiality provisions ( §§303.401-303.417 ) , provisions for parental consent , notice and surrogate parents ( §§303.420-303.422 ) , and dispute resolution options ( §§303.430-303.439 ) .

the confidentiality provisions incorporate the provisions in part b in order to make it easier for parents to access information .

the provisions relating to parental consent and notice and those relating to surrogate parents are largely unchanged from existing regulations .

the proposed regulations contain requirements for ensuring that parental consent is obtained before administering screening procedures , providing an evaluation and assessment , providing early intervention services , using public or private insurance , and exchanging personally identifiable information among agencies ( §303.420 ) .

if parental consent is not obtained , the proposed regulations provide that the lead agency may use the due process hearing procedures to challenge the parent's refusal for an evaluation and assessment but may not use these procedures to challenge the parent's refusal to consent to the provision of an early intervention service or the use of insurance ( §303.420 ( c ) ) .

the proposed regulations contain various dispute resolution options , including mediation , state complaints , and due process hearing procedures .

the mediation requirements are largely unchanged ; however , the proposed regulations add that if mediation resolves a complaint , the parties must execute a legally binding agreement that is signed by the parent and an agency representative who has authority to bind the agency .

in addition , the agreement is to be enforceable in state or federal court ( §303.431 ) .

§§303.230 through 303.236 of the proposed regulations add detailed departmental procedures , which parallel those in part b regulations ( §§300.179-300.183 ) regarding the secretary disapproving a state's application , including requirements for notice and hearing before initial and final disapproval decisions are made .

following the requirement that applies provisions of in sections 616 , 617 , and 618 of part b dealing with certain federal administrative requirements to part c ( §642 ) , the proposed regulations would include extensive requirements that parallel part b regulations §§300.601-300.608 and §§300.640-300.645 dealing with federal monitoring and enforcement related to state performance standards and reporting requirements ( §§303.700 through 303.708 and §§303.720 through 303.724 ) .

§303.520 would add extensive requirements about use of public and private insurance to pay for services provided under part c. for example , the state would be required to obtain parental consent to use public insurance or program benefits of a parent or child enrolled or participating in a public insurance or public benefit program .

similarly , states would be able to use private insurance if parental consent is provided .

parental consent would not be required if the state has enacted certain statutes related to the use of private insurance for part c services ( eg , that the use of such insurance "cannot .

 .

 .

be the basis for increasing the health insurance premiums of the infant or toddler with a disability or the child's family. .

 ( §303.520 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) ) .

part c permits states to charge fees for some part c services under certain circumstances .

§303.521 would add requirements on the system of fees and payments that the state could charge parents .

for example , states would not be able to charge parents who are unable to pay ( as defined by the state ) .

fees could not be charged for certain part c services , such as child find and evaluation .

states that provide fape below the age of 3 or that use part b funds to provide services for infants and toddlers with disabilities could not charge fees for services provided as part of fape .

