within the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) is charged with securing our nation's land and maritime borders between official ports of entry ( poe ) to deter and interdict terrorists , weapons of mass destruction , and aliens attempting to enter the country unlawfully .

in order to discharge its duties , the usbp deploys personnel , technology , and tactical infrastructure such as vehicle barriers and fencing .

fencing is erected on the border to impede the illegal entry of unauthorized aliens , while vehicle barriers are designed to impede the entry of vehicles but do not impede the entry of individuals .

this report will analyze the barriers that are currently being constructed and maintained along the border by the usbp , including historical and future cost estimates and the policy issues involved .

because the current debate has largely focused on the deployment of fencing to the border , this report will focus on the policy issues surrounding the construction of border fencing .

however , information concerning the kinds of vehicle barriers being deployed at the border will be provided where available .

using the broad powers granted to the attorney general ( ag ) to control and guard the u.s. border , the usbp began erecting a barrier known as the "primary fence" directly on the border in 1990 to deter illegal entries and drug smuggling in its san diego sector .

the san diego fence formed part of the usbp's "prevention through deterrence" strategy , which called for reducing unauthorized migration by placing agents and resources directly on the border along population centers in order to deter would - be migrants from entering the country .

the san diego primary fence was completed in 1993 , covering the first 14 miles of the border from the pacific ocean .

the fence was constructed of 10-foot - high welded steel army surplus landing mats with the assistance of the corps of engineers and the california national guard .

in addition to the 14 miles of primary fencing erected in its san diego sector , the usbp maintains stretches of primary fencing in several other sectors along the southwest border , including campo , ca ; yuma , az ; nogales , az ; naco , az ; douglas , az ; and el paso , tx .

in 1996 , congress passed the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) , which , among other things , explicitly gave the attorney general broad authority to construct barriers along the border and authorized the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) to construct a secondary layer of fencing to buttress the completed 14-mile primary fence .

construction of the secondary fence stalled after 9.5 miles had been completed due to environmental concerns raised by the california coastal commission ( ccc ) .

in 2005 , congress passed the real id act , which , among other things , authorized the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to waive all legal requirements to expedite the construction of border barriers .

in 2006 , congress passed the secure fence act , which , among other things , directed dhs to construct five separate stretches of fencing along the southern border , totaling 850 miles .

this requirement was modified by provisions in division e of h.r .

2764 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , which was enacted into law on december 26 , 2007 .

the secretary of homeland security is now required to construct reinforced fencing along not fewer than 700 miles of the southwest border , in locations where fencing is deemed most practical and effective .

in addition to border fencing , the usbp deploys both permanent and temporary vehicle barriers at the border .

vehicle barriers are meant to stop the entry of vehicles , but not people , into the united states .

temporary vehicle barriers are typically chained together and can be moved to different locations at the usbp's discretion .

permanent vehicle barriers are embedded in the ground and are meant to remain in one location .

the usbp's san diego sector extends along the first 66 miles from the pacific ocean of the international border with mexico , and covers approximately 7,000 square miles of territory .

located north of tijuana and tecate , mexican cities with a combined population of more than two million people , the sector features no natural barriers to entry by unauthorized migrants and smugglers .

as a result of this geographical reality and in response to the large numbers of unauthorized aliens crossing the border in the area , in 1990 the usbp began erecting a physical barrier to deter illegal entries and drug smuggling .

the ensuing "primary" fence covered the first 14 miles of the border , starting from the pacific ocean , and was constructed of 10-foot - high welded steel .

as previously mentioned , the ins constructed the primary fencing in san diego using the broad authority granted to the ag in order to guard and control the u.s. border by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

in 1996 , congress expressly authorized the ag to construct barriers at the border for the first time in the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) .

this legislation has subsequently been amended on several occasions .

in 1996 , construction began on the secondary fence that had been recommended by the sandia study with congressional approval .

the new fence was to parallel the fourteen miles of primary fence already constructed on land patrolled by the imperial beach station of the san diego sector , and included permanent lighting as well as an access road in between the two layers of fencing .

of the 14 miles of fencing authorized to be constructed by iirira , nine miles of the triple fence had been completed by the end of fy2005 .

construction of the remaining 4.5 miles was halted as a result of legal actions taken by the california coastal commission , which is discussed below .

apprehension statistics have long been used as a performance measure by the usbp .

however , the number of apprehensions may be a misleading statistic for several reasons , including the data's focus on events rather than people and the fact that there are no reliable estimates for how many aliens successfully evade capture .

this makes it difficult to establish a firm correlation between the number of apprehensions in a given sector and the number of people attempting to enter through that sector .

while caution should be taken when attempting to draw conclusions about the efficacy of policy initiatives based solely on apprehensions statistics , they remain the most reliable way to codify trends in illegal migration along the border .

the san diego fence spans two border patrol stations within the san diego sector: imperial beach station and chula vista station .

as previously noted , the primary fence was constructed in those two stations beginning in fy1990 ; the secondary fence was constructed beginning in fy1996 .

figure 1 shows the stark decrease in apprehensions at the imperial beach station from fy1992 to fy2004 .

the majority of the decrease occurred in the four year period from fy1995 through fy1998 and coincided with operation gatekeeper , which as previously noted combined the construction of fencing along the border with an increase in agents and other resources deployed directly along the border .

for the period from fy1998 to fy2004 , apprehensions at the imperial beach station averaged about 14,000 each year .

figure 2 shows the apprehensions at the chula vista station over the same period of time .

the trend in apprehensions at chula vista is somewhat similar to imperial beach , with overall apprehensions dropping significantly from fy1992 to fy2002 .

apprehensions increased slightly from fy2002 to fy2004 , but remain far below their early 1990s levels .

interestingly , the rate of decline in chula vista in the mid - 1990s lagged behind the rate of decline in imperial beach station during this period .

this suggests that as enforcement ramped up in imperial beach station , unauthorized migration shifted westward to chula vista .

from fy1992 to fy1998 , for example , apprehensions decreased by 92% in imperial beach , but only by 54% in chula vista .

from fy1998 through fy2001 , apprehensions leveled off in imperial beach , averaging around 16,000 a year , but continued to decline at chula vista , from 72,648 in fy1998 to 3,080 in fy2002 .

overall , the trend indicates the following: as enforcement measures , in this case including fencing , were deployed — first focusing on imperial beach , and later extending to chula vista — the flow of unauthorized migration pushed eastward .

the drop in apprehensions occurred first in imperial beach , and then later pushed eastward to chula vista .

figure 3 shows the aggregate apprehensions made at the other san diego sector stations , excluding imperial beach and chula vista .

those stations are el cajon , campo , san clemente , temecula , and brown field .

figure 3 shows that at the time apprehensions were beginning to decline in imperial beach ( starting in fy1995 ) and chula vista ( starting in fy1996 ) , apprehensions at other san diego sector stations almost doubled .

this suggests that as enforcement efforts increased in the two westernmost stations , including the installation of fencing and the deployment of additional agents , the flow of illegal migration pushed eastward to the other stations in the san diego sector .

while apprehensions declined in the non - fenced stations of the san diego sector from fy1997 to fy2001 , the rate of decline was not as steep as the rate of decline at the stations where fencing was deployed .

overall , the decline in apprehensions in the rest of the san diego sector has lagged behind the decreases in imperial beach and chula vista: from fy1992 to fy2004 , apprehensions in the other san diego sector stations decreased by 42% , compared to decreases of 95% in imperial beach and 94% in chula vista .

in fy2003 and fy2004 , apprehensions increased slightly in the rest of san diego sector , possibly in response to the increasing usbp focus on the tucson sector in arizona .

it seems , then , that the installation of border fencing , in combination with an increase in agent manpower and technological assets , has had a significant effect on the apprehensions made in the san diego sector .

this in turn suggests that fewer unauthorized aliens are attempting to cross the border in the san diego sector as a result of the increased enforcement measures , including fencing , manpower , and other resources , that were deployed to that sector .

figure 4 shows overall san diego sector apprehensions , breaking out the imperial beach and chula vista stations , and compares them to the apprehensions made at the tucson sector between fy1992 and fy2004 .

the data used to create this graph can be seen presented in table form in appendix g .

figure 4 shows that in fy1992 , imperial beach and chula vista accounted for 64% of all apprehensions made in the san diego sector ; by fy2004 the two stations accounted for only 14% of all apprehensions made in the sector .

however , as apprehensions declined in imperial beach and chula vista stations and san diego sector as a whole over the late 1990s and early 2000s , apprehensions in the tucson sector in arizona increased significantly over this period .

over the 12-year period between 1992 and 2004 , overall apprehensions in the san diego sector declined by 76% .

however , as apprehensions were decreasing in the san diego sector , they were increasing in other sectors further east .

this increase was most notable within the tucson sector in arizona , where apprehensions increased six - fold ( 591% ) between fy1992 and fy2004 .

as figure 4 shows , overall apprehensions in the san diego and tucson sectors combined have averaged roughly 620,000 yearly since fy1992 , with the san diego sector accounting for the lion's share during the early 1990s and the tucson sector accounting for the majority in the early 2000s .

this provides further indication that the construction of the fence , combined with the increases in manpower in the san diego sector , changed the patterns of migration for unauthorized aliens attempting to enter the country illegally from mexico .

as figures 1-4 show , the increased deployment of agents , infrastructure , technology , and other resources within the san diego sector has resulted in a significant decline in the number of apprehensions made in that sector .

nationally , apprehensions made by the usbp grew steadily through the late 1990s , only to decline in the early 2000s .

however , in 1992 the usbp apprehended 1.2 million unauthorized aliens ; in 2004 , the usbp also apprehended 1.2 million unauthorized aliens .

while the increased enforcement in the san diego sector has resulted in a shift in migration patterns for unauthorized aliens , it does not appear to have decreased the overall number of apprehensions made each year by usbp agents .

as previously noted , apprehensions statistics can be somewhat misleading , but they nevertheless remain the best way to codify trends in unauthorized migration along the border .

however , it is impossible to ascertain solely by looking at apprehensions statistics how many unauthorized aliens are attempting to enter the country illegally , because it is unclear how many individuals evade being captured by the usbp each year .

the usbp has been constructing and maintaining barriers along the international land border since 1991 .

these barriers have historically been limited to selected urban areas as part of the usbp's overall strategy of rerouting illegal migration away from urban areas towards geographically isolated areas where their agents have a tactical advantage over border crossers .

two main types of border fencing have been constructed: primary fencing located directly on the border along several urban areas ; and sandia fencing , also known as secondary or triple fencing , in san diego .

additionally , the usbp has begun installing permanent vehicle barriers in various segments of the border .

vehicle barriers are designed to impede the entry of vehicles while allowing individuals and animals to cross the border freely .

as such , they have a lower environmental footprint than border fencing .

congress may consider a number of issues concerning the construction of barriers along the border , including , but not limited to , their effectiveness , overall costs compared with benefits , possible diplomatic ramifications , unintended consequences , and the locations in which they are to be constructed .

although these issues apply to all potential barriers at the border , due to the focus on border fencing in the current congressional debate , this section will focus its analysis on the potential policy and legal issues surrounding the construction of fencing at the border .

proponents of border fences point to the substantial reduction in apprehensions along the san diego sector as tangible proof that fences succeed in reducing cross - border smuggling and migration where they are constructed .

opponents attribute part of the decrease in apprehensions to the increase in manpower and resources in the sector and , pointing to the increase in apprehensions in less - populated sectors , contend that the fence only succeeds in re - routing unauthorized migration and not in stopping it .

the usbp , for its part , states that border fencing is a force multiplier because it allows its agents to focus enforcement actions in other areas .

the usbp has also stated that the fencing constructed in urban areas has helped reroute unauthorized migration to less populated areas where its agents have a tactical advantage over border crossers .

as previously noted , the number of usbp apprehensions in 2004 were almost identical to the number of apprehensions in 1992 ; the main difference is that san diego accounted for the majority of apprehensions in 1992 , whereas in 2004 tucson and yuma sectors accounted for the majority of apprehensions .

a possible issue for congress concerns the overall effectiveness of border fencing , especially if it is not constructed across the entire border in question .

in the limited urban areas where border fencing has been constructed , it has typically reduced apprehensions .

however , there is also strong indication that the fencing , combined with added enforcement , has re - routed illegal immigrants to other less fortified areas of the border .

additionally , in the limited areas where fencing has been erected , there have been numerous breaches of the border fencing and a number of tunnels discovered crossing underneath the fencing .

it stands to reason that even if border fencing is constructed over a significant portion of the land border , the incidences of fence breaches and underground tunnels would increase .

possible policy options to address these issues could include mandating that border fencing be highly tamper - resistant or directing cbp to invest in tunnel - detection technologies .

because border fencing is a relatively new and limited phenomenon along the u.s. - mexico border , there is a dearth of information concerning its overall costs and benefits .

the corps of engineers study predicted that the costs of constructing a double layer fence consisting of primary fencing and sandia fencing would range from $1.2 million to $1.3 million a mile , excluding the costs of land acquisition .

the corps of engineers also predicted that the 25-year life cycle cost of the fence would range from $16.4 million to $70 million per mile depending on the amount of damage sustained by the fencing .

if significant portions of the border were to be fenced , reducing the areas along which individuals could cross the border , it may stand to reason that the fencing will be subjected to more breaches and other attempts to compromise than the fencing that has already been constructed .

this may mean that the costs of maintaining border fencing that is widely deployed in the future will be higher than they have been thus far for the limited deployment .

the corps estimates do not include the costs of acquiring the land or most labor costs , since construction would be done by dod ; these could well turn out to be significant expenses if private contractors are used to construct the fencing as per dhs' fy2007 congressional budget justifications .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that border fencing would cost $3 million a mile to construct and that maintenance would total roughly 15% of the overall project costs per year .

however , the cbo does not elaborate on what is included in those estimates .

dhs predicts that the san diego fence will have a total cost of $127 million for its 14-mile length when it is completed — roughly $9 million a mile .

construction of the first 9.5 miles of fencing cost $31 million , or roughly $3 million a mile , while construction of the last 4.5 miles of fencing is projected to cost $96 million , or roughly $21 million a mile .

however these costs may be somewhat misleading due to the following factors: construction of the fence was delayed for an extended period of time ; the remaining construction involves filling a relatively large gulch which may be more complex than the average stretch of border ; and dhs is proposing to use private contractors to expedite the construction process which may increase the labor costs and thus may increase the overall project costs .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , the border fencing constructed by the end of fy2007 ( using mostly the corps of engineers and the national guard to construct the fencing ) cost about $2.8 million a mile .

the fencing constructed in fy2008 , using mostly private constructors , cost about $5.1 million a mile .

some have argued that building fences on the border is too expensive and would consume funding that would be better spent on hiring additional agents or deploying additional technologies to the border .

others maintain that the costs of fencing are negligible compared to the costs of illegal immigration , and that fencing has been proven effective at decreasing illegal immigration in those areas where it has been deployed .

the usbp has testified that "for border control , for border security , we need that appropriate mix .

it's not about fences .

it's not about border patrol agents .

it's not about technology .

it's about all of those things. .

at issue for congress is how best to allocate scarce border security resources while safeguarding homeland security .

does border fencing represent the best investment of border security funding , and what is the appropriate mix of border security resources ? .

how much will maintaining border fencing cost in the future , and which agency will be responsible for this maintenance ? .

will using private contractors to expedite the construction of border fencing increase or decrease the costs ? .

congress mandated the design of the border fence in san diego in iirira .

many different fence designs could be deployed to the border , and each have their relative strengths and weaknesses .

concrete panels , for example , are among the more cost - effective solutions but usbp agents cannot see through this type of fencing ; the usbp testified about their preference for fencing that can be seen through , so as to identify the activity occurring on the mexican side of the border and thus preserve their tactical advantage over potential border crossers , and to better avoid potential rockings or other violent incidents .

sandia fencing has been effective in san diego and can be seen through , but is among the more expensive fencing options .

bollard fencing has been effective in its limited deployment and can also be seen through , but is also expensive to install and to maintain .

chain link fencing is relatively economical , but more easily compromised .

if fencing is to be constructed along the border , an issue concerns what kinds of fencing should be constructed in order to maximize its deterrent effect and its utility to the usbp while minimizing the costs associated with its construction and maintenance .

the usbp has testified that border fencing is most effective for its operational purposes when deployed along urban areas .

in these areas , individuals crossing the border have a short distance to cover before disappearing into neighborhoods ; once they have entered neighborhoods it is much more difficult for usbp agents to identify and apprehend unauthorized aliens .

also , from populated areas it is relatively easy for unauthorized aliens to find transportation into the interior .

for these reasons , all of the border fencing constructed by the usbp to date has been built in urban areas abutting the border , such as san diego , nogales , and el paso .

in rural areas , the usbp testified that it has a tactical advantage over border crossers because they must travel longer distances before reaching populated areas .

according to cbp , fencing is manpower intensive because agents must continually check the fence for breaches and for illegal activity .

this does not represent a problem in urban areas , because the usbp stations are typically located near the border in those areas .

in some of the more rural areas of the border , where the nearest towns and usbp stations may be many miles away from the border , this would mean that agents would need to spend much of their working day commuting from the nearest usbp station to the fence location .

additionally , because the border fencing constructed to date has been built along urban areas it has been relatively easy to house the individuals involved in its construction .

if border fencing is extended into the more remote areas of the border , the costs of its construction may increase due to the need to bring the individuals and goods needed to build the fence to these areas for extended periods of time .

lastly , some areas of the border are prone to severe weather effects , such as flash flooding , that could compromise any permanent structures constructed there .

a very practical issue concerns what areas of the border should be fenced .

should fencing be restricted to urban or semi - urban areas in order to give the usbp a tactical advantage over border crossers , or should fencing be constructed along any geographical area of the border that features large numbers of unauthorized immigration ? .

in rural areas , should fencing be limited to areas of high illegal entry in order to impede individuals from crossing the border , or should fencing be constructed as a deterrent in any area , even those featuring low levels of illegal entry ? .

should fencing be deployed in sectors where the distance between the nearest usbp station and the fence requires agents to spend most of their day commuting ? .

should fencing be deployed to the northern border as well as the southwest border ? .

will building fencing along more remote or environmentally harsher areas of the border increase the construction costs ? .

there are a number of issues associated with the acquisition of the land that would be required for border fencing .

much of the land along the california and arizona border is owned by the federal government ; however most of the land along the texas border is owned by private individuals .

what will the costs of acquiring the land to construct border fencing be , and have these costs been factored into estimates of border fencing costs ? .

will eminent domain be used to confiscate land from individuals who do not wish to have fencing built on their lands ? .

the reservations made by presidents roosevelt and taft may have kept substantial parcels of land within the federal domain , depending mostly on the amount of public lands at the time and valid existing claims .

crs was not able to determine how many valid claims and land patents exist , if any , or the number of private developments that may be encroaching on the reservations .

nonetheless , it appears that only those who qualify under an exception or were provided land by statute have valid fee title claims within the reserved strip .

if lands were mistakenly granted , sold , or transferred to private parties , these conveyances could be void because , as a general rule , rights can not be acquired in lands actually embraced in a legally valid withdrawal .

compensation under the fifth amendment for private landowners may not be owed if private claims are not legitimate .

because the proclamations do not cite any supporting authority , some question the president's implied or inherent constitutional powers to issue them .

others may argue that they conflict with the exclusive mandate given congress by the property clause of the constitution to regulate and dispose of federal property .

an issue for congress may include whether these proclamations are , in fact , valid , and if so what actions are appropriate to take in the instances where individuals own land within the reservation's boundaries .

assuming the proclamations are valid , the reservations may provide the first 60 feet of necessary space for fence construction in many areas .

however , the two layer fencing constructed to date includes 150 feet of land between its layers .

an issue for congress may involve whether to confine border fencing to the 60-feet easement reserved by the proclamations , or whether to acquire the additional 90 feet of land that would be needed to construct sandia - style fencing .

a corollary issue may involve the authority of dhs to construct border fencing along tribal lands .

the arizona desert along the tohono o'odham reservation has become one of the most heavily trafficked border areas in the country , and the usbp has been restricted in its operations in the reservation due to tribal concerns .

the tohono o'odham have reportedly vowed to fight the construction of fencing on tribe - owned land , citing environmental and cultural concerns .

under current law , the secretary of the interior may grant rights - of - way over and across tribal land , provided the secretary receives prior written consent of the tribe .

if the tribe does not consent , dhs may look to its new waiver authority to construct a fence across tribal lands .

it is unclear , however , whether the expanded waiver that was given to the secretary of dhs would allow ( or was intended to allow ) the department to override the statutory authority given to another federal agency .

ultimately , federal government holds all indian lands in trust , and congress may take such lands for public purposes , as long as it provides just compensation as required by the fifth amendment .

the governments of mexico and canada have both voiced concern about the united states constructing barriers along the international border .

mexican president vicente fox has come out strongly against the construction of border barriers on numerous occasions , stating his belief that these projects isolate the two nations , create frustration and misunderstandings , and do not solve the underlying problems that lead individuals to enter the united states illegally .

mexican press secretary rubén aguilar valenzuela stated his government's belief that "history has also taught us that a wall is never the solution to problems and that all walls eventually get torn down. .

the mexican government has reportedly forwarded numerous diplomatic notes to the white house registering its complaints against the possible expansion of border fencing .

the canadian government has also reportedly voiced concern over legislative proposals that would require a study of fencing options along the northern border , citing the difficulties of fencing the northern border and the fact that the u.s. government has never discussed such a plan with canadian authorities .

deputy assistant secretary for immigration and customs enforcement john p. clark reportedly stated during congressional testimony that the proposed expansion of border fencing "harkens back to the chinese wall and the berlin wall , not the message we want to send to the mexican government , the canadian government , and the rest of the world. .

there are a number of possible issues for congress to consider involving the potential diplomatic ramifications of constructing barriers along the border: do the gains in border security outweigh the risk of alienating mexico and canada ? .

should the mexican or canadian government's opinions or wishes be taken into account when border fencing is concerned ? .

given the need to coordinate intelligence and law enforcement activities at the border , should maintaining cordial working relationships with mexico and canada take precedence over sealing the border with physical barriers ? .

a great deal of debate has been around the environmental impacts of border fencing .

the addition of fences along the southwest border , according to some , could harm sensitive environments , adversely affect critical habitat for protected species , and block migratory patterns for animals .

indeed , these concerns were among the many voiced by the ccc in its objection to the completion of the san diego border fence .

after immigration officials , the ccc , and the environmental community could not agree on a fence design , congress passed waiver language in the real id act that allows the secretary of dhs to waive all "legal requirements" necessary to ensure expeditious construction of the barriers and roads in the vicinity of the u.s. border .

the secretary used this provision to waive a number of primarily environmental laws ( see appendix h ) in order to complete the san diego border fence .

dhs maintains , however , that it will follow "best management practices" throughout construction and will be "mindful of the environmental impacts" that might occur .

nonetheless , the secretary's broad waiver authority has many worried about potential fence projects along other areas of the southwest border .

some argue that a fence along the arizona border could be especially destructive to endangered jaguar and sonoran desert pronghorn populations that usually roam this area because it would fragment native habitat and ultimately reduce gene pools .

officials from the u.s .

fish and wildlife service , however , have said that it is too early to speculate about the potential impact of a border fence on wildlife migration .

others note that unauthorized migration negatively impacts the environment , and believe that the construction of fencing could actually have a beneficial impact for protected lands if it reduces the number of unauthorized migrants traversing through environmentally sensitive lands .

as congress debates immigration reform and the addition of new border fences , members will undoubtedly be called upon to balance national security interests with environmental protections .

because there does not appear to be a clear consensus on the environmental impacts of border fencing , there is some interest in a study of the issue .

the effects of the san diego border fence , for example , may help scientists better understand and predict potential environmental consequences elsewhere .

should fencing be expanded along the southwest border , congress may be interested in environmentally sensitive alternatives to normal fencing and whether they can effectively limit illegitimate cross - border traffic .

some argue that vehicle barriers may be less intrusive because they allow unimpeded wildlife movement but can limit damaging vehicular traffic .

congress may also call on the secretary to cooperate or coordinate certain activities with the environmental community , since the secretary could waive many environmental requirements .

the building of barriers along the international border has raised a number of legal issues .

most stem from requirements posed by environmental laws .

before the passage of the real id act waiver provision , for example , the sierra club and other environmental groups challenged , under the national environmental policy act , the federal government's plan to complete the san diego border fence .

the lawsuit alleged , among other things , that the government's final environmental impact statement did not address the entire 14-mile border infrastructure system and inadequately addressed the parts that were evaluated .

after secretary chertoff exercised the waiver authority , the court dismissed the environmentalists' lawsuit in december 2005 .

with respect to the secretary's use of the waiver authority , the provision allows legal redress only for constitutional violations and limits review to the district courts of the united states ( though the supreme court retains discretionary appellate review over district court decisions ) .

in essence , an individual could not sue dhs for bypassing the environmental impact statement requirements of the national environmental policy act ( a law it has waived ) because that would be a statutory violation , but an individual could sue for the taking of property without "just compensation" as provided by the fifth amendment .

should a district court make a ruling , that decision can only be appealed if the petitioner files a petition for a writ of certiorari to the supreme court and the court , in its discretion , chooses to grant certiorari .

in other words , there is no intermediate appellate court review guaranteed as of right to a petitioner .

appeal directly from a district court to the supreme court rarely appears in law .

still , when congress determines a particular class of cases to be of great public import , it is not unprecedented for it to require prompt review in the highest court of the land .

as previously discussed , a few legal challenges have been brought in federal district courts challenging the constitutionality of the waiver authority provided to the secretary of homeland security by the real id act , but these challenges have thus far been rejected .

considerable evidence shows that the usbp's historical strategy of "prevention through deterrence," whereby agents and resources including border fencing and other barriers have been concentrated along urban areas and areas traditionally featuring high levels of illegal entry , has succeeded in changing the flow of illegal migration .

while san diego , ca , and el paso , tx , were historically the two sectors that featured the most apprehensions and the highest levels of illegal immigration , since the mid - 1990s and the advent of operations gatekeeper and hold the line in those sectors , the more remote geographical areas of the arizona border have become the hot - spots for illegal migration into the united states .

one unintended consequence of this enforcement posture and the shift in migration patterns has been an increase in the number of migrant deaths each year ; on average 200 migrants died each year in the early 1990s , compared with 472 migrant deaths in 2005 .

another unintended consequence of this enforcement posture may have been a relative increase , compared with the national average , in crime along the border in these more remote regions .

while crime rates in san diego and el paso have declined over the past 15 years , the reduction in crime rates along the more rural areas of the border have lagged behind the national trends .

another unintended consequence of the border fencing has been the proliferation of tunnels dug underneath the border .

in san diego , where the double - layer sandia fencing has been constructed , smugglers have dug numerous tunnels underneath the border fence .

one such tunnel was almost a kilometer long and was built from reinforced concrete — evidence of a rather sophisticated smuggling operation .

a possible issue for congress to consider as it debates expanding the existing border fencing is what the unintended consequences of this expansion could be .

given the re - routing of migration flows that have already occurred , are dhs and the relevant border communities prepared to handle the increased flow of illegal migration to non - reinforced areas ? .

is dhs prepared to deal with an increase in the phenomenon of cross - border tunnels and other attempts to defeat the purpose of the fencing ? .

what will the impact on crime rates be along the unreinforced areas of the border ? .

will usbp agents be required to spend some of their patrolling time guarding the fence ? .

appendix a .

legislation in the 110 th congress as previously noted , the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) made significant changes to the secure fence act .

the act gives dhs discretion as to where fencing should be erected along the border , requires that 700 miles of reinforced fencing be constructed , and designates 370 miles as a priority area that must be constructed by december 31 , 2008 .

in addition , the act provided a total of $1,225 million for sbinet .

this represented an increase of $225 million over the administration's request , and the amounts recommended by the house - and senate - passed versions of the bill .

of the $1,225 million provided by p.l .

110-161 , $1,053 million was designated as emergency funding , and $172 million comprises regular appropriations .

the $1,225 million was apportioned as follows: $1,088 million for development and deployment ( $1,053 million in emergency funding , and $35 million in regular appropriations ) ; $73 million for operation and maintenance ; and $64 million for program management .

funding for the construction of the border fence was included in the development and deployment activity in the bsfit account .

however , it is important to note that other items , such as the deployment of cameras and sensors to the border , are also funded under this activity .

currently available authoritative documentation does not provide funding details below the activity level .

therefore , the portion of this funding that would be specifically directed to the border fence cannot be precisely determined .

however , according to cbp congressional affairs , the president's $1,000 million fy2008 request for bsfit included $196 million in fence - related funding .

p.l .

110-161 also withheld $650 million of the funding provided for sbinet until an expenditure plan is received and approved by the house and senate appropriations committees .

proposed legislation in addition to the consolidated appropriations act , a number of bills were introduced in the 110 th congress that included provisions relating to the construction of border fencing .

although the following analysis is not intended to provide a comprehensive list of every bill introduced that had fencing provisions , it does provide an overview of the main types of fence - related bills that have been introduced and their overarching themes .

prior to enactment of the consolidated appropriations act , a number of other bills were introduced in the 110 th congress that would have expanded or underlined the secretary of homeland security's authority to construct fencing at the border .

h.r .

4192 , h.r .

3638 , and h.r .

2954 would have directed the president to construct the fencing authorized by the secure fence act .

s. 2348 would have authorized $3 billion in emergency funding for a variety of border security purposes , including the construction of 700 miles of fencing .

s. 2294 and s. 1984 would have called for the construction of 700 miles of fencing and 300 miles of vehicle barriers within two years of enactment .

s. 1269 would have called for the construction of double layer fencing along the border from the pacific ocean to the gulf of mexico .

s. 330 would have called for replacing existing fencing in tucson and yuma sectors with double layer fencing and constructing a total of 370 miles of fencing and 500 miles of vehicle barriers along the border .

the issue of barriers at the border was also of interest to the 110 th congress as a component of the larger immigration debate .

during may and june 2007 , the senate considered a number of comprehensive immigration reform measures ( s. 1348 , s.amdt .

1150 to s. 1348 , s. 1639 ) , though cloture was unable to be achieved on any of these proposals .

both s.amdt .

1150 , as amended , and s. 1639 , as introduced , included language concerning fencing at the border that was similar to that which was ultimately enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 .

some comprehensive immigration reform proposals considered also included provisions that would have required that the construction of border barriers serve as a trigger mechanism for broader immigration reform to occur .

s.amdt .

1150 , as introduced , would have required the construction of 370 miles of fencing and 200 miles of vehicle barriers before some provisions relating to legalization , adjustment of status , and temporary workers could take effect .

in addition , s.amdt .

1150 would have amended §102 of iirira to expressly authorize the construction of the san diego fence .

during the initial senate floor debate for s.amdt .

1150 , s.amdt .

1172 was adopted by unanimous consent and amended the trigger mechanisms to require 300 miles of vehicle barriers .

s. 1639 , as introduced , included similar language to s.amdt .

1150 , as amended , concerning barriers at the border .

s. 1639 would have required dhs to construct 370 miles of fencing and 300 miles of vehicle barriers as part of the trigger mechanisms required before some provisions relating to legalization , adjustment of status , and temporary workers could take effect .

s. 1369 would also have expressly authorized the completion of the san diego fence .

a number of bills that were introduced in the second session of the 110 th congress would have amended the changes to the secure fence act that were enacted by the consolidated appropriations act of fy2008 .

h.r .

5568 would have inserted the word "physical" before all previously enacted occurrences of the word "fencing" ( eg , in the secure fence act and §102 of iirira ) .

s. 2712 would have required that the 700 miles of reinforced fencing authorized by the consolidated appropriations act be completed by december 31 , 2010 .

h.r .

5124 would have required that the fencing constructed under the act's authorization be double layer , at least 14 feet tall , and be completed within six months of the bill's enactment .

in addition , the bill would have prohibited dhs from counting fencing in existence prior to january 1 , 2008 , toward the 700-mile total .

h.r .

4987 would have replaced the 700-mile requirement enacted by the consolidated appropriations act and replaced it with language , similar to that in the original secure fence act , requiring five specific stretches of fencing to be constructed .

h.r .

4960 would have repealed the consultation requirement enacted by the consolidated appropriations act .

lastly , several introduced bills included other fencing provisions not directly related to the construction of fencing .

h.r .

5728 would have established a border improvement trust fund and allow taxpayers to designate $5 ( $10 for joint filers ) from their annual income tax returns for this fund .

the fund could have been used to pay for costs associated with constructing and maintaining fencing and barriers at the border .

s. 2709 would have imposed a minimum sentence of five years for any alien convicted of damaging fencing or infrastructure ( including cameras and sensors ) at the border .

appendix b .

legislation in the 109 th congress the 109 th congress enacted three pieces of legislation concerning border fencing , and considered several more .

the real id act ( p.l .

109-13 ) , as previously noted , expanded dhs's waiver authority to expedite the construction of border fencing .

the secure fence act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-367 ) directed dhs to construct five stretches of border fencing totaling roughly 850 miles .

the fy2007 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

109-295 ) provided $1.2 billion for the installation of fencing , infrastructure , and technology along the border ; $31 million of this total was designated for the completion of the san diego fence .

in addition to these acts , a number of bills with fencing related provisions were passed by the house and the senate .

h.r .

4437 , which would have directed dhs to construct five stretches of fencing along the border , was passed by the house on december 16 , 2005 .

s. 2611 , which called for 370 miles of fencing to be constructed , was passed by the senate on may 25 , 2006 .

s.amdt .

4788 was added to the department of defense appropriation bill , h.r .

5631 , on august 2 , 2006 , and would have appropriated $1.8 billion to the national guard for the construction of border fencing .

h.r .

5631 was passed by the senate on september 7 , 2006 ; however , this fencing provision was stripped from the bill during conference .

p.l .

109-295 , the fy2007 dhs appropriations act , provided $1.2 billion in funding for border fencing , infrastructure , and technology ; combined with the supplemental appropriation provided by p.l .

109-234 , the conferees noted that dhs would have $1.5 billion for border infrastructure construction in fy2007 .

the conferees directed dhs to submit an expenditure plan for this funding within 60 days of the bill's enactment , and withheld $950 million of the funding until the plan is received and approved by the house and senate committees .

however , the act did not place any restrictions on how dhs is to apportion this appropriation between fencing , infrastructure , and technology .

in addition to the bills discussed above , there were a number of bills in the 109 th congress that would have expanded the current fencing and other forms of barriers at the international land border .

some of these bills would have required fencing to be constructed along the entire southwest border , others would have identified particular stretches of land which would receive fencing , and still others would have called for studies to determine whether fencing is a cost - effective way of securing the border .

appendix c. examples of usbp border fencing appendix d. the san diego fence appendix e. permanent vehicle barrier schematic appendix f. permanent vehicle barriers appendix g. data from figure 4 appendix h. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of the san diego border fence appendix i .

legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in the vicinity of the barry m. goldwater range in southwest arizona appendix j .

legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in the vicinity of the san pedro riparian national conservation area in southeast arizona appendix k. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in hidalgo county , texas appendix l. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads at various project areas located in california , arizona , new mexico , and texa .

