regional trade agreements ( rtas ) are trade arrangements under which member - countriesgrant each other preferential treatment in trade .

rtas may be categorized as bilateral , multilateral,or sub - regional .

with no formal definitions , these terms are sometimes used loosely to describevarious groupings .

a bilateral trade agreement is usually an agreement between two countries toreduce tariffs and quotas on items between themselves .

while this definition seemingly indicatesan agreement between just two countries , it is sometimes used to describe trade agreementsinvolving more than two countries .

there are a number of types of arrangements including free trade agreements , customsunions , common markets , and economic unions .

 ( 1 ) free trade agreements ( ftas ) are the most common form ofregional economic integration in which members of a group remove tariffs and some nontariffbarriers to trade among member countries .

 ( 2 ) at the same time , each member retains its independent trade policy,including its tariffs , towards nonmember countries .

ftas are those in which member countriesagree to eliminate tariffs and nontariff barriers on trade in goods within the free trade area , but eachcountry maintains its own trade policies , including tariffs on trade outside the region .

ftas accountfor 84% of all rtas in force in the world , and 96% of those that are pending .

the likely reasonthere are more ftas than customs unions is that they can be concluded more quickly and require lesspolicy coordination among members .

in an fta , member countries maintain their own trade policyvis - a - vis non - member countries .

 ( 3 ) the u.s. - chile free trade agreement is an example of a bilateralfta .

customs unions are agreements in which members conduct free trade among themselves andmaintain a common trade policy towards non - members .

these agreements require the establishmentof a common external tariff and harmonization of external trade policies .

such agreements implya greater loss of autonomy over the parties' commercial policies and require longer and morecomplex negotiations and implementation periods .

geographical considerations play an importantrole in defining the objective of economic , and sometimes political , integration among the membercountries .

 ( 4 ) the southerncommon market ( mercosur ) in south america is an example of a customs union .

common markets are those in which member countries go beyond a customs union byeliminating barriers to labor and capital flows across national borders within the market .

theeuropean union is the most prominent example of a common market .

in economic unions , member countries merge their economies even further than commonmarkets by establishing a common currency , and therefore a unified monetary policy , along withother common economic institutions .

the 12 members of the european union that have adoptedthe euro as a common currency is the most significant example of a group of countries that has gonefrom a customs union to an economic union .

between january 2004 and february 2005 , the world trade organization ( wto ) receivednotification of 43 new rtas , "making this the most prolific rta period in recorded history. .

 ( 5 ) a wto discussion paperreported in may 2005 that the number of world rtas in force totaled 170 , with 20 additional rtasdue to enter force pending domestic ratification , and a further 70 under negotiation or consideration .

rta activities have intensified in all world regions "particularly in the western hemisphere andasia - pacific. .

 ( 6 ) .

supporters of trade integration in the americas view hemispheric free trade as supportingu.s .

economic and political interests in several ways .

they argue that the movement towards tradeintegration is beneficial for u.s. economic prosperity and will serve to strengthen democraticregimes and support u.s. values and security interests .

forming closer economic relations withcountries in the region is seen by some as a means to improve cooperation on other issues such asthe environment and anti - drug efforts .

u.s. opponents to regional integration in the americas areconcerned that hemispheric free trade would lead to a loss of jobs in the united states .

they arguethat trade agreements would result in u.s. companies shifting production to lower - wage countrieswith weak labor and environmental standards .

economists are in general agreement that rtas can provide economic benefits , but not thatthere are also associated costs .

in general , they see rtas as beneficial for an economy to the extentthat they provide trade creation over trade diversion .

when a trade agreement lowers trade barrierson a good , production may shift from domestic producers to lower cost foreign producers and resultin substituting an imported good for the domestic good .

this process is called trade creation .

tradecreation provides economic benefits as consumers have a wider choice of goods and servicesavailable at lower costs .

trade creation also results in adjustment costs , however , usually in theform of domestic job losses as production shifts to another country .

the drawback to rtas is that they may result in trade diversion because they are not fullyinclusive of all regional trading partners .

trade diversion results when a country forms an rta andthen shifts the purchase of goods or services ( imports ) from a country that is not an rta partner toa country that is an rta partner .

for example , if the united states was purchasing an item fromasia prior to nafta and then began to purchase this item from mexico after nafta was enforced,solely as a result of the trade agreement , even though the asian country was the lower - cost producer,then nafta would be associated with trade diversion .

mexico would now be the producer of thatitem , not because it produced the good more efficiently , but because it was receiving preferentialaccess to the u.s. market .

the effects of trade creation versus trade diversion are complex and difficult to measure .

much depends on the market structure and costs in which an rta intervenes and the long - termdynamic effects of the rta .

a report by the inter - american development bank ( iadb ) states thatmost studies have found that "trade creation greatly dominates trade diversion" in most regionalintegration trade arrangements .

the study indicates that in the case of nafta , all members standto gain , particularly mexico .

in the case of mercosur , the study indicates that argentina , brazil , anduruguay have the potential of increasing their gdp .

 ( 16 ) while an increase in rtas throughout the western hemisphere may have benefits , they canalso result in complex networks of preferential trade arrangements .

there are an increasing numberof overlapping trade agreements , each with its own tariff schedule and rules of origin regime .

someeconomists believe that these arrangements may pose challenges for developing countries and putthem in a "weaker position than under the multilateral framework. .

 ( 17 ) developing countries mayhave difficulties in navigating the maze of rules that accompany rtas , and they may not be able tofully benefit from the new trade rules .

another disadvantage for developing countries is that rtasmay result in a decreasing reliance on nonreciprocal trade preferences such as the duty - free treatmentthat andean countries receive from the u.s. atpdea .

according to the wto study on rtas , thereplacement of preferential trade arrangements with rtas could present developing countries withchallenges as they transition from non - reciprocal trade preferences to mutual tradeliberalization .

 ( 18 ) thesedisadvantages have the possibility of perpetuating poverty in the region .

since the passage of nafta , the united states , canada , and mexico have pursued tradeliberalization through bilateral , regional , and multilateral negotiations .

all have participated in themultilateral talks for an ftaa but have also formed other bilateral agreements to help achieve theiroverall trade integration objectives .

many of the negotiations that have produced trade agreementshave been completed relatively quickly and have achieved broader trade liberalization thanmultilateral trade negotiations .

one of the advantages in forming agreements on a bilateral orregional basis is that these agreements can achieve more liberalization in tariff and non - tariff barriersas opposed to the multilateral approach that usually achieves partial reductions on a limited numberof goods .

nafta has served as a precedent for other u.s. trade agreements .

the united states hasadvanced its trade policy agenda in the western hemisphere through bilateral trade initiatives withchile , central america and the dominican republic , panama and selected andean countries ( seetable 3 ) .

the u.s. - chile fta was signed in june 2003 and entered into force in january 2004 .

cafta - dr was signed into u.s. law on august 2 , 2005 and is expected to enter into force injanuary 2006 .

in may 2004 , the united states began negotiations with colombia , peru , ecuador,and bolivia on the u.s. - andean free trade agreement .

those negotiations continue and are expectedto be concluded by the end of 2005 .

in april 2004 , the united states began negotiations withpanama on the u.s. - panama free trade agreement and those negotiations have not been concluded .

countries in the western hemisphere have been forming regional trade agreements since1961 when the central american common market was formed .

latin american countries viewregional trade agreements as a tool to help promote economic and social development but also as away of gaining leverage in the negotiations of larger scale agreements such as the ftaa .

in general,latin american countries have economic interests , but also recognize that trade agreements aloneare not sufficient to combat poverty and the larger social problems caused by poverty .

in the absence of an ftaa , it is highly possible that the number of bilateral rtas in thewestern hemisphere may continue to increase .

some analysts note that as the number of rtasincrease , there is a possibility of consolidating existing agreements into larger trading arrangementsin regions of the world , as in the case of the eu which went through five consecutive enlargements,bringing the membership of the union from six to 25 members .

 ( 62 ) another example ofconsolidation or expansion is the bilateral agreement between the united states and canada in the1980s , which helped to bring focus on the uruguay round of multilateral negotiations and theformation of nafta .

however , some believe that this strategy is not the best course of action forthe united states .

one of the reasons given is that the focus on bilaterals is distracting the unitedstates from its leadership role in energizing the ftaa negotiations .

another reason given is thatthe bilateral agreements are doing little to resolve problems such as the trade issues related toagriculture , or strengthening the trade relationship between the united states and brazil .

 ( 63 ) .

all the countries of the western hemisphere , with the exception of cuba , have been activeparticipants in the establishment of an ftaa .

in august 2005 , senior representatives from all ftaacountries met in mexico .

caribbean trade officials urged countries to hold an administrative meetingprior to the november 2005 summit of the americas to restart the stalled ftaa negotiations .

theysuggested that negotiators look at the technical and political obstacles that are holding back the talksand restart the negotiations with a new "road map" that would guide negotiators toward a conclusionof the negotiations .

 ( 64 ) however , the recent summit of the americas , held in mar del plata , argentina , was not successfulin reactivating the trade talks .

the majority of the 34 participating countries were in support of thetalks , while five countries , including brazil , argentina , and venezuela , were opposed to signing upfor the talks , mostly due to disagreements over agriculture and intellectual property rights .

some observers are pessimistic about the near - term possibility of restarting the talks , butthere are many analysts who believe that pursuing multilateral talks would be advantageous for theregion .

some have expressed hope that progress on agriculture at the wto and that the november2005 summit of the americas could help move the negotiations forward .

according to a study bythe government accountability office ( gao ) , there are three factors that have been impedingprogress in the ftaa negotiations: 1 ) the united states and brazil have made little progress inresolving basic differences on key negotiation issues ; ( 2 ) member governments have shifted energyand engagement from the ftaa to bilateral and other multilateral trade agreements ; and 3 ) twomechanisms intended to facilitate progress , a new negotiating structure and the co - chairmanship bythe u.s. and brazil , have failed to do so .

 ( 65 ) the gao study found that officials from many nations andregional groups in the western hemisphere have indicated a continued commitment to establishinga mutually beneficial ftaa .

 ( 66 ) if the ftaa talks move forward and an agreement is signed , it would provide considerablenew trade and investment opportunities for the 34 participating countries .

for the united states , anftaa would support the u.s. interest in gaining deeper access to markets in south america .

theunited states might also benefit in that an ftaa could reinforce economic and political reforms thathave occurred in latin america and could help build support for other important u.s. goals such asdrug interdiction , improving environmental and labor conditions , supporting educational reforms,and reinforcing democracy .

 ( 67 ) in terms of trade , the u.s. position has been that the ftaawould be significant if it achieves trade liberalization beyond that which has been accomplishedunder the wto , especially in the areas of liberalization of trade in services and investment ; liberalization in government procurement ; enforcement of intellectual property rights ; and theinclusion of labor and environmental issues .

 ( 68 ) for countries in latin america and the caribbean , the ftaa may help national incomelevels in the region , but not all economic sectors would benefit .

some economists believe that tradeliberalization is needed to improve economic development in the region .

an international monetaryfund ( imf ) report found that trade openness in latin america remained low and cited "abundantempirical evidence" that the more open a country is to trade , the higher its growth performance .

among the report's recommendations is that countries in latin america need "to liberalize trade andstrengthen their financial systems" to help sustain economic growth .

 ( 69 ) however , latin americancountries would have to take additional measures to benefit from trade liberalization and improveeconomic conditions .

one study on the effects of an ftaa on latin america reports that anysignificant effect on incomes and inequality would take a very long time to show up .

it states thatthe long - term economic health of latin america would require much improvement ineducation .

 ( 70 ) .

trade integration in the americas has gained momentum since the 1990s .

the possibilityof forming an ftaa or trade agreements with andean countries and panama is of interest topolicymakers because of the economic and political implications for the united states .

as theeffects of nafta on the u.s. , mexican , and canadian economies become clearer , policymakers arefaced with the issue of whether trade agreements are beneficial to the united states and how theunited states should proceed in its trade policy in the western hemisphere .

an underlying question is whether the united states should continue to deepen tradeintegration in the americas and , if so , whether negotiating bilateral trade agreements is the mostappropriate trade policy .

as pointed out earlier , some analysts do not believe that bilateral tradeagreements are the best course of action because they take away the focus from energizing the ftaanegotiations and are slowing down the process .

others believe that rtas have led to theconsolidation of trade agreements into larger free trade areas in other parts of the world and that thesame thing could occur in the western hemisphere over time .

another issue is whether the united states should deepen integration with its nafta tradingpartners .

a recent study by senior fellows at the institute for international economics on theachievements and challenges of nafta finds that , while nafta has been successful in promotingregional trade and investment , it also has limitations .

the authors propose that nafta be"upgraded" and that the united states , canada , and mexico should convert their free trade agreementinto a customs union and adopt a common external tariff .

they believe that this would promotecommerce among the three trading partners ; reduce distortions generated by nafta rules of origin ; and help resolve some of the trade disputes that are affecting trade relationships in northamerica .

 ( 71 ) regional integration also has political implications for the united states .

some observerssee the impetus for trade liberalization as political as well as economic .

there are several questionsthat policymakers could consider .

to what extent do trade integration agreements foster politicalstability in a country ? .

are they a useful tool for building a more democratic , secure , and prosperousregion ? .

