the economies of the united states and canada are highly integrated , a process that has been accelerated by the bilateral u.s. - canada free trade agreement ( fta ) of 1989 and the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) of 1994 .

the two countries are natural trading partners , given their geographic proximity and their ( partial ) linguistic and cultural similarities .

because 80% of the canadian population lives within 200 miles of the u.s. border and due to the impediments of canadian geography , trade with the united states is often easier and less expensive than canadian inter - provincial trade .

both are affluent industrialized economies , with similar ( though not identical ) standards of living .

however , the economies of the two countries diverge in numerous ways .

first , the u.s. economy dwarfs that of canada .

u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) is over 9 times that of canada in nominal terms and nearly 11 times as large in terms of purchasing power parity .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

this large and historic disparity has presented opportunities and challenges for canada .

nafta provides canada with a large market for its exports at its doorstep , however it has also led to increased import competition for small - scale canadian businesses .

the canadian economy is also disproportionately impacted by a u.s. economic slowdown or changes in the bilateral exchange rate .

in the past decade from 2001 , the average annual real gdp growth rate has been slightly higher for canada ( 1.9% ) than for the united states ( 1.6% ) .

per capita average annual growth rates over the period have shown a similar , if anemic trajectory ( 0.82% v. 0.62% ) .

canadian per capita income , in terms of ppp , has remained relatively constant at around 84% of u.s. per capita income .

the persistent per capita income gap has proven worrisome to canadian policymakers as it raises questions about canadian productivity and competitiveness .

in terms of sectoral components of gdp , the united states and canada are similar .

over two - thirds of both economies are devoted to the services sector , although the sector is larger as a percentage of gdp in the united states ( 76.9% - 70.9% ) .

the manufacturing sector's composition of gdp has fallen in both countries over time , but it is still relatively more important to the canadian economy ( 27.2% - 22.2% ) .

agriculture makes up the remaining 1.9% of the canadian economy and 1.2% of the u.s. economy .

in terms of savings and investment , canada and the united states have diverged .

canada's experience with fiscal profligacy in the 1970s and 1980s caused the country to eschew deficit spending in the 1990s .

parliament consistently passed balanced budgets from 1997-2008 , and canada lowered its ratio of public debt - to - gdp from 100% of gdp in 1996 to 61.3% of gdp in 2008 .

yet , deficit spending returned in the 2009 stimulus budget and public debt - to - gdp is now back to 84.0% .

the united states has a lower ratio of debt - to - gdp , but it has been trending upwards , reaching 62.9% of gdp in 2010 , after years of deficit spending .

some of the differences between u.s. and canadian economic performance may be traced to the differences in the role and structure of the government in economic life .

while both countries can be identified as generally free - market capitalist economies , at times canada has adopted more interventionist economic policies .

prior to the fta with the united states , canada protected her small - scale manufacturing enterprises that produced solely for the domestic market with high tariffs .

while these plants provided jobs to canadian workers , they resulted in higher prices for canadian consumers and led to a relatively inefficient allocation of national economic resources .

canada has also provided its citizens with a more generous social safety net including a government - run national health service .

canadian citizens pay higher taxes to receive these benefits , but private industry is relieved of providing health care coverage .

a different relationship between the canadian federal government and the provinces also affects economic dynamics .

canadian provinces have relatively more power vis - à - vis canada's federal government than that of states with the u.s. government .

for example , natural resources are under the policy control ( and in many cases , ownership ) of canadian provincial governments .

in the softwood lumber dispute , provincial ownership and management of forests have made the provincial governments key players in the negotiations .

alberta's vast energy reserves may also cause friction between it and other "have - not" provinces without similar resource endowments .

the canadian federal government attempts to provide a uniform level of services across the provinces by providing "equalization" payments to poorer provinces ; however , these payments are a source of continuous squabbling between the provinces , on one side , and the federal government .

canada is the largest single nation trading partner of the united states .

trade increased in 2010 , after dropping in 2009 due to the global economic downturn .

in 2010 , total merchandise trade with canada was $481.5 billion ( a 12.1% increase from 2009 ) , consisting of $275.5 billion in imports and $206.0 billion in exports resulting in a trade deficit of $69.5 billion .

in 2010 , $1.3 billion in goods crossed the border each day .

trade with canada represented 15.9% of u.s. total trade in 2010 , with canada purchasing 18.3% of u.s. exports and supplying 14.5% of total u.s. imports .

while canada is an important trading partner for the united states , the united states is the dominant trade partner for canada .

the united states supplied 50.4% of canada's imports of goods and purchased 74.9% of canada's merchandise exports in 2010 .

while the absolute value of trade continues to increase between the two nations , each nation's share of trade with the other has decreased in recent years .

as a share of u.s. total trade , trade with canada dropped from 20% - 15% since 2003 .

conversely , trade with the united states dipped from 74% to 63% of canada's global trade in the same period .

trade is a dominant feature of the canadian economy .

while in the united states , the value of trade ( exports + imports ) as a percentage of gdp was about 20.7% in 2010 , the comparable figure for canada was 49.3% .

canada's goods exports totaled $386.0 billion in 2010 , which represented 29.1% of canadian gdp ; canada imported $390 billion from all destinations , 31.3% of its gdp .

in 2009 , canada's merchandise trade balance fell into deficit for the first time since 1975 and this deficit persisted in 2010 .

canada is relatively more exposed to the world economy and to the fortunes of other economies , foremost to that of the united states , than most other countries .

autos and auto parts represent the top u.s. exports to , and second - largest imports from , canada .

agriculture and construction machinery , computer equipment , general purpose machinery , aerospace product and parts , basic chemicals , pharmaceuticals and medicines , iron and steel , and precision instruments are other major u.s. exports .

primary u.s. imports from canada outside the automotive sector are energy ( natural gas , petroleum products , electricity ) ; pulp , paperboard , and paperboard mill products ; aerospace products and parts ; nonferrous metal and processing ( ex aluminum ) ; and basic chemicals .

that the united states and canada trade substantial volumes of the same goods bespeaks the economic integration of the two economies .

this integration has been assisted by trade liberalization over the past 40 years , beginning with the automotive agreement of 1965 ( which eliminated tariffs on shipments of autos and auto parts between the two countries ) , through the canada - u.s. free trade agreement of 1989 ( fta ) , and nafta .

under the fta ( which was incorporated into nafta ) , bilateral tariffs except for certain agricultural products were phased out over a 10-year period culminating in 1998 .

the elimination of tariffs and the reduction of nontariff barriers have contributed to the process of specialization , as each country is able to produce goods for a larger continent - wide market .

thus , firms are able to improve productivity through increased economies of scale and coordinated production .

such specialization led to increased bilateral trade , much of it in intermediate products .

one study estimated that about 45% of u.s. - canadian trade was intra - firm trade , reflecting the substantial integration of the two economies and contributing to increased efficiency and competitiveness of firms on both sides of the border .

the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , has increased scrutiny of the canadian border as a possible point of entry for terrorists or for weapons of mass destruction .

the potential for economic disruption caused by a terrorist attack on border infrastructure or as a result of a border closure is large .

for example , the ambassador bridge that links detroit and windsor , ontario , is the largest trade link in the world , with more than 7,000 trucks crossing daily carrying goods worth more than $120 billion per year .

the cost of the border to carriers , manufacturers , and governments in terms of delays and compliance has been estimated by one survey at $7.5 billion to $13.2 billion annually .

using the survey's midpoint estimate , they estimate that costs related to transit time and uncertainty total $4 billion and trade policy related costs were estimated at $6.28 billion .

the total midrange figure , $10.3 billion , reflected 2.3% of cross - border trade in 2004 .

another report claims that average processing times have increased 200% from 45 seconds in december 2001 to 2.15 minutes in december 2004 .

this report also claims that additional reporting , compliance , and delays add approximately $800 to the cost of every north american - produced vehicle and that the border "threatens to become the greatest non - tariff barrier the world has ever seen. .

however , a july 2007 study indicated that increased border security has not affected canadian export volumes to the united states through most land ports , although the study found evidence that substitution between ports may have occurred .

the terrorist attack of september 11 , and its aftermath , have sparked a wide - ranging debate in canada over its relationship with the united states , including the feasibility or desirability of furthering the process of north american integration .

the extent to which the two economies are integrated was dramatized by the adverse impact that border closings had on trade flows after the terrorist attacks .

while concerns in the united states over the u.s. - canada border are focused primarily on border security and immigration issues , the debate in canada has become much broader , encompassing such issues as the nature of sovereignty , the desirability and feasibility of further economic integration with the united states , and even the adoption of the u.s. dollar .

this discourse is not unusual in canada ; questions concerning relations with the united states continually loom large in policy discussions .

such discussions are unusual in the united states , and at this point they are generally confined to the types of security measures described in the preceding section .

certain aspects of increased cooperation with the united states on border and immigration issues have proved controversial to some canadians .

these questions generally have taken the form of resistance in some quarters to the notion of harmonization of u.s. and canadian regulations .

a segment of canadian public opinion fears that , due to the wide disparity in population and economic power of the two nations , harmonization of customs and immigration regulations would inevitably lead to adoption of u.s. standards , and implicitly , the policies behind them .

moreover , according to this view , canadian resistance to this harmonization could imperil the economic relationship with the united states .

however , others contend that canadian and u.s. regulations affecting the border are more similar than different and would be for the most part compatible .

hence , the scope of coordination in certain areas of border management may be acceptably encompassed by mutual recognition of each other's regulations .

others in canada believe the lesson from september 11 is that increased cooperation with the united states is both necessary and inevitable , given the reality of canadian trade flows and economic interdependence .

yet , they believe such integration must be managed to assure canada protects its interests and its sovereignty .

several economic options have received renewed attention in canadian policy circles , from greater regulatory harmonization to more long - term options including a security perimeter , a customs union , a common market , or a monetary union .

the latter also received attention due to the long - term slide of the canadian dollar up to 2002 .

however , the appreciation of the canadian currency by 30% against the u.s. dollar since has eclipsed such discussions .

these concepts are not new , and they have been discussed in conjunction with "deepening" the north american free trade agreement .

consequently , these discussions often involve mexico as well .

there has been renewed discussion of ways to enhance cooperation between the three nafta partners .

the concept of deepening nafta — "nafta plus" — has taken on added salience , in some quarters , since most of the gains resulting from tariff reduction of the agreement have been realized .

in addition , ftas negotiated by the united states and canada with other trading partners have diminished the relative advantage of nafta .

in addition , since the 2001 terror attacks there has been a perception by some in canada and mexico that continued economic access to the u.s. market is dependent on greater security cooperation with the united states .

former u.s .

ambassador paul cellucci notably said in 2003 that "security trumps trade" in the u.s. - canada relationship .

this realization has led to many border initiatives described above .

the security and prosperity partnership ( spp ) , contains many initiatives that could lead to some measure of regulatory harmonization among the united states , canada , and mexico .

in addition to calling for implementation of common border security strategies , the spp initiates cooperation in energy , the transportation network , financial services , and standards harmonization .

ten ministerial working groups were formed and were required to report after 90 days , and semi - annually thereafter .

reportedly , the scope of spp activity is in the realm of regulatory changes , actions that do not require legislative activity .

the initial report was released on june 27 , 2005 .

the prosperity component of the spp intends to enhance competitiveness by developing proposals to streamline regulatory processes among the three partners , enhance detection and prevention of counterfeiting and piracy , and liberalize rules of origin .

sectoral initiatives on steel , autos , energy , air transport , and e - commerce are also envisioned .

quality of life cooperative initiatives on pollution , agriculture and food supply , and health issues were also launched .

since the initial report , the united states and canada have agreed to facilitate the exchange of information on infectious disease outbreaks , concluded an open sky agreement , and signed a memorandum of understanding on pipeline safety .

in june 2006 , the three nations launched a north american competiveness council , which is made up of business leaders from each nation who will examine proposals and provide recommendations to improve the competitiveness of north american business in global markets .

one approach envisioned by some u.s. and canadian business leaders and policy advocates is to create a north american security perimeter .

this proposal responds to u.s. fears of terrorism by removing the security functions from the border to the point of first contact of a good or person to north america .

thus , the container landing at the canadian port of halifax headed for the united states would be inspected in halifax , not at the u.s. border , thereby avoiding delays at border choke - points .

pre - screening of passengers would also take place at the point of landing , not at the border .

however , a completely seamless border for goods would also require standards harmonization or acceptance of the inspecting party's standards , information sharing on threat assessments , and trust in each party's screening procedures .

it also makes the assumption that there are no terrorist threats indigenous to the north american security perimeter .

another step discussed in policy circles regarding the further integration of the north american economy is the creation of a customs union .

members of a customs union commonly eliminate tariffs among themselves , and erect common barriers against the rest of the world .

both the u.s. and canada have already eliminated all tariffs between each other under nafta , and have similar , though not identical , tariff schedules with third countries .

because all customs duties would be paid at port of entry at the perimeter of the customs union , the need for customs agents on the u.s. - canadian land border to collect revenue would be obviated .

however , border agents also enforce immigration , sanitary and phytosanitary , and environmental laws .

a customs union does not imply a harmonization or mutual recognition of each nation's regulations .

thus , a national presence at the border would continue to be necessary .

it is also unclear in what form current trade remedy practices could be continued under a customs union .

such actions against third countries could continue relatively easily if both sides found it necessary ; however , actions against each other would require the continued payment of duties at the border .

deeper integration of the north american economic space would imply some form of common market or economic union .

a common market area would add free movement of labor and capital ; thus , immigration and investment regulations would need to be harmonized or mutually recognized .

in addition to a common tariff policy and free trade in goods and services , a common market would imply free movement of capital and labor .

at this point , harmonization of certain investment and immigration issues would need to be agreed upon .

a type of economic union approaching that of the european union would also require harmonized or mutually recognized standards and regulations and perhaps some supranational institutions .

although the united states and canada share many developed country level standards , this form of integration would still need to be meticulously worked out .

for example , would the united states adopt the metric system to fulfill its obligations to harmonize standards ? .

could the two nations adopt common forestry prices and management policies and thereby help resolve the softwood lumber dispute ? .

would either nation allow supranational entities to overrule laws passed by congress or parliament ? .

these questions illustrate the extent to which north american economic integration would affect the governance of the united states , canada , and possibly mexico .

another discussion recurrent in many canadian policy circles is that of monetary union with the united states .

this potential goal has been discussed in many forms .

the canadian dollar could be linked in value to the u.s. dollar ; canada could adopt the u.s. dollar ; or a new north american currency ( called the amero by one proponent ) could replace the u.s. and canadian dollars , and perhaps the mexican peso .

generally , talk of monetary union north of the border is strongest during times of relative weakness of the loonie vis - a - vis the u.s. dollar .

the recent strength of the loonie has diminished such discussion , although the idea still has some proponents .

those who support monetary union argue that it would force canada to make the necessary structural adjustments that would make it more competitive with the united states .

in other words , dollarization or a currency union would remove the ability to cushion adverse economic conditions through depreciation of the currency .

by tying the loonie to the u.s. dollar or by adopting the dollar outright , canada would be making the unmistakable commitment to converge with u.s. macroeconomic policy .

then canada would be able to reap the benefits of u.s. policy , which traditionally have been lower inflation , lower interest rates , and higher levels of growth than canada has experienced .

in addition , the savings in trade transaction costs would be significant for the volume of trade the two nations conduct .

canadian opponents of monetary union contend that it would lead to an unacceptable loss of political and economic sovereignty .

monetary policy would be dependent on ( or tied to ) actions of the u.s. federal reserve .

thus , the canadian government would be left with fewer levers to combat inflation or fight recession .

in a monetary union in which macroeconomic convergence is reached , this point may not be important .

to opponents of monetary union , however , the two economies respond differently to events , and thus need to utilize different adjustment mechanisms .

furthermore , with a population and economy smaller than some federal reserve districts , canada's ability to influence u.s. monetary policy in a monetary union likely would be small .

