the connection between greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions in the atmosphere and climate change has motivated efforts to achieve reductions of ghg emissions .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations' framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , which called on industrialized countries to initiate ghg reduction .

however , in early 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the unfccc 1997 kyoto protocol , which called for legally binding commitments by developed countries to reduce their ghg emissions .

in the absence of a federal program requiring ghg reductions , a growing number of u.s. states are taking action in this arena .

although a majority of states have addressed climate change to some degree ( eg , by creating ghg inventories or state action plans ) , the most aggressive actions have come from a smaller group of states , including california and a coalition of states from the northeast and mid - atlantic regions .

california recently enacted several laws that seek to reduce ghg emissions .

the first section of this report discusses the activity in california .

the second section focuses on the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) , a cooperative effort of 10 states in the northeast and mid - atlantic regions to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from power plants .

the report's final section considers these state - led actions from a federal policymaking perspective , examining the potential effects , limitations , and legal challenges of state - led climate change actions .

in the environmental policy domain , california is generally on the more proactive side of the regulatory spectrum .

the state's recent climate change actions continue this pattern .

california has enacted several significant pieces of climate change legislation , each addressing ghg emissions in different ways .

a recent executive order from the governor supplements the state's climate change statutes .

this section discusses the actions california has taken to decrease its ghg emissions .

the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) is a market - based effort by 10 states — connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , rhode island , and vermont — to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from power plants .

rggi has been under development since 2003 , when states from the northeast and mid - atlantic regions began to discuss setting up a cooperative effort to reduce carbon dioxide emissions .

subsequent meetings and workshops culminated in a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) that was signed in december 2005 .

a primary strategy of rggi is to create a program with flexibility , so that in the future other emission sources / sectors , ghgs , and states could be included .

the initiative would set up the nation's first mandatory cap - and - trade program for carbon dioxide .

starting in january 2009 , rggi states have agreed to implement a cap of 188 million short tons of carbon dioxide emissions from power plants .

the cap is intended to stabilize emissions through the end of 2014 .

in 2015 and each subsequent year , the emissions cap would be lowered incrementally , so that by 2018 , the cap would be 10% below the initial level .

in a cap - and - trade system , regulators set a cap ( or limit ) on the overall emissions of a given gas from a specified group of sources , such as power plants .

the emissions allowed under the new cap are then allocated in the form of credits ( or permits ) to individual sources .

sources that emit more than their allowance must buy credits from those who emit less than their allowance , thus creating a financial incentive for sources to reduce their own emissions .

the rggi cap - and - trade program is to be implemented by the individual states .

each rggi state will need to establish its own law and / or regulation to administer and enforce the emissions reduction program .

however , each state will base its law / regulation on a detailed model rule that was developed by the participant states .

to facilitate administration of the trading program , the mou calls for the states to create a non - profit , regional organization .

this organization is to provide technical assistance to the rggi states and help maintain consistent implementation across state lines .

depending on various design details , cap - and - trade systems can vary significantly .

the cap level and cap applicability ( i.e. , when the cap takes effect and which sources are affected ) are perhaps the primary variables regarding the impact of the program .

other details , such as emission allocation and whether to include a safety valve , can further alter the character of a cap - and - trade program .

some observers consider rggi to be a model for a possible federal cap - and - trade program , and thus several of rggi's design elements are generating interest and debate .

these issues are discussed below .

the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) and the climate change developments in california raise several issues that may be of interest to congress .

this section discusses some of the potential effects of these actions by states , the limitations of these actions , and legal challenges that may hinder or halt implementation of the emission reduction programs .

from a global perspective , many u.s. states emit significant amounts of ghgs .

if individual u.s. states were classified as sovereign nations , 18 u.s. states would rank in the top 50 for nations that annually emit the primary ghg: carbon dioxide .

compared with other nations , texas , the combined wci and rggi states , and california rank as top carbon dioxide emitters ( see table 1 ) .

a primary argument in support of individual or cooperative state climate change action is that states can serve as laboratories for policymaking .

states can test different ideas and policies on a smaller scale , and help determine which climate change solutions are most appropriate .

many of the rggi states and california have acted as pioneers in other environmental policy venues — for example , automobile emissions standards in california and acid rain provisions in new england states .

such programs often act as precursors or even models to federal environmental regimes .

most federal legislative proposals that seek to control ghg emissions would employ a cap - and - trade emissions regime .

there has been some debate regarding how a cap - and - trade program might work on a national level .

although the federal acid rain program , which involves sulfur dioxide emissions trading , is generally considered a success , some emissions trading programs have encountered problems during implementation .

state programs , such as rggi , may offer the opportunity to iron out logistical details that would be crucial in a national cap - and - trade system: which sources to regulate .

how to allocate emissions allowances .

how high to set the emissions cap .

when to allow offsets instead of actual reductions .

whether to include a safety valve , and if so , how high to set it .

state programs can inform federal policymakers in other ways .

the political process by which states create climate change policy can be enlightening and perhaps adaptable on the federal level .

for instance , by examining the development and passage of state legislation , federal policymakers may better understand the motivations of different stakeholders and learn how best to frame the issues .

the mandatory emission reduction programs in california and rggi will likely have economic effects on consumers , businesses and manufacturers , and possibly interstate commerce .

the most immediate effects of the emissions programs ( at least the ones furthest along in development ) will be on the automotive manufacturing and electricity generation sectors .

for automotive manufacturers , the california motor vehicle regulations — which at least 12 states plan to implement — will likely have the effect of dividing the market , potentially requiring the manufacture of a different class of cars to meet the new standards ( scheduled to apply in 2009 ) .

for automotive companies , this raises the issues of the technical means of meeting the standard , marketing , ensuring compliance , and pricing .

depending on how the emission limits are to be met , they may also influence fueling infrastructure .

state governments will need resources to enforce the standards .

consumers in regulated states may face higher prices for vehicles .

for the electric generating sector , the california and rggi requirements will likely promote generation from low carbon - intensive fuels , while curtailing generation from high carbon - intensive fuels , such as coal .

california's ghg performance standards will reach into neighboring states as well , effectively barring electricity imports generated by conventional coal - fired power plants .

as coal - fired plants tend to produce lower - cost electricity , the result of these requirements may be to increase electricity prices within the states that limit emissions , and possibly lower prices in states without such emission standards .

if the ghg limitations on motor vehicles and electricity increase prices in the regulated states , businesses and manufacturers may factor this cost into location decisions .

there is some concern that regulated industries will have a financial incentive to move ( and thus transfer jobs ) to states ( or nations , such as mexico or canada ) that do not limit ghg emissions .

others fear that emission limits will raise the cost of living and doing business within those states , although in theory such effects can be at least partially addressed through the design of the emissions reduction program .

one concern shared by many observers , particularly industry stakeholders , is that state climate change programs ( in the absence of a federal program ) will create a patchwork of regulations nationwide .

it is claimed that a patchwork system of standards may hinder a company's efficiency and possibly create economic burdens for firms that operate in multiple states .

the prospect of regulations that vary from state to state is moving some companies to support a federal climate change program with comparable requirements across the entire united states .

climate change has been described as the "ultimate global commons problem. .

the global warming and climate impacts associated with increased ghg emissions in the atmosphere cannot be linked with specific emission sources .

unlike localized reductions in other air pollutants ( eg , sulfur dioxide , particulate matter ) , when an emissions source reduces its carbon dioxide emissions , it does not generate a corresponding local climate change benefit unless there are similar widespread reductions around the world .

from a practical standpoint , the actions of one or a small group of states cannot by themselves significantly affect the global accumulation of ghg emissions in the atmosphere .

however , as discussed above , actions now under way in california and states in the northeast and mid - atlantic regions may create examples and / or models that will prove instructive in more widespread applications .

moreover , when business and industry have confronted a growing patchwork of state requirements , these sectors have historically begun to favor a national policy — as has begun to happen in the case of state - level actions on climate change .

however , the lack of a national program or a truly global approach to ghg emissions reductions does limit what individual states can accomplish in actually reducing ghg emissions and accumulations .

legal challenges may halt or hinder state action .

the possibility of legal challenges creates considerable uncertainty regarding the future of state climate change actions , particularly the more aggressive programs .

there are already several lawsuits against state actions that seek to regulate ghg emissions from motor vehicles .

car dealers and trade associations have filed suits in california , vermont , and rhode island seeking to halt the regulations on various grounds .

for example , the plaintiffs contend that california's regulations are preempted by the energy policy and conservation act ( p.l .

94-163 ) , which directs states not to regulate fuel economy standards .

it in uncertain what role the massachusetts decision may play in these proceedings , because some of the arguments in these cases ( eg , the relationship between conflicting federal and state policing concerning climate change ) were not addressed in the massachusetts case .

further litigation confronting the more recent state actions is anticipated .

many expect a legal challenge to the rggi program when the first state's rule is officially issued .

in addition , some observers question whether california's recently enacted ghg performance standards are constitutional .

they argue that the performance standards disproportionately affect the neighboring states that have historically exported coal - generated electricity to california consumers , raising the question of whether the california standard , in effect , regulates interstate commerce .

the degree to which a state can influence interstate commerce is central to the debate regarding state - led climate change activities .

the u.s. constitution grants congress the power to regulate interstate commerce .

u.s. courts interpret this as a limitation on the states' ability to regulate interstate commerce .

the legal arguments in these cases ( and expected cases ) are complicated and beyond the scope of this report .

moreover , many of the legal and constitutional issues chart new ground .

for these reasons , many observers have concluded that it is difficult to predict how the courts will interpret and decide these issues .

regardless of the ultimate strength and outcome of the legal arguments opposing state - led climate change policies , affected stakeholders will almost certainly challenge the implementation of emission reduction programs .

it is uncertain how long these anticipated legal challenges might delay ghg reductions in the states .

