in early march 2006 , president bush made a three - day trip to india , the first such visit by au.s .

president in six years .

in a speech preceding his trip , the president called india a "naturalpartner for the united states" and identified five broad areas of bilateral cooperation: counterterrorism , democracy promotion , trade promotion , health and environmental protections , andenergy initiatives .

on march 2 , the president and prime minister singh issued a statementexpressing their mutual satisfaction with the "great progress" made in advancing the u.s. - india"strategic partnership. .

the statement , which reviewed bilateral efforts to expand ties in a numberof key areas and called for further such efforts , notably announced "successful completion of india's[nuclear facility] separation plan," a reference to ongoing and complex negotiations related topresident bush's july 2005 vow to achieve "full civilian nuclear energy cooperation with india. .

onmarch 9 , the administration informally submitted to key congressional committee chairman aproposal for adjusting u.s. laws relevant to nuclear commerce .

as president bush was in newdelhi , the pentagon issued a statement lauding bilateral military relations with india and anticipatingpossibly major arms sales to that country .

 ( 1 ) in the wake of major u - s. - india bilateral agreements signed in the summer of 2005 , congressheld four relevant hearings in the latter months of that year .

on september 8 , october 26 , andnovember 16 , the house international relations committee ( hirc ) considered the perspectives ofstate department officials and nongovernmental experts on the progress and meaning of increasinglywarm u.s. - india relations and relevant agreements .

similar panels testified before the senateforeign relations committee on november 2 .

this senate hearing , along with the october househearing , was focused specifically on what has become the most controversial aspect of the july 2005joint statement issued by president bush and prime minister manmohan singh: an intention toachieve full bilateral civilian nuclear energy cooperation .

in mid - october 2005 , the chairs and ranking members of the senate foreign relations andhouse international relations committees sent a letter to secretary of state rice requesting that theadministration begin "substantive discussion" with their committees on possible legislativeproposals related to envisaged civil nuclear cooperation with india .

during the october 26 hirchearing , committee chairman henry hyde called "strange and unusual" the administration'sminimal consultation with congress on the details of such plans and said he was "troubled" by publicstatements from the administration suggesting that congressional support for such cooperation wasbroad and virtually guaranteed .

 ( 2 ) in a november letter which echoed much of the analysis ofnongovernmental hearing witnesses , a group of 18 experts , scholars , and former u.s. governmentofficials urged members of the congress to "critically examine" the proposed nuclear cooperationagreement , saying it "poses far - reaching and potentially adverse implications for u.s. nuclearnonproliferation objectives" and is unlikely to bring india "into closer alignment with other u.s.strategic objectives. .

 ( 3 ) in late january , u.s .

ambassador to india mulford caused a diplomatic stir when heexplicitly linked progress on the proposed nuclear deal with india's upcoming international atomicenergy agency ( iaea ) vote on iran , saying if india chose not to vote with the united states , hebelieved the u.s. - india initiative "will die in the congress. .

a state department spokesman calledthe ambassador's comments a "personal opinion" and denied that the issues were linked .

india'sexternal affairs ministry responded that india "categorically rejects" any attempts to link the twoissues , and opposition and leftist indian political figures criticized the remarks as "a serious affrontto india and its sovereignty. .

 ( 4 ) on february 4 , india voted with the majority ( and the unitedstates ) on an iaea resolution to refer iran to the u.n. security council .

new delhi called theresolution "well - balanced" and insisted that its vote should not be interpreted as detracting fromindia's traditionally close relations with iran .

the united states later expressed being pleased withindia's vote .

 ( 5 ) developments relevant to civil nuclear cooperation with india have progressed in countriesother than the united states .

in september 2005 , india and france issued a joint statement promisingthat the two countries would work toward "conclusion of a bilateral nuclear cooperation agreement,"and france committed itself to working with other countries and the nsg to accomplish this .

however , after four months of uncertainty over the issue of separating india's civilian and militarynuclear facilities , paris indicated that new delhi would have to make "some compromises" in thisarea , with the french ambassador to india identifying a common french - u.s. interest in reachinga consensus among nsg members , which he said "is not easy. .

also in september , canada reversedits previous policy and announced that it would supply nuclear - related "dual - use items" to india'scivil nuclear program .

following the march 2 u.s. - india joint statement , australia , which is hometo nearly half of the world's unmined uranium , indicated that it might alter its policy of not sellingthis resource to non - signatories of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty , meaning india may becomeeligible .

 ( 6 ) after more than seven months of intensive negotiations over a "credible , defensible , andtransparent" indian plan to separate its civilian and military nuclear facilities as per the july 18 jointstatement , u.s. and indian officials were able to reach agreement just hours before the issuance ofthe march 2 joint statement while president bush was in new delhi .

the indian plan , whichrequires india to move 14 of its 22 reactors into permanent international oversight by the year 2014and place all future civilian reactors under permanent control , exempts india's fast breeder reactorsand also would guarantee an uninterrupted supply of nuclear fuel for india's civilian facilities .

undersecretary of state burns , the lead u.s. negotiator , insists that the plan is a boost for u.s.nonproliferation efforts , claiming that the percentage of indian nuclear facilities under safeguardswill grow as most future facilities are likely to be designated civilian .

numerous nonproliferationexperts remain critical of of the proposed deal .

on march 8 , the white house issued a press releaseresponding to critics .

 ( 7 ) on november 1 , 2005 , s. 1950 , to promote global energy security throughincreased cooperation between the united states and india on non - nuclear energy - related issues , wasintroduced in the senate .

on december 15 , h.con.res .

318 , expressing concernregarding nuclear proliferation with respect to proposed full civilian nuclear cooperation with india,was introduced in the house .

on july 18 , 2005 , during the first state visit to washington , d.c. , by an indian leader sincenovember 2001 , president george w. bush and prime minister manmohan singh issued a jointstatement resolving to establish a "global partnership" between the united states and india throughincreased cooperation on economic issues , on energy and the environment , on democracy anddevelopment , on non - proliferation and security , and on high - technology and space .

of particularinterest to many in congress were the statement's assertion that , "as a responsible state withadvanced nuclear technology , india should acquire the same benefits and advantages as other suchstates," and president bush's assurance that he would work on achieving "full civilian nuclear energycooperation with india. .

 ( 8 ) such cooperation would require changes in both u.s. law and nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) guidelines .

this clause is widely viewed as representing the most direct ( if still implicit ) recognitionto date of india's de facto status as a nuclear weapons state and thus as a reversal of more than threedecades of u.s. nonproliferation policy .

notably omitted from the july 18 statement was anymention of india's aspirations for a permanent seat on the u.n. security council .

just weeks earlier,the united states and india signed a ten - year defense framework agreement .

 ( 9 ) many observers view this andother u.s. moves to build strategic relations with india as part of an effort to "counterbalance" therise of china as a major power , although both washington and new delhi insist that their strategiccooperation is not directed against any third party .

this report reviews the major provisions of u.s. - india bilateral agreements signed in 2005and further explicated in march 2006 , including the status of issues addressed in the now completednext step in strategic partnership initiative , security relations , economic relations , and global issues .

the report reviews arguments made in favor of and in opposition to increased bilateral cooperationin each major issue - area and includes indian perspectives .

regional issues involving china,pakistan , and iran also are discussed .

 ( 10 ) u.s. - india agreements in june and july 2005 represent a new set of landmarks in rapidlywarming ties between the world's two most populous democracies .

after decades of estrangementduring the cold war , u.s. - india relations were freed from the constraints of global u.s. - sovietbipolarity in 1991 , the same year that new delhi began efforts to transform its once quasi - socialisteconomy through fiscal reform and market opening .

however , relations with india continued to beviewed primarily through the lens of u.s. nonproliferation interests .

the marked improvement ofrelations that began in the latter months of the clinton administration - - president clinton spent sixdays in india in march 2000 - - was accelerated after a november 2001 meeting between presidentbush and then - indian prime minister atal bihari vajpayee , when the two leaders agreed to greatlyexpand u.s. - india cooperation on a wide range of issues .

india's swift post - 9 / 11 offer of full supportfor u.s. - led counterterrorism operations was widely viewed as reflective of the positive newtrajectory in bilateral relations .

pro - u.s. sentiment may be widespread in india ( 11 ) and many in washingtonand new delhi see a crucial common interest in cooperating on efforts to defeat militant islam .

president bush's 2002 national security strategy of the united states stated that "u.s.interests require a strong relationship with india," and a recent national intelligence councilprojection said the likely rise of china and india "will transform the geopolitical landscape" indramatic fashion .

 ( 12 ) in january 2004 , president bush and prime minister vajpayee formally launched the "next stepsin strategic partnership" ( nssp ) initiative , which sought to address longstanding indian interestsby expanding bilateral cooperation in the areas of civilian nuclear activities , civilian space programs,and high - technology trade , and expanding dialogue on missile defense .

 ( 13 ) in march 2005 , the bushadministration unveiled a "new strategy for south asia" based in part on a judgment that the nsspwas insufficiently broad and that sets as a goal "to help india become a major world power in the 21stcentury. .

 ( 14 ) nongovernmental proponents of closer u.s. - india security cooperation often refer to the riseof china and its potential disturbance of asian stability as a key reason to "hedge" by bolstering u.s.links with india .

while the bush administration has sought to downplay this probable motivator,pentagon officials reportedly assert that india is likely to purchase up to $5 billion worth ofconventional weapons from the united states , including platforms that could be "useful formonitoring the chinese military. .

 ( 15 ) skeptics of a u.s. embrace of india note that the indianparliament passed resolutions condemning u.s. military operations against iraq and later declinedu.s .

requests for troop contributions in the effort to stabilize that country .

india's u.n. mission hasvoted with the united states roughly 20 percent of the time over the past five years .

 ( 16 ) according to the current indian prime minister , three major factors have driven a redefinitionof u.s. - india ties: the end of the cold war , the accelerating pace of globalization , and the increasinginfluence of nearly two million indian - americans .

however , there is concern among elements ofindia's security establishment and influential leftist political parties that the united states is seekingto turn india into a regional "client state. .

in accord with india's traditional nonalignment sentiments,leftist figures have called the july 18 joint statement overly concessional to u.s. interests and afurther violation of the ruling coalition's commitment to independence in foreign affairs .

suchcriticism may have elicited assurances by india's defense ministry that decisions about any futurejoint indian - u.s. military operations would be strictly guided by india's national interest and theprinciples of its foreign and defense policies .

in 2003 , the indian external affairs minister denied thatindia's relations with the united states could be used as a "counterforce" against china , saying , "wecategorically reject such notions based on outmoded concepts like balance of power .

we do not seekto develop relations with one country to 'counterbalance' another. .

 ( 17 ) the administration's policy of assisting india's rise as a major power has significantimplications for u.s. interests in asia and beyond .

the course of u.s. relations with china andpakistan , especially - - and the relationship between beijing and islamabad , itself - - is likely to beaffected by an increase in u.s. - india strategic ties .

of most immediate interest to the u.s. congressmay be the bush administration's intention to achieve "full civilian nuclear energy cooperation withindia," and its promise to bring before congress related and required legislative proposals .

 ( 18 ) many in congress alsoexpress concerns about india's relations with iran and the possibility that new delhi's policies towardtehran's controversial nuclear program may not be congruent with those of washington .

morebroadly , congressional oversight of u.s. foreign relations in asia likely will include considerationof the potential implications of increased u.s. cooperation with india in functional areas such asarms sales and high - technology trade .

with rapid increases in indian and chinese influence on theworld stage , many in congress will seek to determine how and to what extent a u.s. - india "globalpartnership" will best serve u.s. interests .

since 2001 , the indian government has pressed the united states to ease restrictions on theexport to india of dual - use high - technology goods , as well as to increase civilian nuclear and civilianspace cooperation .

these three key issues came to be known as the "trinity," and top indian officialsstated that progress in these areas was necessary to provide tangible evidence of a changed u.s. - indiarelationship .

 ( 19 ) therewere later references to a "quartet" when the issue of missile defense was included .

prior to theformal launching of the nssp initiative in january 2004 , the united states had sought to balanceindian interests in cooperation on and trade in sensitive technologies with concerns aboutproliferation and security .

according to secretary of state powell in october 2003 , we have been trying to be as forthcoming as we canbecause it's in our interest to be forthcoming , but we also have to protect certain red lines that wehave with respect to proliferation , because it's sometimes hard to separate within space launchactivities and industries and nuclear programs , that which could go to weapons , and that which couldbe used solely for peaceful purposes .

 ( 20 ) india's export controls are generally considered sturdy , with some analysts calling new delhi's trackrecord comparable to or better than that of most signatories to multilateral export regimes .

 ( 21 ) however , others callattention to recent u.s. sanctions on four indian individuals and entities said to have been involvedin wmd - related transfers to iran .

the "strategic partnership" forwarded by the nssp involvedprogress through a series of reciprocal steps in which both countries took action designed to expandengagement on nuclear regulatory and safety issues , enhanced cooperation in missile defense,peaceful uses of space technology , and creation of an appropriate environment for increasedhigh - technology commerce .

 ( 22 ) despite the "nuts - and - bolts" nature of nssp efforts , someanalysts characterized the initiative's overarching goal - - increasing rather than denying new delhi'saccess to advanced technologies - - as a revolutionary shift in the u.s. strategic orientation towardindia .

 ( 23 ) on july 18,2005 , the state department announced successful completion of the nssp , calling it "an importantmilestone" in the transformation of u.s. - india relations and an enabler of further cooperativeefforts .

 ( 24 ) the july 18joint statement includes provisions for moving forward in three of the four nssp issue - areas ( thejune 28 defense agreement calls for expanded collaboration on missile defense ) .

since 1998 , several indian entities have been subjected to case - by - case licensingrequirements and appear on the u.s. commerce department's "entity list" imposing licensingrequirements for exports to foreign end users involved in weapons proliferation activities .

inoctober 2001 , president bush waived nuclear - related sanctions on aid to india , and the number ofindian companies on the entity list was reduced from 159 to 2 primary and 14 subordinate .

inseptember 2004 , as part of nssp implementation , the united states modified some export licensingpolicies and removed the indian space research organization ( isro ) headquarters from the entitylist .

further adjustments came in august 2005 when six more subordinate entities were removed .

indian companies remaining on the entity list are four subordinates of the isro , four subordinatesof the defense research and development organization , one department of atomic energy entity,and bharat dynamics limited , a missile production agency .

 ( 25 ) it may be that numerous indian observers will remain skeptical about the nssp process evenafter the july 18 joint statement , viewing it in the past as a mostly symbolic exercise that will notalter a perceived u.s. intention of ensuring its own technological superiority .

 ( 26 ) many such analystsbelieve that past u.s. moves have not been substantive , opining that changes in licensingrequirements for high - technology trade have been of little consequence for prospective indian buyersand progress on space and nuclear energy cooperation has been marginal .

months after its january2004 launch , the nssp appeared to some indian analysts to have "crashed against bureaucraticobstacles in washington" ( often an oblique reference to the nonproliferation interests of the statedepartment ) .

 ( 27 ) .

since september 2001 , and despite a concurrent u.s. rapprochement with pakistan,u.s. - india security cooperation has flourished .

both countries acknowledge a desire for greaterbilateral security cooperation and a series of measures have been taken to achieve this .

theindia - u.s. defense policy group - - moribund since india's 1998 nuclear tests and ensuing u.s.sanctions - - was revived in late 2001 and meets annually .

u.s. diplomats have called bilateralmilitary cooperation among the most important aspects of transformed u.s. - india relations .

on june28 , 2005 , indian defense minister pranab mukherjee was in washington , dc , where the unitedstates and india signed a ten - year defense framework agreement that refers to a "new era" forbilateral relations and calls for collaboration in multilateral operations , expanded two - way defensetrade , increasing opportunities for technology transfers and co - production , expanded collaborationrelated to missile defense , and establishment of a bilateral defense procurement and productiongroup .

the united states views defense cooperation with india in the context of "common principlesand shared national interests" such as defeating terrorism , preventing weapons proliferation , andmaintaining regional stability .

 ( 50 ) some analysts believe that india , as a major democracy with a well - trained and professionalmilitary , is a worthy candidate for greater security cooperation with the united states , even ifsignificant asymmetries ( on technology transfers , for example ) could persist and limit therelationship .

greater interoperability and coordination with the indian armed forces has the potentialto benefit the united states in areas including counterterrorism , counternarcotics,counterproliferation , and peacekeeping operations .

 ( india has extensive experience in this lattercategory. ) .

 ( 51 ) skepticspoint to an indian strategic culture rooted in concepts of nonalignment and multipolarity as reasonsthat a true strategic partnership will be difficult to develop in the security realm .

 ( 52 ) apparently divergent u.s.and indian worldviews are demonstrated in significantly differing policies toward iraq and thestrategy for fighting religious extremism , relations with and investments in iran and burma , and,perhaps most importantly for new delhi , relations with pakistan .

also , the indian military is quitenew to doctrines entailing force projection , having long been focused on defending the country'ssovereignty from internal or neighboring threats .

several indian officials have expressed concern that the united states is a "fickle" partnerthat may not always be relied upon to provide the reciprocity , sensitivity , and high - technologytransfers sought by new delhi .

indian military officers voice frustration at what they see asinconsistent u.s. policies and a lack of u.s. credibility .

 ( 53 ) the june defense pact and july joint statement apparently seekto mollify indian concerns in these areas , but it remains to be seen whether or not leaders in bothcapitals can overcome potential political opposition and provide what their counterparts seek fromthe defense relationship .

as india's largest trading and investment partner , the united states strongly supports newdelhi's continuing economic reform policies .

u.s. exports to india in 2004 were valued at $6.1billion ( up 22% over 2003 ) , while imports from india totaled $15.6 billion ( up 19% over 2003 ) ,making india the 22nd largest u.s. trading partner .

the u.s. - india economic dialogue , which wasinaugurated in new delhi in march 2000 , has four tracks: the trade policy forum , the financialand economic forum , the environment dialogue , and the commercial dialogue .

each of thesetracks is led by the respective u.s. agency and indian ministry .

the july 18 joint statement includescalls for revitalizing the economic dialogue , most concretely through the launch of a new ceoforum , and promoting modernization of india's infrastructure "as a prerequisite for the continuedgrowth of the indian economy. .

the ceo forum , composed of ten chief executives from eachcountry representing a cross - section of key industrial sectors , seeks to more effectively bring privatesector input to government - to - government deliberations .

in march 2006 , the forum issued a reportidentifying india's poor infrastructure and dense bureaucracy as key impediments to increasedbilateral trade and investment relations .

 ( 58 ) in september 2004 , u.s .

under secretary of state larson told a bombay audience that "theslow pace of economic reform in india" has meant "trade and investment flows between the u.s. andindia are far below where they should and can be," adding that "the picture for u.s. investment isalso lackluster. .

 ( 59 ) inaugust 2005 , the new delhi government announced that it was abandoning plans to sell more thana dozen state - owned companies in what many analysts called a major setback to india's economicreform program , one that likely will affect the flow of foreign investment there .

the move was seenas a gesture to india's communist parties which support the ruling coalition in new delhi .

 ( 60 ) despite the generallyclosed nature of the indian economy and u.s. concerns , india's recent gdp growth rates are amongthe highest in the world , averaging more than 6.5% annually for 2002-2004 .

in november 2005 , u.s. treasury secretary snow made a five - day visit to india focusingon that country's efforts to further liberalize its financial sector and improve financing infrastructure.during his stay , secretary snow led the u.s. delegation at a meeting of the u.s. - india financial andeconomic forum in new delhi .

during the same month , u.s. trade representative portman visitednew delhi for meetings with top indian officials , where he inaugurated the u.s. - india trade policyforum and urged "ambitious" cuts in india's trade - distorting agricultural subsidies .

ambassadorportman and indian commerce minister nath made agreements to establish several focus groups topromote bilateral trade .

u.s. proponents of increased economic cooperation with india make traditional free - marketarguments that more bilateral trade and investment will benefit the economies and citizens of bothcountries .

some u.s. interest groups have expressed concern that closer u.s. - india economic tiescould accelerate the practice by some u.s. firms of outsourcing it and customer service jobs toindia .

proposals have been made in congress and various state governments to restrict outsourcingwork overseas .

bush administration officials have expressed opposition to government restrictionson outsourcing , but they have told indian officials that the best way to counter such "protectionist"pressures in the united states is to further liberalize markets .

other u.s. interest groups have raisedconcern over the outsourcing of financial services ( such as call centers ) to other countries that entailtransmitting private information of u.s. consumers .

u.s. officials have urged india to enact newprivacy and cybersecurity laws to address u.s. concerns over identify theft .

 ( 61 ) .

closer u.s. - india relations growing from an overt u.s. desire to increase india's power haveimplications for u.s. relations with other regional countries , as well as for the dynamics among thosecountries .

policy makers in beijing , islamabad , and tehran are among those who follow closely thecourse of a u.s. - india "global partnership" with an eye toward how their own geopolitical standingis affected .

the u.s. - india 'global partnership': how significant for american interests ? .

 , house internationalrelations committee , november 16 , 2005 .

u.s. - indian nuclear energy cooperation: security and nonproliferation implications , senateforeign relations committee , november 2 , 2005 .

the u.s. - india 'global partnership': the impact on nonproliferation , house international relationscommittee , october 26 , 2005 .

the u.s. and india: an emerging entente ? .

 , house international relations committee , september8 , 2005 .

