the general services administration ( gsa ) , through its public buildings service ( pbs ) , is the primary federal real property and asset management agency , with a portfolio consisting of 8,847 buildings and structures with an estimated replacement value of $68.8 billion in fy2006 .

gsa is also responsible for completing needed repairs and renovations to the federal facilities it manages .

congress enacted the public buildings act amendments in 1972 , and established the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) within gsa to finance the operating and capital costs associated with federal buildings .

created as a revolving fund , the fbf is financed by income from rental charges assessed to tenant agencies occupying gsa - owned - and - leased space that approximate commercial rates for comparable space and services .

gsa determines the base or shell rental rate by conducting appraisals of other comparable properties and incorporates operating expenses and tenant improvements .

in order to assess accurately the commercial market rate for each facility , gsa conducts a property appraisal every five years .

in the event there may be no comparable building available on which to base a fair appraisal , gsa uses a "return on investment ( roi ) " method , which calculates the rate needed to recover the building's actual construction costs over 25 to 30 years .

the gsa administrator is required to prescribe regulations providing for the rates that gsa charges to tenant agencies for use of its space .

the rental rate may also include a charge for any additional improvements or remodeling performed by gsa at the request of the tenant , which is amortized , or paid in equal installments during the term of the lease .

however , the tenant agency is responsible for paying shell rent for as long as it occupies the gsa facility .

for privately leased space , gsa charges the tenant agency for the actual leasing and operating costs , and related management services .

in each instance , there is an occupancy agreement between gsa and the tenant agency that sets forth the financial terms and conditions of the occupancy .

while rent deposits to the fbf are the principal source of funding , congress annually prescribes how gsa may allocate its fbf assets as new obligational authority in appropriations funding .

congress also may provide additional appropriations to the fund .

generally , fbf revenues are used first for gsa's building operating expenses .

congress then allocates fbf funds for the construction of new buildings , including courthouses , as well as for repairs and renovations to existing facilities .

a major concern for gsa is that the fbf has not historically produced sufficient rent revenues to finance needed capital improvements to its inventory of owned buildings .

by way of background , congressional establishment of the fbf to finance the capital costs of federal facilities with income derived from rent assessments represented an important revision to previously enacted federal real property law .

previously , construction authority for each federal building was approved and funded in separate legislation until the 1902 enactment of the omnibus public building act authorizing the secretary of the treasury to "give effect to and execute the provisions of existing legislation" to acquire property and to enter into contracts for the construction of federal buildings .

the federal government's acquisition of federal property was suspended in 1914 at the onset of world war i , and was not reinstated until the enactment of the public buildings act in 1926 .

this 1926 act provided the basic authority for construction of federal buildings by the congressional authorizations and appropriations process .

congress later enacted the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the acquisition of sites and design plans for federal buildings located outside washington , dc , and for improvements to existing federal buildings .

the same year , congress enacted the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 .

this act established the general services administration ( gsa ) and gave the gsa administrator responsibility for administering federal real property .

in 1954 , congress amended the public buildings act of 1949 to authorize the gsa administrator to acquire titles to real property and to construct federal buildings through lease - purchase contracts .

under this procedure , a building was financed by private capital , and the federal government made installment payments on the purchase price in lieu of rent payments .

title to the property was vested in the federal government at the end of the contract period , generally of at least 10 and not more than 30 years .

when authority for lease - purchase contracts expired in 1957 , congress approved a successor statute , the public buildings act of 1959 .

the 1959 act re - established earlier requirements to provide for direct federal construction of public buildings through the congressional authorizations and appropriations process .

this law , as amended and recodified over the years , remains the basic statute authorizing the construction and renovation of federal civilian facilities .

the act vests the administrator of general services with sole authority to acquire , construct , alter , repair , remodel , improve , or extend most federal buildings , and to acquire the sites or additions to sites for such buildings .

as part of the funding authorization process , gsa is required to submit to the senate committee on environment and public works , and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure , a detailed prospectus of all proposed building projects .

in the decade following the 1959 passage of the public buildings act , congress appropriated approximately $115 million each fiscal year to gsa for new construction projects .

however , by 1972 , a total of 63 congressionally authorized building projects had not received appropriations , largely as a result of fiscal constraints .

in april 1972 , the house committee on public works reported that , while congress "repeatedly asserted its insistence" that direct federal construction of public buildings was the most efficient and economical way to meet the government's urgent space requirements , an additional $1 billion would be needed in direct congressional appropriations to fund the 63 uncompleted construction projects .

during its consideration of h.r .

10488 and the proposed federal buildings fund , the committee reported that a single congressional approval for all the costs of acquiring a site , designing , and construction of a building is essential to a timely , responsive federal building program .

such a consolidated appropriation would expedite construction by allowing gsa to employ various time - saving techniques used in private construction but unavailable where funding uncertainties preclude the precision planning necessary to implement them.... a buildings fund to finance the acquisition , construction , alteration , maintenance , operation , and protection of all public buildings is the logical mechanism for one - time project funding .

the proposed buildings fund was to be financed by income from rental charges assessed to tenant agencies occupying gsa - owned - and - leased space that approximated commercial rates for comparable space and services .

each tenant agency would budget for its own space needs in the annual congressional authorizations and appropriations process .

the legislative history reveals that congress believed that the requirement for tenant agencies to be directly accountable for their space needs would result in more efficient utilization of federal office space .

during its 1971 consideration of legislation to create the fbf , the senate committee on public works reported that individual agency requests and justifications for office space during the annual budget process represented a "significant step toward performance budgeting," resulting in greater congressional oversight of the federal buildings program .

the 1971 congressional deliberations focused on two different methods to establish agency rental charges , the cost - recovery method and the rent - equivalent method .

under the cost - recovery method , charges would have been based on estimated maintenance costs , the cost of leasing space , and depreciation costs on gsa - owned facilities .

income resulting from the depreciation charges would have been available to finance future gsa construction and repairs projects .

the cost - recovery approach was rejected by congress because not enough revenue could have been generated ; in fact , gsa estimated that it would have needed additional appropriations of nearly $150 million each year to finance future construction projects .

the second option , the rent - equivalent method based on commercial rates for leasing space , was ultimately embodied in law .

gsa officials estimated that , based on 1971 funding obligations , approximately $800 million in rental charges would be paid to the fund .

of this total , congress and gsa anticipated that nearly $300 million in revenues would be available for capital expenditures .

the senate committee on public works reported that , while it endorsed gsa's use of commercial charges , it was not encouraging the agency to establish its rates so high as to produce an inordinate surplus of monies in the fund .

on the contrary , the committee desires that the rates charged ... be sufficient only to defray the cost of constructing , maintaining , and replacing public buildings and facilities , and to provide related services .

p.l .

92-313 , enacted on june 16 , 1972 , amended the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 to establish a real property management financing fund in the u.s. treasury to receive revenues from tenant agencies for gsa - owned - and - leased space and services .

revenues deposited into the fund were authorized to be used for expenditures for real property management and related activities "in such amounts as are specified in annual appropriations acts without regard to fiscal year limitations. .

the federal buildings fund , which became operational in fy1975 , replaced and received the unexpended balances of two existing buildings management and construction funds , and any prior gsa congressional appropriations for public buildings .

the act authorized appropriations to the fund for the first two fiscal years in which the fund became operational , and any additional appropriations as might be necessary to carry out the fund's purposes .

the legislation also reinstated the purchase contract authority for a three - year period to provide immediate funding for the construction of gsa's backlog of authorized , but unfunded , building projects .

section 5 authorized the gsa administrator to enter into purchase contracts , for a period not to exceed 30 years , with title ultimately reverting to the federal government .

in a departure from the 1954 act authorizing purchase contracts , p.l .

92-313 required gsa to pay local property taxes during the purchase term .

the 1972 legislation authorized the gsa administrator to charge a tenant for the gsa space which the agency occupied , and for all gsa maintenance and repairs .

while the act specified that gsa's rental rates "shall approximate commercial charges for comparable space and services," the statute gave no criteria or guidance for computing these charges .

the 92 nd congress established the federal buildings fund with the objective that income derived from agency rental assessments would provide a more predictable source of revenue for new construction and capital improvements than direct congressional appropriations .

congress also believed that the fbf would promote responsible asset management by requiring tenant agencies to budget for their rent and services .

however , the fbf did not generate sufficient revenues for capital expenditures due , in large part , to statutory obligations and limitations placed on the fbf when it was created .

when the fbf became operational in fy1975 , gsa's existing portfolio of federal facilities , valued at nearly $3.5 billion , was transferred to the fbf as contributed capital and provided the principal source of revenue .

however , the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) estimated that nearly half of gsa's federal building inventory was more than 30 years old , requiring as much as $1.1 billion in extensive repairs .

for many of gsa's older buildings , the funds needed for alterations and other related costs could sometimes exceed the annual rental income generated to the fbf .

gao reported in 1981 that , during the first six years of the fund's existence , a total of $442 million was available from the fbf for new construction , averaging only about $73.6 million each year .

a second factor contributing to a loss of revenue for the fbf was gsa's use of the purchase contract method from 1972 to 1975 to finance the construction of 68 federal facilities that had not received congressional funding .

as authorized by section 5 of p.l .

92-313 , building construction projects were financed with private funds , with ownership of the buildings eventually reverting to the federal government .

gsa borrowed approximately $1.3 billion through the sale of participation certificates to private investors , while letting contracts for construction in the same manner employed for direct construction projects financed with appropriated funds .

during the purchase contract term , the fbf's resources were obligated to repay the principal , interest , and local real estate taxes for the federal facilities , and these expenditures were a major drain on the fbf .

on the basis of available data on 21 of the newly constructed federal buildings , gao reported in 1979 that fbf expenditures for principal , interest , and real estate taxes actually exceeded the properties' incoming rental income to the fbf .

in fy1980 , gsa estimated that fbf resources would be used to pay about $100 million in principal , interest , and taxes on the 68 buildings .

the obligations for annual purchase contract payments increased steadily between 1976 and 1982 , from $51 million to $156 million .

the fbf's reserves were also affected by its obligations to pay for the buildings' maintenance and other services pertaining to gsa's central property management responsibilities , which increased from $414 million in fy1975 to nearly $571 million in fy1980 .

another reason the fbf generated less revenue than anticipated for needed capital investment was that congress and the office of management and budget ( omb ) periodically restricted the rent payments that gsa was allowed to charge tenant agencies .

gao reported that , between 1975 and 1988 , administrative and legislative rent restrictions reduced available fbf revenues by nearly $4 billion .

when the federal buildings fund became operational in fy1975 , the gsa administrator established agency rental charges and prescribed regulations providing for the rates that gsa charges to tenant agencies for use of its space .

these rates were based on computing composite commercial rates charged in various locations throughout the country and included rating factors pertaining to the quality of structure and design elements for different types of commercial facilities .

according to gao's findings , the quality rating was an important component , since the higher the rating , the greater the building rental charge .

gao reported , however , that gsa's quality ratings were largely based on "subjective judgment and limited criteria," and that gsa's reliance on market surveys did not provide an "adequate basis" for determining approximate rental rates .

tenant agencies also criticized gsa's methodology in determining fees based on composite market rates instead of actual costs based on more favorable long - term leases .

during consideration of gsa's fy1975 budget request , the house committee on appropriations reported that gsa's rent charges were higher than comparable commercial rates , reducing rental fees by 10% .

the senate committee on appropriations agreed to the provision .

as a result , fy1975 rental income to the fbf was reduced from $1.16 billion to $1.04 billion , and any fbf revenues in excess of $1.08 billion were authorized to be deposited in miscellaneous receipts of the u.s. treasury .

again in fy1976 , the house and senate committees on appropriations reduced agency rental payments to gsa by 10% and authorized that revenues to the fbf in excess of $1.34 billion be deposited in miscellaneous receipts of the u.s. treasury .

the following year , in fy1977 appropriations language , congress again authorized gsa to deposit in the u.s. treasury any revenues accruing to the fbf in excess of $1.15 billion .

gao reported that , in fy1977 , gsa decided to reduce its rental rates by 10% to preclude a congressionally imposed reduction .

in both fy1976 and fy1977 , omb required gsa to grant length - of - occupancy discounts to agency tenants , further reducing gsa's rental income by 20 % .

in addition , a gsa internal audit committee issued a report which criticized the agency's method of calculating composite rental rates without giving adequate consideration to the location of facilities and the corresponding differences in market values .

in order to provide a more equitable method to determine agency rental charges , gao recommended that gsa conduct an individual survey and appraisal for each gsa - owned - and - leased building to determine a rent that would be "equivalent to commercial rent for comparable space and services. .

in part because of gao's recommendations , gsa began conducting independent appraisals for each of its owned and leased facilities to establish rental rates in fy1978 .

gao subsequently reported that gsa's new appraisal method appeared to provide documented and defensible justifications for computing commercially comparable rental rates .

while congress did not reduce tenant rental fees in fy1978 , it did require gsa to deposit any income from the fbf in excess of $1.33 billion in miscellaneous receipts of the u.s. treasury .

from fy1975 to fy1978 , gao reported that gsa had transferred about $7 million from the fbf to miscellaneous receipts of the u.s. treasury , further reducing fbf revenues available for capital improvements .

after meeting its primary obligation to finance building operating expenses , the fbf has historically not produced sufficient revenues to fund needed repairs in gsa's real property inventory .

past studies by gao reveal that a large portion of gsa's aging federal facilities are urgently in need of significant and costly repairs .

in many instances , federal facilities are vacant or no longer needed because of tenant agencies' changing missions .

gao issued a 2003 report on federal property as part of its high - risk series , which identified areas vulnerable to mismanagement , waste , or fraud and concluded that "a major commitment is necessary to either modernize these facilities or to dispose of them. .

two years later , gao reported that , while progress had been initiated by the 2004 establishment of the federal real property council ( discussed later in this crs report ) , long - standing problems persisted for gsa in managing its real property inventory .

capital reinvestment is one of the largest challenges confronting gsa officials , who have described their buildings inventory as predominantly aging , with maintenance and repair needs that far exceed available fbf revenues .

the condition of the federal government's real property inventory is not static ; that is , even as certain repairs are completed , new problems are identified .

in addition , the amount of funding needed for repairs is greater each year , due to cost increases in maintaining an expanded inventory of properties .

as a solution , gao has stated that gsa must find new ways to generate additional revenues that are needed to upgrade its federal inventory .

seeking to increase the amount of funding available to adequately maintain these federal properties , gsa officials have expressed support for legislative reform initiatives introduced in previous congresses that would authorize the agency to convey excess real property by sale , lease , or exchange , with net proceeds deposited into the fbf for future real property capital acquisitions and improvements .

it has been documented that incoming rent revenues deposited into the fbf have been insufficient to fund needed repairs .

moreover , gsa's efforts to deal with a long - standing backlog of needed repairs have been hindered by a lack of reliable and detailed information about specific properties .

in addition , real property law restricts gsa's , and other landholding agencies' , ability to generate the additional revenues necessary to upgrade federal buildings , or to dispose of them when they are no longer of use .

some observers contend that existing statutory requirements that have been in place since 1949 often constrain effective federal property management that is necessary to meet agencies' changing mission requirements .

as previously mentioned , the 108 th congress revised gsa's property management policies with the passage of the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act , on december 8 , 2004 .

section 412 authorized the gsa administrator to convey real property by sale , lease , exchange , or leaseback agreements , with net proceeds deposited into gsa's federal buildings fund for future real property capital acquisitions and improvements .

introduced in the 109 th congress , h.r .

3134 , the federal real property disposal pilot program and management improvement act of 2005 , proposed to improve the management of federal real property by establishing a five - year pilot program to allow for the expedited disposal of surplus or underutilized federal real properties , and would have enacted many of the requirements of e.o .

13327 into law .

it also appears that certain types of transactions with the private sector will continue to be encouraged as the most cost - effective means to restore federal properties , and to dispose of properties that the government no longer needs .

gao has long supported real property reform initiatives that would allow incoming revenues to the fbf from real property transactions .

according to proponents , enactment of reform initiatives , such as h.r .

3134 , could fundamentally change existing law by giving gsa and other landholding agencies new incentives to manage and dispose of their real property inventories .

other issues regarding property management may also need to be addressed to resolve gsa's long - standing problems .

gao has reported that gsa's continued reliance on leased property remains as one of the major obstacles to a viable and self - sustaining federal property portfolio .

as stated earlier , the current budget process favors lease agreements that appear more economical .

one option that congress may wish to consider would be to include a reference to the total cost of lease agreements in the annual appropriations and authorizations process to reflect better the actual long - term costs associated with leasing .

president bush's establishment of the federal real property council and the appointment of senior real property officers will arguably provide greater coordination within the executive branch to improve the operational and financial management of the government's real property inventory .

congressional enactment of h.r .

3134 would have codified these provisions into law .

gao has reported that , while the federal real property council is developing performance measures and a real property inventory database , it is too early to determine the impact of these efforts , which , in gao's view , are positive .

funding limitations will likely continue to be gsa's greatest obstacle to completing urgent repairs and renovations to aging federal facilities .

addressing gsa's long - standing issues with its real property portfolio will: ...require a reconsideration of funding priorities at a time when budget constraints will be pervasive .

without effective incentives and tools ; top management accountability , leadership , and commitment ; adequate funding ; full transparency with regard to the government's real property activities ; and an effective system to measure results , long - standing real property problems will continue and likely worsen .

the cost history pertaining to fbf reserves and trends in the following areas may continue to be of particular concern to congress: the size of the gsa - managed space inventory and how efficiently that space is used ; the leasing program and its effect on costs ; and the level of capital investments .

in addition to congress and the executive branch , local and foreign governments , the private sector , and various advocacy groups , such as historic preservation organizations , all have a vested interest in how gsa acquires , manages , and disposes of its real property .

a diversity of views could be expected should congress choose to address this issue further .

