the report is intended to provide a brief summary and analysis of major legislative provisions in bills related to reauthorization of the federal aviation administration and related aviation programs that were considered during the 110 th congress .

while federal aviation administration ( faa ) reauthorization legislation was considered at length during the 110 th congress , and a faa reauthorization bill ( h.r .

2881 ) was passed by the house , the only related legislation enacted consisted of several short term extensions for aviation trust fund revenue collections and aviation program authority .

the federal aviation administration extension act , part ii ( p.l .

110-330 ) extends these authorizations until march 31 , 2009 , thus carrying the issue of faa reauthorization over to the 111 th congress .

this report discusses major provisions in the bills and selected policy issues discussed during the legislative debate over faa reauthorization that took place during the 110 th congress .

the report is organized into six major program areas: aviation system finance ; airport finance ; faa management and organizational issues ; system capacity and safety ; environmental issues ; and miscellaneous programs and provisions .

in several cases , provisions that appear in various unrelated sections of proposed legislation have been rearranged in this report in an effort to group and discuss related items in an issue - driven or programmatic context .

since this report is primarily written as a means of communicating key legislative provisions under consideration in the ongoing faa reauthorization process , it does not go into detail regarding the specific policy issues behind these legislative proposals .

crs has prepared two separate reports that provide discussion of the policy context for the current faa reauthorization debate .

for an overview of various selected issues related to the current faa reauthorization debate , see crs report rl33789 , federal aviation administration: an abridged look at reauthorization issues in the 110 th congress ; for more detailed background on these issues , see crs report rl33698 , reauthorization of the federal aviation administration: background and issues for congress , both by [author name scrubbed] , et al .

funding authorization for aviation programs set forth in vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 , hereafter referred to as vision 100 ) expired at the end of fy2007 .

also , authorization of the existing tax and fee structure that provides revenue for the aviation trust fund expired at the end of fy2007 .

during the first session of the 110 th congress , the house passed the faa reauthorization act of 2007 ( h.r .

2881 ) .

while h.r .

2881 , along with the aviation investment and modernization act of 2007 ( s. 1300 ) and aviation financing provisions in american infrastructure investment and improvement act of 2007 ( s. 2345 ) have all been placed on the senate legislative calendar , they have not yet been debated on the senate floor .

in early may 2008 , the senate attempted , but failed , to take up consideration of h.r .

2881 .

revenue collections and the operation of the faa and its programs have continued , however , as a result of continuing and consolidated appropriations legislation ( p.l .

110-92 , p.l .

110-116 , and p.l .

110-161 ) .

the program was further extended until june 30 , 2008 , by the airport and airway extension act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-190 ) .

on june 30 , 2008 , the federal aviation administration extension act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-253 ) was signed by the president , further extending airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) tax authorization and airport improvement program ( aip ) expenditure authority through the end of fy2008 .

on september 30 , 2008 , the president signed the federal aviation administration extension act of 2008 , part ii ( p.l .

110-330 ) , which provides a six - month extension for revenue collections , aip obligation and grant authority , and authorizations for faa programs .

on september 30 , 2008 , the president also signed the continuing appropriations resolution for fy2009 , which provides funding for the faa and other federal programs through march 6 , 2009 .

the resolution increases funding for faa operations to an annualized rate of $8,757 million , $17 million above the fy2008 level .

the law stipulates that roughly $1,099 million of this must be expended on activities tied to aviation safety .

under the terms of the resolution , faa's other programs are limited to spending at an annualized rate equivalent to fy2008 appropriations .

the legislative process toward reauthorizing the faa began in february 2007 with the submittal to congress of a legislative proposal by the bush administration and initial congressional hearings regarding faa reauthorization .

on february 14 , 2007 , the faa transmitted proposals to reauthorize funding of faa functions and related aviation programs and reform the financing of the national airspace system .

the text of these proposals were introduced as bills in the house ( h.r .

1356 ) and in the senate ( s. 1076 ) at the faa's request .

the faa's proposed bill ( h.r .

1356 / s. 1076 , hereafter referred to by bill number or as the faa proposal ) , entitled the next generation air transportation system financing reform act of 2007 , proposes a new system for financing aviation system operations and capital improvements that includes various fee - for - service charges ( user fees ) , directed primarily at commercial system users , and excise taxes ( primarily fuel taxes ) for general aviation system users .

the faa proposal also includes several modifications to airport revenues , including increases in the maximum passenger facility charges ( pfcs ) that airports can impose on passengers , and initiatives intended to modify and simplify the apportionment of grants to airports .

the faa proposal also recommends several management and organizational reforms , most notably the proposed establishment of an air transportation system advisory board , and the authority to create a commission , similar to the military's base realignment and closure ( brac ) commissions , to make independent recommendations regarding the realignment and consolidation of various faa facilities and services .

the proposal also includes proposed statutory language intended to better integrate the work of the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) on the next generation air transportation system ( ngats ) design and implementation into the faa's ongoing planning and acquisition activities .

also , the proposal includes language to increase the flexibility in delivering various air traffic services and capabilities to system users by allowing airports and private entities to play a more direct role in acquiring , deploying , and maintaining facilities and services to augment the faa's air traffic communications , navigation , and surveillance capabilities .

with regard to addressing system and airport capacity and safety , the faa proposal seeks statutory authority to control congestion at certain airports through market - based mechanisms , such as slot auctions and peak - period pricing .

the proposal would direct the department of transportation ( dot ) to study the appropriateness of a market - based system at new york's laguardia airport ( lga ) , and if deemed appropriate , would permit the airport operator to implement a market - based approach to controlling congestion .

the faa proposal also seeks to establish a pilot program to evaluate market - based mechanisms to relieve congestion at up to 15 other airports .

with regard to addressing the environmental impacts of aviation , the faa proposal includes language that seeks to provide funding for research into technology or processes that would reduce noise , air emissions , and water quality impacts ; provide grants for programs or projects intended to mitigate or minimize regulated environmental impacts ; and provide grants or specify regulatory procedures to assist airports in complying with environmental requirements .

the faa proposal also recommends establishing a consortium for fostering innovation to develop cleaner , quieter , and more efficient next - generation aircraft .

further , the faa proposal seeks to limit the scope of the air tour management program , designed to mitigate noise and other adverse impacts from air tours over national park units , to those parks where air tour impacts have been identified as a concern or could become a more substantial issue .

the faa proposal also includes language that would significantly modify the existing essential air service program ( eas ) that subsidizes air carrier service to small and isolated communities , primarily by setting more stringent criteria for program eligibility and restricting further expansion of the program .

on may 3 , 2007 , senator rockefeller introduced the aviation investment and modernization act of 2007 ( s. 1300 ) .

on may 16 , 2007 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation convened a markup session and ordered that the bill be reported favorably with amendments .

the reported bill , along with an accompanying committee report ( s.rept .

110-144 ) , was ordered printed on august 3 , 2007 and placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders .

s. 1300 proposes a four - year reauthorization , including modest increases to the faa's authorized spending levels through fy2011 .

s. 1300 , as amended , offers an alternative to the faa - proposed user fee structure , proposing to create a separate treasury fund , called the air traffic modernization fund , that would be financed through the collection of $25 surcharges imposed on certain flights for air traffic control costs .

the surcharge would be principally collected from airlines and high - performance business jet operators , as all piston - engine powered aircraft would be exempt from paying the surcharge .

the bill language specifies that more than $400 million toward the faa's facility and equipment ( f&e ) account is to be derived from these surcharges each year from fy2009 through fy2011 .

the bill gives the faa specific authority to collect these surcharges and impose sanctions upon those who don't pay , but leaves it up to the faa to devise a collection system .

the surcharge would be in addition to the existing tax and fee system , although proposals to modify that tax and fee structure may be considered by the senate through separate legislation considered by the senate committee on finance or possible floor action .

to further support the modernization of air traffic facilities and services , s. 1300 authorizes the department of transportation to issue obligations , such as bonds , totaling up to $5 billion .

these instruments would be repaid , with interest through revenues derived from the collection of the $25 per flight surcharges .

interest yields on these instruments would be set at rates of comparable treasury obligations .

s. 1300 includes several provisions for faa management and organizational reform .

the bill includes an alternate to the faa - proposed board , by creating a smaller seven - member air traffic control modernization oversight board that would have greater oversight authority over faa's planning , budgeting , and implementation of facilities and equipment modernization .

the proposed board would have approval authority over large scale acquisition programs ( those of $100 million or greater ) , and would be responsible for approving the faa's capital improvement program , operational evolution plan , facilities and equipment budget , and key leadership positions in the air traffic organization ( ato ) and joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) .

s. 1300 proposes $100 million annual increases to the airport improvement program ( aip ) through fy2011 , but does not include any increases to the maximum passenger facility charge ( pfc ) that can be levied by airports .

the bill does , however , propose a pilot program at up to six airports allowing airports to collect pfcs directly from passengers without any statutory ceiling on the amount that could be charged .

the bill includes other technical modifications to the aip program primarily aimed at increasing the eligibility of smaller passenger service airports to qualify as primary airports and extend the 95% federal share of airport project funding for smaller - sized airports .

s. 1300 includes several provisions addressing customer service for passenger airlines .

these provisions endeavor to provide assurances of adequate food , water , and restroom facilities when flights are substantially delayed .

these provisions would also require airlines to provide consumer rights information and airline customer service policies on their internet websites , and would require airlines to publish customer service and flight delay history information .

s. 1300 would also expand dot's consumer complaint investigations , subject to the availability of appropriations .

with regard to systems planning for next generation air traffic technologies , s. 1300 would require all agencies involved in the ngats initiative to establish implementation offices and enter into multiagency agreements outlining their respective responsibilities and budgetary commitments to supporting ngats .

like the faa proposal , s. 1300 would make the jpdo director a voting member of the faa's joint resources council ( jrc ) and the ato's executive council .

the bill would extend the authorization of $50 million annually to jpdo through fy2011 .

however , unlike the faa proposal , s. 1300 would not establish a brac - like commission to examine faa facility and services consolidation and realignment .

rather , under s. 1300 , the air traffic control modernization oversight board would be tasked with reviewing the faa's recommendations for realignment and proposing alternative recommendations , but gives the board no specific power to influence the actions related to faa realignment in the manner proposed in the faa bill .

with regard to the faa's personnel management system , s. 1300 includes a provision that would involve the federal services impasses panel ( fsip ) in cases where the faa and bargaining units cannot reach an agreement during collective bargaining .

the provision would allow the fsip to order binding arbitration in such cases and outlines a specific process for conducting such binding arbitration proceedings .

s. 1300 includes numerous provisions related to system capacity and safety including provisions designed to: improve runway safety ; expedite progress on rulemaking to improve airliner fuel tank safety and reduce flammability risk ; conduct research and improve regulations pertaining to pilot fatigue , flight time , and rest requirements ; implement several ntsb recommendations pertaining to the safety of helicopter emergency medical service ( hems ) operations ; address unmanned flight operations in the national airspace system ( nas ) ; and examine ways to improve capacity and safety by improving wake turbulence prediction , detection , and avoidance .

the bill also seeks to expand the number of flights operating to and from washington reagan national airport .

with regard to environment and energy issues , s. 1300 includes several of the faa - proposed provisions regarding research and mitigation grants .

additionally , the bill seeks to establish a research grant program and center of excellence to examine the development of synthetic jet fuel from clean coal sources .

the bill also includes a provision that would prohibit all aircraft under 75,000 pounds maximum weight that do not conform to stage 3 noise standards five years after enactment .

heavier aircraft would be required to conform to stage 3 noise standards by december 31 , 1999 .

s. 1300 also seeks changes to the air tour management program that include allowing modifications to interim operating authority without further environmental review ; allowing transfers of operating authority to conduct commercial air tours over national parks ; establishing an annual reporting requirement for commercial air tour operators ; and authorizing fee collections from air tour operators tied to the cost of carrying out the air tour management program .

s. 1300 also proposes changes to the essential air service program ( eas ) including a requirement that dot allow eas airlines to code share with other carriers , extension of the existing statutory highway mileage criteria for eas eligibility through fy2011 , the creation of financial incentives for improvements to eas service , and a program to aid the conversion of former eas airports to general aviation status .

the bill would allow additional overflight fee collections in excess of the $50 million level identified in the faa proposal to be put toward the eas program .

under s. 1300 , the additional amount authorized in addition to the $50 million base , would rise from $77 million to $83 million .

on november 13 , 2007 , the senate committee on finance reported s. 2345 , the american infrastructure investment and improvement act of 2007 , incorporating the committee's recommendations for what is likely to be the revenue title of the senate faa reauthorization bill .

its proposal makes some changes to elements of the existing tax and fee structure , but does not create new user fees .

as can be seen in table 3 , the committee has increased the general aviation jet fuel tax , increased the international departure / arrival tax , and created a new tax system for a particular segment of the aviation industry — fractionally owned aircraft .

the senate finance bill provides what is viewed by many as a possible alternative to the surcharge proposal contained in s. 1300 .

representative oberstar introduced the faa reauthorization act of 2007 ( h.r .

2881 ) on june 27 , 2007 .

on june 28 , 2007 the house committee on transportation and infrastructure held a markup session on the bill and ordered the bill reported favorably with amendments .

while the bill was ordered to be reported favorably with amendments by the committee , the amended bill and accompanying committee report has not yet been made publicly available .

also , on june 13 , 2007 , representative udall introduced the federal aviation research and development reauthorization act of 2007 ( h.r .

2698 ) , covering research , engineering , and development programs of the faa which fall under the jurisdiction of the house committee on science and technology .

that committee held a markup session on that bill on june 22 , 2007 , and ordered that it be reported favorably with amendments .

funding authorization levels for faa research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) and selected provisions contained in h.r .

2698 were incorporated into the version of h.r .

2881 considered on the house floor as title ix of the bill ( see h.res .

664 ; h.rept .

110-335 ) .

also , the text of h.r .

3539 as ordered reported by the house committee on ways and means , providing for the extension and modification of airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) taxes , was adopted and incorporated into the version of h.r .

2881 considered by the house .

on september 20 , 2007 , the house passed h.r .

2881 , agreeing to several miscellaneous amendments to the bill .

this report discusses h.r .

2881 as passed by the house .

h.r .

2881 proposes a boost in f&e spending to support ngats initiatives .

also , funding authorization levels specified in h.r .

2698 , and incorporated into funding authorization levels specified in h.r .

2881 , would substantially increase the available funding for faa research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) activities that fall under the jurisdiction of the house committee on science and technology .

the house committee on ways and means reported h.r .

3539 , the airport and airway trust fund financing act of 2007 , on september 18 , 2007 .

title x of h.r .

2881 as passed by the house , adopted from the ways and means bill ( h.r .

3539 ) , follows the general intentions communicated by the house committee on transportation and infrastructure ( the t&i committee ) , which sought a modest increase in federal aviation fuel taxes .

specifically , the t&i committee called for increasing jet fuel taxes from 21.8 cents per gallon to 30.7 cents per gallon ( roughly a 40% increase ) and aviation gasoline taxes from 19.3 cents per gallon to 24.1 cents per gallon ( about a 25% increase ) .

the house committee on ways and means , however , agreed to raise the jet fuel taxes even further , to 35.9 cents per gallon ( roughly a 65% increase ) , while accepting the gasoline tax proposal at the 24.1-cent - per - gallon level .

these levels were included in the house - passed version of h.r .

2881 .

with regard to airport financing , h.r .

2881 would fund the aip program at the same levels specified in s. 1300 .

h.r .

2881 would additionally allow for increased passenger facility charge ( pfc ) collections , but large hub airports that increase pfcs above the current $4.50 per passenger level would have their aip apportionments reduced by an amount equal to the projected pfc revenue increases derived from the fee increase .

h.r .

2881 would allow for pfcs to increase , up to $7 per passenger and would raise the pfc cap on a round trip ticket from $18 to $28 .

the bill also calls for a study to assess the impact of proposing different pfc rates for connecting passengers versus origin and destination passengers .

h.r .

2881 would set state apportionments for aip at 10% of total apportioned amounts , with a $300 million minimum provided total aip funding remains above $3 billion .

apportionments for nonprimary airports would remain at $150,000 or one fifth of the estimated five year development costs .

the bill also would raise the required air carrier approval for airport privatization amounts from 65% to 75% and airports participating in the privatization pilot program would not be eligible for aip funds .

like the faa proposal and s. 1300 , h.r .

2881 would exempt proceeds from the sale of a privatized airport to a public authority from aip assurances that require all airport revenue be expended for capital and operating costs .

h.r .

2881 includes several provisions regarding passenger airline service , including a requirement that dot review and adjust denied boarding compensation regulations every two years .

the bill would establish additional carrier monthly reporting requirements to provide dot with data on diverted flights and flights cancelled after leaving the gate .

h.r .

2881 would also require contingency plans for providing food , safe drinking water , restrooms , cabin ventilation , and medical care to passengers during excessive ground delays to be developed and submitted to dot .

airports would also be required to devise plans for sharing facilities and making gates available for such situations , and would require dot to set up a consumer complaints hotline .

the bill would also require airlines to inform passengers at the time of ticket purchase of the names of any insecticides it intends to use while passengers are on board .

the bill requires dot to establish an advisory committee for airline passenger consumer protection .

the bill also directs the dot inspector general to conduct an audit of air carrier flight delays and cancellations , and requires a gao assessment comparing passenger rights in the united states to those in the european union .

with regard to next generation modernization initiatives , h.r .

2881 , like the faa proposal and s. 1300 , would increase the stature of the jpdo director , and would require each jpdo supporting agency to designate a senior official and establish an office to oversee agency efforts supporting the ngats planning and development initiatives .

the bill would also require a multiagency integrated work plan describing annual objectives , milestones , and delineation of responsibility among federal agencies , and to tie these plans to the budgetary process .

h.r .

2881 would also require gao to review the progress and challenges associated with air traffic modernization initiatives under ngats .

the bill also authorizes additional appropriations specifically designated for airspace redesign initiatives to enhance aviation system capacity and reduce delays .

h.r .

2881 proposes to establish an faa working group on facility and service consolidation , consisting of the faa administrator and representatives from sectors of the aviation industry as well as labor representatives representing faa field employees .

the working group's functions , however , would largely be advisory in capacity , and it could not by itself prevent any faa consolidation actions from moving forward .

an amendment agreed to and incorporated into house - passed h.r .

2881 would require that faa regional office consolidation be included in the scope of the working group's oversight , and would require that the working group include representation for regional office employees .

h.r .

2881 would create a public - private partnership including a university with expertise in air traffic management to serve as an airport - based test facility for ngats technologies .

the bill would also establish a nextgen research and development center of excellence to provide educational , technical , and analytical assistance regarding ngats technologies .

the bill would also require the faa to establish a process for including affected employees , such as air traffic controllers and airways system specialists , in the ngats process and other modernization initiatives .

with regard to faa personnel management , the house committee on transportation and infrastructure adopted an amendment offered by representative costello that , like s. 1300 , would require binding arbitration to resolve impasses in contract negotiations .

h.r .

2881 , however , would invalidate faa contract actions taken after july 10 , 2005 , thus appearing to have the effect of undoing the faa contract with air traffic controllers adopted june 5 , 2006 , and subjecting the prior impasse with controllers to the terms of the binding arbitration provision .

pending the outcome of the binding arbitration , the provision would allow affected employees to receive "back pay" of any additional salary increase that may be included in the negotiated settlement , and it authorizes $20 million for this purpose .

h.r .

2881 includes language requiring a gao study of faa technical training of system specialists that service air traffic and navigation infrastructure , and a study by the national academy of sciences on faa inspector staffing levels and workload as well as air traffic controller staffing .

the bill authorizes increased funding for increasing inspectors , safety technicians , and operational support staffing .

h.r .

2881 also calls for an faa study of front line manager staffing requirements for air traffic control facilities , and would establish a university center of excellence for aviation employment .

the bill also seeks to create a 12-member task force to conduct a study assessing the conditions of faa air traffic control facilities and recommend steps for rehabilitation , remediation , and programmatic changes to prevent unsafe building conditions .

h.r .

2881 provides for 10 additional beyond perimeter slots from washington reagan national airport ( dca ) , but would reduce within perimeter slots by an equal amount .

the bill does not specifically address slot issues at new york's laguardia airport where statutory slot controls have expired , nor at any other congested airports besides dca .

however , the bill includes a general provision that would allow the faa to hold meetings among air carriers to voluntarily negotiate schedule reductions at any airport experiencing arrival and departure rates exceeding maximum hourly rates that is likely to have a significant adverse effect on a regional or national level .

if air carriers were unwilling to voluntarily agree to schedule reductions , then the provision would authorize the faa administrator to take appropriate action to reduce arrivals and departures to reflect available airport capacity .

also , an amendment agreed to by the house would require gao to assess the use of market - based strategies for reducing airspace congestion , such as peak - period pricing , slots , or quotas , and compare the effects of such initiatives to the improvements in congestion attainable through airspace redesign initiatives .

h.r .

2881 contains language similar to s. 1300 requiring the faa to report on its progress to install systems to mitigate runway incursions .

h.r .

2881 would authorize dedicated funds for runway incursion reduction programs and runway status lights .

additionally , h.r .

2881 would require the faa to develop a strategic runway safety plan .

h.r .

2881 includes language identical to s. 1300 calling on the faa to finalize rulemaking regarding fuel tank flammability reduction on large transport aircraft .

h.r .

2881 , like s. 1300 , also directs the national academy of sciences to carry out a study of pilot fatigue and requires the faa to implement recommendations of an faa study on flight attendant fatigue .

the bill would also require the faa to rewrite current flight and duty time regulations for air carrier , commuter airline , and charter pilots to count flight time accumulated conducting non - revenue flight assignments for the operator toward pilot flight and duty time totals .

the bill would also require the faa to establish occupational safety and health standards for flight attendants , and would require flight attendants , as well as gate agents , to receive specific training in serving alcohol , recognizing intoxicated individuals , and handling disruptive passengers .

with regard to airline maintenance , h.r .

2881 includes a provision that would restrict the use of non - certified maintenance providers , allowing only airline employees or employees of faa - certified repair stations to carry out substantial and routine maintenance and complete required inspections of aircraft used in airline service .

air carriers would also be required to provide complete lists of their non - certificated maintenance providers , whose activities would be restricted to non - routine , non - substantial maintenance and repair work under this provision .

the bill also adopts an amendment agreed to by the house that would extend the requirement for drug and alcohol testing programs to safety - critical positions at foreign repair stations working on air carrier aircraft or components .

with regard to unmanned aircraft , h.r .

2881 would require the faa to develop a comprehensive plan to safely integrate commercial unmanned aircraft in the national airspace system as soon as possible but not later than the end of fy2012 .

it also calls for expediting authorization of public - use unmanned aircraft , and implementing interim regulations to allow certain commercial unmanned aircraft to have access to airspace prior to completion of the comprehensive plan .

h.r .

2881 also would authorize funding for wake vortex mitigation technologies , including advisory systems .

the bill identifies specific funding amounts totaling more than $45 million over the four year reauthorization period for wake turbulence - related research and development .

an amendment agreed to by the house would also require the faa to study the feasability of creating a publicly - searchable internet database of acceptable height and distance from aviation sites for the installation of wind turbines .

the bill would also require the faa to update standards for aircraft rescue and firefighting ( arff ) personnel and equipment at commercial airports based on national voluntary consensus standards , but does not specifically expand the scope of these standards to all - cargo operations as some aviation safety experts have argued for .

h.r .

2881 includes a provision , similar to that in the faa proposal , to establish a consortium to develop continuous low energy , emissions and noise ( cleen ) engine and airframe technology .

the bill includes proposed sense of congress language asserting that the european union's proposed emissions trading scheme is inconsistent with international civil aviation authority ( icao ) practices of establishing consensus - based international standards and recommended practices , and urges the european union and others to work cooperatively through icao to develop "a consensual approach to addressing aircraft greenhouse gas emissions. .

the bill also calls for research to promote development of alterative jet fuels and calls for the jpdo to establish environmental standards for nextgen technologies .

like the faa proposal and s. 1300 , the h.r .

2881 also includes a provision to fund environmental mitigation grants under a proposed pilot program .

unique to h.r .

2881 is a provision for a pilot program for aircraft departure queue management to decrease fuel consumption and emissions , and a provision requiring the faa and the epa to examine how engine noise and emissions standards development could be better integrated across the two agencies .

similar to s. 1300 , h.r .

2881 includes a provision that would prohibit operations of non - stage 3 compliant jets under 75,000 pounds after 2012 .

an amendment agreed to by the house also adds language stating that it is the sense of the house of representatives that the port authority of new york and new jersey should conduct noise compatibility planning studies ( referred to as part 150 studies ) at john f. kennedy international airport and laguardia airport in new york and newark liberty and teterboro airports in new jersey .

additionally , the bill would increase funding for the airport cooperative research program ( acrp ) to examine airport environmental issues and calls for an interagency study on the effects of aviation on climate change .

the bill would also require the faa to study the use of lead - free fuels for piston aircraft .

with regard to the air tour management program and curtailing aircraft noise in national parks , the modifications proposed in h.r .

2881 are similar to the faa proposal initiatives to streamline and expedite agency actions .

h.r .

2881 reserves $50 million in overflight fees for funding the essential air service ( eas ) program and increases the authorization for additional eas funds to $83 million .

the bill encourages financial incentives and long - term contracts for eas , but would eliminate the local participation program created by vision 100 .

the bill would also create an office of rural aviation within dot to monitor and improve air service to small communities .

the bill also includes language allowing state and local governments to restore an airport's eas eligibility status by offering proposals , developed in cooperation with the air carrier , to reduce subsidies to below statutory per passenger maximums and allows dot to increase negotiated eas subsidies to adjust for any significant increases in air carrier fuel costs .

the bill also seeks to clarify the statutory definitions related to the actual control of the operations of u.s. airlines that are owned in part by foreign entities .

the house committee on transportation and infrastructure has also agreed to an amendment offered by representative oberstar to limit express carrier employees covered under the railway labor act ( rla ) to those performing certain aviation - related functions , leaving other express carrier employees , like delivery truck drivers , to be covered under provisions of the more broadly defined national labor relations act ( nlra ) , which allow them to organize and collectively bargain at the local level and according to less formal standards for affiliation .

the measure is supported by labor unions and united parcel service ( ups ) whose employees are already primarily covered under the nlra , but is opposed by fedex , whose employees fall under the rla guidelines .

funding authorization levels for the faa have been historically split among four principal accounts: operations and maintenance ( o&m ) ; the airport improvement program ( aip ) or grants in aid for airports ; facilities and equipment ( f&e ) ; and research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) .

however , beginning in fy2008 , the faa proposes a restructuring of these accounts , largely to separate operational activities carried out by the air traffic organization ( ato ) from faa's regulatory functions in the faa's accounting structure .

s. 1300 , however , proposes to reauthorize the four existing faa accounts .

therefore , the bills are not directly comparable with regard to funding authorizations .

the faa also proposes new user - fee funding mechanisms , under which much of the revenue to be used for air traffic services and regulatory functions would be determined through fee - setting activities carried out by the faa administrator , rather than through traditional congressional funding authorizations .

this further complicates any effort to make comparisons among the bills with regard to funding levels .

funding mechanisms and levels identified in the bills are generally described below , and more detailed treatment of the faa - proposed revenue system is provided later in the section titled " proposed tax and fee structure . .

over the last reauthorization period there has been considerable discussion about the long term health of the existing trust fund based faa financing system .

the faa , and others , believe the existing system will have difficulty providing the funding that the agency will need in the years ahead and that a new funding system more closely tied to aviation industry activity should be adopted .

other aviation interests , especially those representing the ga portion of the industry believe the existing funding system is adequate at least for the next reauthorization cycle .

as congress considers reauthorization it will likely need to weigh these opposing viewpoints .

for a detailed examination of the existing aviation finance system and the proposed changes to this system see crs report rl33913 , aviation finance: federal aviation administration ( faa ) reauthorization and related issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

the airport improvement program ( aip ) provides federal grants for airport development and planning .

aip funding is usually limited to capital improvements related to aircraft operations .

commercial revenue - producing portions of airports and airport terminals are improvements that are generally not eligible for aip funding .

aip money cannot usually be used for airport operational expenses or bond repayments .

aip funds are distributed either as formula grants or as discretionary grants .

small airports are much more dependent on aip grants than large and medium hub airports .

the larger airports can more easily generate revenue from user fees and have historically had the financial wherewithal to successfully access the bond market .

for background and legislative history of federal aid to airports , including a description of the aip program , as well as an overall discussion of aip issues , see crs report rl33891 , airport improvement program: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the passenger facility charge ( pfc ) program provides a source of non - federal funds intended to complement aip spending .

the pfc is a local tax imposed , with federal approval , by an airport on each boarding passenger .

pfc funds can be used for a broader range of projects than aip grants and are more likely to be used for "ground side" projects .

pfcs can also be used for bond repayments .

the aip and pfc programs are the sources of funds for airport capital development that have the most federal involvement .

other sources are bonds , state and local grants , and airport revenue .

the faa proposal ( h.r .

1356 / s. 1076 ) , would make major changes in both the aip and pfc programs .

in effect , the proposal would reduce the size and scope of the aip program , while increasing the role of pfcs in airport finance .

the proposal would broaden allowable costs under both programs .

the distribution of aip grants would undergo major changes and the local matching share for aip grants would be changed for some airports .

s. 1300 , as reported , retains the basic aip program size , structure , and funding distribution .

it would increase the program's overall year - over - year authorization level by $100 million for each of the four years covered by the bill .

s. 1300 does not raise the pfc cap .

consequently , under s. 1300 , the significance of the aip and pfc programs relative to each other's role in airport finance would remain roughly the same as it is under current law .

h.r .

2881 also retains the basic aip program size , structure , and funding distribution .

as does s. 1300 , it would increase the program's overall year - over - year authorization level by $100 million for each of the four fiscal years covered by the bill .

unlike s. 1300 , however , h.r .

2881 would raise the pfc cap to $7 .

consequently , the bill would raise the significance of the role of the pfc relative to that of aip within the context of airport finance .

neither s. 1300 , as reported , nor h.r .

2881 , as passed , restructure the aip or pfc programs substantially but they do make a significant number of what may be seen as perfecting changes .

recent incidents where passengers were held in aircraft for eight or more hours awaiting take off , as well as reports of deterioration of on - time arrival performance by airlines have led to increasing interest in airline passenger consumer issues .

currently , most passenger rights are set forth in the airlines' "contract of carriage" language .

the contract of carriage is the legal contract between the airline and the ticket holder which describes the rights and responsibilities of both the air carrier and the passenger .

passengers may take legal action in federal courts based on these contracts .

historically , the department of transportation's ( dot ) role in consumer protection is limited .

the existing law does provide procedures and compensation rules for "bumping" and lost or damaged baggage , however .

the main power dot has to protect consumers is the department's power to take action against air carriers for "deceptive trade practices. .

the definition and interpretation of deceptive trade practices can significantly impact the scope of dot's enforcement authority .

staffing of dot's office for aviation enforcement and proceedings has also been an issue in the past .

this dot office also deals with passenger discrimination issues .

since the 1971 creation of the user - supported airport and airway trust fund there has been disagreement over the appropriate use of the trust fund's revenues .

this led , beginning in 1976 , to the enactment of a series of legislative mechanisms designed to assure that federal capital spending for u.s. airports and airways ( i.e. , aip and f&e ) would be funded at their fully authorized levels .

for a detailed discussion of the history and impact of the various spending guarantee mechanisms , see crs report rl33654 , aviation spending guarantee mechanisms , by [author name scrubbed] .

the current mechanism dates back to 2000 and includes two spending guarantees .

one makes it out - of - order in the house or senate to consider legislation that fails to use all aviation trust fund receipts and interest annually .

the second makes it out - of - order to consider any bill that provided any funding for re&d or o&m if the bill fails to fully fund aip and f&e at their fully authorized levels .

the current guarantees will lapse at the end of fy2007 if no action is taken to extend them .

management and organizational reform at the faa has been a central focus of both legislative and administration initiatives over the past several years .

major provisions of the faa proposal and s. 1300 addressing management and organizational issues include: measures designed to achieve better integration of ngats planning and implementation into the faa's ongoing planning and acquisition activities ; measures to establish a mechanism for considering possible realignment and consolidation of various faa facilities and services ; and provisions to increase the flexibility in the design and implementation of ngats by allowing airports and private entities to play a more direct role in acquiring , deploying , and maintaining facilities and services to augment the faa's air traffic communications , navigation , and surveillance capabilities .

these issues , and the related legislative proposals under consideration in the current faa reauthorization debate are discussed in further detail below .

system capacity and safety remain as overarching issues behind much of the reform sought in the proposed faa reauthorization .

however , in terms of requested statutory changes specifically addressing system capacity and safety issues , major provisions offered in the faa's proposal have focused on obtaining the authority to implement market - based approaches to controlling congestion at selected high - density airports .

specifically , the faa proposal seeks statutory authority to control congestion at certain airports through market - based mechanisms , such as slot auctions and peak - period pricing .

the proposal would direct dot to study the appropriateness of a market - based scheme at new york's laguardia airport ( lga ) , and if deemed appropriate , would permit the airport operator , the port authority of new york and new jersey , to implement a market - based approach to controlling congestion .

the faa proposal also seeks to establish a pilot program to evaluate market - based mechanisms to relieve congestion at up to 15 other airports .

s. 1300 does not contain any provisions addressing this issue , but does seek to increase the number of flights to and from washington reagan national airport which are tightly controlled through a statutorily defined slot system .

the bill also contains numerous provisions addressing assorted aviation safety and capacity issues including runway incursions ; airliner fuel tank safety ; pilot fatigue ; helicopter emergency medical service operations ; age limits for airline pilots ; unmanned aircraft operations ; and wake turbulence prediction , detection , and avoidance .

aviation and airport operations have air quality , water quality , and community noise impacts .

to address issues associated with these impacts , and to assist airport operators with complying with local , state , and federal regulations related to those impacts , the faa proposal and bills under consideration in the senate ( s. 1300 ) and the house ( h.r .

2881 ) include similar proposals that would: provide funding for research into technology or processes that would reduce noise , air emissions , water quality impacts , and energy use ; provide grants for programs or projects intended to mitigate or minimize regulated environmental impacts ; and provide grants or specify regulatory procedures to assist airports in complying with environmental requirements .

s. 1300 and h.r .

2881 also include provisions that would establish certain requirements to reduce noise .

h.r .

2881 includes two unique provisions .

the first ( § 509 ) would require faa , to the maximum extent possible , implement "sustainable practices" in the construction and major renovation of air traffic control facilities in order to reduce energy use and improve environmental performance at those facilities .

finally , each proposal includes provisions seeking to modify the air tour management program , a program designed to regulate commercial air tours over national park units primarily in an effort to mitigate noise and other adverse impacts .

these provisions seek to narrow the scope of this program to park service units where noise or other adverse impacts from air tours has been identified or could become a more substantial issue .

the second ( § 512 ) specifies the sense of the congress with respect to the european union ( eu ) directive extending the eu's emission trading proposal to international civil aviation .

the bill specifies that , by not working through the international civil aviation organization in a consensus - based fashion , the eu directive is inconsistent with the convention on international civil aviation ; and that it is antithetical to building international cooperation to address greenhouse gas emissions from aircraft .

a wide array of aviation industry issues are being considered in the context of faa reauthorization .

modifications to the essential air service ( eas ) program that provides subsidy incentives to airlines for servicing small , rural , or otherwise isolated communities are contentious as the faa proposal seeks to set more stringent criteria for participation , whereas s. 1300 and h.r .

2881 seek increased funding and other program enhancements .

also , h.r .

2881 seeks to clarify foreign ownership issues related to operational control of u.s. flag airlines , a central issue for potentially expanding "open skies" arrangements with the european union ( eu ) in the future .

also , h.r .

2881 includes a provision addressing union issues among express carriers in language that would limit applicability of the railway labor act ( rla ) to employees engaged in airline operations , placing other employees under the terms of the national labor relations act ( nlra ) .

these issues are further discussed below .

the faa proposal includes language that would significantly modify the existing essential air service program ( eas ) , a dot - managed program that subsidizes air carrier service to small and isolated communities , primarily by setting more stringent criteria for program eligibility and restricting further expansion of the program .

some modifications to the eas program are also likely to be considered by the house and the senate .

the eas program provides subsidies to air carriers for providing service between selected small communities and hub airports .

the program was originally established in 1978 as part of airline deregulation to ensure a minimum level of air service to smaller communities that might otherwise lose service because of economic factors .

as part of its annual budget recommendations over the last few years the bush administration has suggested limiting eas funding to $50 million and requiring local cost - sharing as a condition for a community's continued participation in the program .

the program nonetheless has grown as congress has provided additional funding for eas , appropriating $110 million in both fy2006 and fy2007 .

vision 100 included several mechanisms and incentives designed to move communities out of the standard eas program .

communities have not sought to participate in these incentive regimes , however , suggesting that the incentives themselves may need to be reconsidered if they are to be effective .

vision 100 also included a somewhat controversial provision that created a trial program that would have required community financial participation as a condition for continued access to eas funding in some instances .

each annual appropriations bill since passage of vision 100 , however , has prevented the use of any appropriated funds to implement the cost - sharing trial program .

the faa produced bill includes provisions to substantially modify the eas program , primarily by setting more stringent criteria for program eligibility and restricting further expansion of the program .

specifically , the faa proposal would limit participation to only those airports that were receiving eas subsidy on the date of enactment of reauthorization legislation .

at present , additional airports may enter into the eas program , provided they previously had scheduled air carrier service as specified in statute .

the faa also proposes to eliminate from participation any airports located less than 70 highway miles from a large or medium hub airport .

further , the faa proposal would eliminate from the eas program any airports that are less than 210 miles from the nearest medium or large hub whose per - passenger subsidy exceeds $200 .

the proposal also includes language intended to simplify the process involved in terminating air carrier service to an eas - eligible community .

the provisions in the faa proposal to modify the eas program may be particularly controversial because the program has historically been viewed favorably by congress , particularly among members representing rural states and districts .

however , from a practical standpoint , the program may be difficult to justify given that per - passenger subsidies are quite high for service to certain locations receiving service , and airlines often have difficulty filling seats on many eas routes .

therefore , while provisions in the faa proposal to restrict expansion of the program may be particularly controversial , other options to increase eas program flexibility and alternatives to traditional basic eas service may be considered during congressional debate .

s. 1300 modifies the eas program primarily at the margin , largely ignoring the administration's proposals .

most importantly the bill increases annual funding for the program .

it does this by continuing to link eas funding to overflight fee collections , but instead of limiting funding from this source to $50 million annually it makes any additional fee collections available for the program as well .

in addition the bill raises the annual authorization of appropriated fund portion of the eas funding scheme from $77 million to $83 million .

there are several additional eas provisions in the bill .

these include a requirement that dot allow code sharing by eas participant airlines , a requirement that a final order establishing mileage adjustment eligibility be extended until the end of fy2011 , a provision including the use of financial incentives to improve eas service — as part of long - term contracts awarded by dot — and a program to aid the conversion of former eas eligible airports to ga status .

similar to s. 1300 , h.r .

2881 reserves $50 million in overflight fee collections for the eas program and increases the additional amount available from annual appropriations to $83 million .

the bill , however , does not reserve overflight fee collections in excess of $50 million for eas , but instead splits eligibility between eas and the small community air service program .

h.r .

2881 , like s. 1300 , encourages the use of financial incentives and long term contracts as part of the eas program .

existing law specifically limits non - u.s. ownership of united states certificated airlines .

these provisions are viewed by many as exclusionary , preventing all but limited foreign investment in the u.s. domestic airline industry , and absolutely preventing any real non - u.s. control over an airline's business decisions .

these laws are seen by proponents of the industry's internationalization as major barriers to a fully open international aviation market .

a recent initiative by the bush administration to lift some of the existing ownership and control restrictions through the regulatory process was opposed by congress and ultimately abandoned by the administration .

a recently concluded "open skies" agreement with the european union ( eu ) suggests that the discussion about airline ownership and control issues could be reopened at some later date .

only h.r .

2881 addresses this issue .

it has done so by including language to be inserted in title 49 , u.s.c .

section 40102 ( a ) ( 15 ) that further defines the legal meaning "actual control. .

the railway labor act ( "rla" ) governs labor - management relations for most carriers in the rail and air industries .

section 2 , first , of the rla requires all carriers and their officers , agents , and employees to "exert every reasonable effort to make and maintain agreements concerning rates of pay , rules , and working conditions , and to settle all disputes ... in order to avoid any interruption to commerce...." the national mediation board ( "nmb" ) , which administers the rla , has recognized the application of the statute to some employees of express carriers who would otherwise seem to be subject to the national labor relations act ( "nlra" ) , the federal statute that governs labor - management relations in other private sector industries .

in re: federal express corp . , for example , the nmb concluded that ground service employees of federal express were subject to the rla rather than the nlra .

the nmb found the rla's stated application to "every air pilot or other person who performs any work as an employee or subordinate official" of a "common carrier by air engaged in interstate or foreign commerce" to be compelling .

the nmb stated: the couriers , tractor - trailer drivers , operations agents and other employees ... are employed by federal express directly .

as the record amply demonstrates , these employees , as part of federal express' air express delivery system , are supervised by federal express employees .

the board need not look further to find that all of federal express' employees are subject to the railway labor act .

while both the rla and the nlra recognize collective bargaining rights for most employees in the private sector , they prescribe different organizational requirements .

for example , under the rla , employees must organize by craft or class on a company - wide basis .

in contrast , under the nlra , an appropriate bargaining unit may be an employer unit , a craft unit , a plant unit , or a subdivision thereof .

the faa proposal does not include provisions that would affect the collective bargaining rights of express carriers .

s. 1300 does not include provisions that would affect the collective bargaining rights of express carriers .

section 806 of h.r .

2881 would amend the rla to subject some employees of an express carrier to the rla and other employees to the nlra .

employees who perform duties for an express carrier in positions that are eligible for certification under 14 c.f.r. , parts 61 , 63 , and 65 , would be subject to the rla .

all other employees of the express carrier would be covered by the nlra .

section 806 would amend the rla to define an "express carrier" to mean "any person ( or persons affiliated through common control or ownership ) whose primary business is the express shipment of freight or packages through an integrated network of air and surface transportation. .

the measure is supported by labor unions and united parcel service ( ups ) whose employees are already primarily covered under the nlra , but is opposed by fedex , whose employees fall under the rla guidelines .

