responding to concerns that human activities are increasing concentrations of "greenhouse gases" ( such as carbon dioxide and methane ) in the atmosphere and causing potentially damaging climate change and global warming , nearly all nations of the world joined together in 1992 to sign the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

the united states was one of the first nations to ratify this treaty .

it included a legally non - binding , voluntary pledge that the major industrialized / developed nations would establish national action plans aiming to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 , and that all nations would undertake voluntary actions to measure and report greenhouse gas emissions to the unfccc secretariat .

the parties to the unfccc hold annual meetings called conferences of the parties ( cops ) , at which unresolved issues are negotiated , rules of procedure are established or amended , and reviews of progress are considered .

as scientific consensus grew that human activities are having a discernible impact on global climate systems , contributing to a warming of the earth that could result in major impacts such as sea level rise , changes in weather patterns , and health effects — and as it became apparent that many major nations such as the united states and japan would not be able to reduce their emissions to 1990 levels by 2000 — parties to the treaty decided in 1995 that it would be necessary to move beyond voluntary measures and to enter into legally binding commitments .

negotiations began on a protocol to establish legally binding limitations or reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .

it was decided by the parties that this round of negotiations would , in keeping with principles established in the unfccc , establish limitations only for the developed countries — the 38 nations listed in annex i to the unfccc , including the former communist countries , plus the european union , and referred to as "annex i countries. .

developing countries are referred to as "non - annex i countries. .

a basic principle established in the unfccc and continuing in negotiations on the kyoto protocol is that parties have "common but differentiated responsibilities" in dealing with climate change issues , and that first steps in reducing greenhouse gas emissions should be taken by the annex i countries .

because developed countries have emitted the largest share of the greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere ( carbon dioxide releases remain in the atmosphere for many decades ) , and because they are wealthier and more able to incur costs of any necessary changes in their economies , it was agreed by negotiators of the unfccc , and subsequently the kyoto protocol , that this principle would be a basic tenet of climate negotiations .

the kyoto protocol negotiations were completed in late 1997 .

the protocol establishes legally binding , mandatory emissions reductions for the six major greenhouse gases .

it requires that annex i countries ( listed again in annex b of the protocol ) reduce their aggregate greenhouse gas emissions by 5% below 1990 levels ( 1990 is the baseline for carbon dioxide , methane , and nitrous oxide ; 1995 is the baseline year for the other 3 gases ) , averaged over the "commitment period" of 2008 to 2012 .

each country was assigned individually negotiated targets which differed according to their situations .

the united states signed the protocol in 1998 .

however , no country is subject to the provisions of a treaty until it has been ratified , which in the united states requires the consent of the u.s. senate .

because the senate was on record in mid - 1997 in s.res .

98 , objecting to a treaty that had no mandatory obligations for developing countries , president clinton did not submit the protocol to the senate for advice and consent ; therefore the united states did not ratify the protocol during his administration .

then in march 2001 , soon after president george w. bush took office , he rejected the kyoto protocol , and the united states declined further participation in kyoto protocol negotiations .

after several years , the required number of annex i countries had ratified , and the protocol entered into force in february 2005 .

as of december 2007 , following the announcement that australia had ratified the protocol , 175 nations plus the european union had ratified it , representing over 62% of annex i countries' 1990 greenhouse gas emissions .

since the united states has not ratified the protocol , it is not subject to its terms .

negotiations continued after the 1997 treaty was finalized in order to put in place the detailed rules for how the kyoto protocol would operate and to establish procedures for how its provisions would be carried out .

these negotiations were continued through two subsidiary bodies that address technical issues , and then decisions were made at the annual conferences of the parties ( cops ) to the unfccc until february 2005 when the kyoto protocol had achieved the necessary ratifications to enter into force ; the annual meeting is now a unfccc cop , combined with a "meeting of the parties ( mop ) " to the protocol .

thus the annual meetings are now referred to as cop / mop meetings .

the united states continues to participate in the discussions and negotiations of the cops , but as it is not a party to the kyoto protocol , it does not participate in kyoto - related ( mop ) negotiations , attending those as an observer .

in december 2007 , cop - 13 / mop - 3 convened in bali , indonesia , and began the process of formulating an agreement that would succeed the kyoto protocol when its commitment period ends in 2012 .

as summarized below in the section on the bali action plan , the negotiations at this meeting were closely watched for signs that the process agreed on would produce an outcome that would be sufficient to the challenge of mitigating and adapting to climate change .

final decisions on what the commitments of developing and developed countries would be were not expected at bali , but the considerations to be included in negotiations toward these decisions are outlined in the "bali action plan. .

the major commitments in the treaty on the key issues are as follows .

during 2007 , climate change gained widespread attention as a critical issue facing the nations of the world , and the negotiations held in bali , indonesia , december 3-14 , 2007 , were widely regarded as a key next step in continuing to chart an international course to mitigate global warming and deal with its impacts .

the kyoto protocol was always intended to be a first step in moving toward reducing global accumulations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere .

negotiators recognized that the goals of the protocol , even if met by all the parties , would not produce the stabilization of atmospheric greenhouse gases posited as the goal of the unfccc .

the protocol set forth a timetable for reviewing progress of actions undertaken to meet the protocol's goals and to consider "next steps. .

it has been generally anticipated that next steps after 2012 would include measures to be taken by both developed and developing countries .

throughout the process preceding the bali meeting , developing countries had been unwilling to make binding commitments on greenhouse gas limitations or management .

the kyoto protocol commitment period begins in 2008 and runs through 2012 ; it was widely expected when the protocol was negotiated that by 2008 , next steps for the post - 2012 period would be either decided or under active negotiation .

however , the challenge at the cop / mop meeting in bali and the negotiations to follow remains how to find agreement on the nature of commitments , if any , that would be acceptable to all the major players — including kyoto protocol parties with existing obligations , developing countries that are major ghg emitters , and the united states , whose role is regarded as critical by all potential participants in the post - 2012 period .

as parties to the kyoto protocol contemplate future commitments in the post - 2012 period , the question of whether existing commitments are likely to be met is important .

this section reviews the status of the parties to the protocol in relation to their existing commitment and current ghg emissions .

many are facing major challenges to achieving emissions reductions , given the increase in emissions they have had in recent years .

the united states took an active role in the negotiations that shaped the 1997 kyoto protocol .

it signed the protocol in 1998 , but president clinton did not submit it to the senate for approval , citing the byrd - hagel resolution , s.res .

98 , that passed unanimously just prior to the completion of the protocol in kyoto .

this non - binding resolution expressed the sense of the senate that it would not support a treaty that did not include obligations for developing countries , or that would harm the u.s. economy .

in march 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol , and the united states has not formally participated in further negotiations on the protocol .

meetings to negotiate details and procedures of the kyoto protocol's rules occurred annually in conjunction with the conference of parties ( cop ) to the unfccc .

the united states has attended these meetings and has participated in discussions or negotiations pertaining only to the unfccc ; it also has been active behind the scenes in discussions of kyoto protocol issues , but has not formally participated .

regaining u.s. participation and ratification of the kyoto protocol remains a major goal for parties to the kyoto protocol , along with engaging major developing country participation , since meaningful reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions would depend on reductions in emissions by the largest emitters .

in february 2002 , president bush announced a u.s. policy of reducing the net "greenhouse gas intensity" of the u.s. economy by 18% over the next 10 years .

greenhouse gas intensity measures the ratio of greenhouse gas emissions to economic output .

ghg intensity has been declining in the united states , and the 18% reduction goal compares to a projected "business as usual" decline in intensity of 14% for the 10-year period .

according to some , the 18% goal would not achieve reductions of greenhouse gases significantly more than the existing trend .

the administration stated that the goal , to be met through voluntary action , is to achieve efficiency improvements that would reduce the 183 metric tons of emissions per million dollars of gross domestic product ( gdp ) expected under "business as usual" to 151 metric tons in 2012 .

the plan noted that "if , in 2012 , we find that we are not on track toward meeting our goal , and sound science justifies further policy action , the united states will respond with additional measures that may include a broad , market - based program" and other incentives and voluntary measures to accelerate technology development .

on april 16 , 2008 , president bush delivered a statement in advance of the major economies meeting in paris ( see below ) in which he announced "a new national goal to stop the growth in u.s. greenhouse gas emissions by 2025. .

u.s. actions related to climate change include extensive scientific and research programs , and continuing international activities to cooperate on a bilateral basis or through other international forums to support voluntary action .

among the most prominent international u.s. activities have been the initiative taken in the asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate , and the initiative by president bush to convene a series of major economies meetings on energy security and environment , that began in september 2007 , including the largest greenhouse - gas - emitting countries — developed and developing — to discuss how to deal with climate change .

these are discussed below .

on july 27 , 2005 , the united states announced formation of a six - nation asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate ( commonly denoted by the acronym 'app' ) , which would work on cooperatively reducing greenhouse gas intensity of their economies .

this partnership agreement included three of the world's largest emitters of greenhouse gases: the united states , china , and india , plus japan , australia , and south korea .

of the three developed country nations in the partnership — the united states , australia , and japan — only japan has ratified the kyoto protocol .

the participants described the focus of the partnership as technology development and reduction of greenhouse gas intensity , on a voluntary basis .

no specific targets were announced .

the members of the partnership indicated that their goal was to "complement , but not replace the kyoto protocol. .

however , concerns have been raised by some observers as to whether this partnership and its approach would in fact reinforce the resistance of the two largest developing country greenhouse gas emitters — china and india — to taking on mandatory emissions commitments in the next phase of the kyoto protocol .

the purposes identified by partnership members include to "create a voluntary , non - legally binding framework for international cooperation to facilitate the development , diffusion , deployment , and transfer of existing , emerging and longer - term cost - effective , cleaner , more efficient technologies and practices among the partners through concrete and substantial cooperation so as to achieve practical results. .

task forces focused on eight industrial or business sectors were established to review the status of their sectors with regard to clean development and climate , to identify cost and performance objectives and realistic goals , and report on recommended actions within their sectors .

the eight task forces are: ( 1 ) cleaner fossil energy , ( 2 ) renewable energy and distributed generation , ( 3 ) power generation and transmission , ( 4 ) steel , ( 5 ) aluminum , ( 6 ) cement , ( 7 ) coal mining , and ( 8 ) buildings and construction .

the task force reports , termed action plans , are now complete and can be accessed on the partnership website .

the executive summary of the task force action plans describes the projects to be undertaken , which include sectoral assessments , identifying best practices , capacity building , and technology research and demonstration .

these activities are described as "a significant first step toward a more comprehensive set of actions to address clean development and climate goals .

the remaining questions include the degree to which funding and investment will be forthcoming for the work plan goals .

also unclear is the degree to which the developing country partners will undertake activities in addition to those receiving outside funding .

another question — critical to the future of the kyoto protocol , and raised initially when the partnership was first announced — is whether the two largest developing country emitters of greenhouse gases , china and india , will see this parallel effort as indeed complementary to the kyoto protocol , or whether they will continue to resist binding emissions reductions in the next commitment period of the kyoto prtocol in favor of the non - binding , voluntary approach espoused by the asia - pacific partnership , with greenhouse gas intensity reduction as their focus .

just prior to the g - 8 meeting , president bush announced may 31 , 2007 , that the united states would convene a meeting in washington in late september of "major economies" — those that are "major emitters" of ghg — on "energy security and climate change. .

he indicated this would begin a series of meetings , starting in september , to support "an effort to develop a new post - 2012 framework on climate change by the end of 2008. .

some observers argued that this initiative could undercut the kyoto protocol negotiations , but others seemed more positive in hoping that all efforts toward dealing with climate change , especially when they include major emitters like india and china , can prove useful .

a white house fact sheet indicated that this proposal "breaks new ground in advancing areas of common interest between developed countries and the major emerging economies" and indicated that this effort "will build on and advance u.s. relations with the asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate and other technology and bilateral partnerships. .

in early august 2007 , president bush announced that the first meeting of this initiative , held september 27-28 , would include invitations to the european union ( the current eu president and european commission ) plus france , germany , italy , and the united kingdom ; and japan , china , canada , india , brazil , south korea , mexico , russia , australia , indonesia , south africa , and the united nations .

in his letter of invitation to heads of governments of the invited nations , president bush noted that he was "... pleased to join the other g - 8 leaders in june in recognizing the vital need for the major economies to work together to achieve the common objectives of reducing global greenhouse gas emissions , increasing energy security and efficiency , and sustaining economic growth. .

noting that the g - 8 leaders had welcomed his proposed series of meetings , he continued: "the united states is committed to collaborating with other major economies to agree on a detailed contribution for a new global framework by the end of 2008 , which would contribute to a global agreement under the u.n .

framework convention on climate change by 2009. .

it was a matter of concern among g - 8 nations prior to the g - 8 meeting in june 2007 that this initiative could serve to undermine both the g - 8 discussions on climate , and the upcoming negotiations at the cop - 13 / mop - 3 meeting in bali , indonesia .

however , both the outcome of the g - 8 meeting in june ( discussed below ) and the final statements inviting participants to the september meeting emphasized the integration of these high - level dialogues into a constructive contribution to the unfccc negotiations .

although some attendees had expressed their concerns that this initiative could undercut the kyoto protocol negotiations , all attendees welcomed the acknowledgment by the united states that climate change is a major global problem , and the endorsement by the united states of the u.n. process as the major forum for negotiating international action on climate change .

the u.s. summary of the september 27-28 , 2007 , major economies meeting on energy security and climate change stated , "discussion reflected a common understanding that any long term goal is aspirational , and that it should not be used as a basis for burden sharing. .

this continuing rejection of mandatory limits in favor of "aspirational goals" was a disappointment to those ( in particular , the european participants ) who hoped for a breakthrough in the u.s. approach .

follow - on meetings were held in late january , in honolulu , hawaii , and in mid - april in paris , france .

in addition to the unfccc and kyoto protocol processes , and the initiatives by the united states discussed above , several major international meetings focused on climate change took place in 2007 .

on april 17 , 2007 , the united nations security council held its first - ever debate on the relationship among climate change , energy , peace , and security .

the meeting was convened by the united kingdom , in its capacity as president of the security council for april .

some 50 delegations spoke at the meeting , some objecting that climate change was better handled by ongoing u.n. efforts ( such as the unfccc ) , but others endorsing the need to deal with climate change as a security issue .

secretary general ban ki - moon has indicated that he places a high priority on dealing with climate change as part of the united nations agenda .

the leaders of the "g - 8" nations — the united states , canada , france , germany , italy , japan , russia and the united kingdom — met june 6-8 , 2007 , in germany to discuss wide - ranging issues , with climate change high on the agenda .

the outcome of this meeting was widely regarded as a key indicator of how successful negotiations on a post - kyoto framework could be .

in preliminary discussions on the outcome of the meeting , the european nations had encountered strong resistance by the united states to the german chancellor's proposed framework , which included a 50% reduction in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions by 2050 , limiting global warming to a rise of 2 degrees celsius ( 3.6 degrees fahrenheit ) , and establishing a global ghg trading market .

in the week preceding this meeting , president bush announced a different approach to include major ghg emitting developing and developed countries in a process aimed at voluntary measures ( discussed above ) .

the final declaration of the g - 8 summit on june 7 was widely described as a "compromise" and as a "step in the right direction" by the united states and the g - 8 leaders .

the summit declaration section on climate change stated that the g - 8 nations are "committed to taking strong and early action to tackle climate change in order to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations..." at levels that would avoid dangerous interference with the climate system .

the declaration stated that the eu , canadian , and japanese decisions that include halving global emissions by 2050 would be seriously considered .

it welcomed the "wide range" of activities underway in industrialized and developing countries and noted the need to address not only climate change but also energy security , economic growth , and sustainable development objectives .

the statement reiterated the unfccc principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities of nations and stated , "we recognise however , that the efforts of developed economies will not be sufficient and that new approaches for contributions by other countries are needed. .

it further acknowledged that "the un climate process is the appropriate forum for negotiating future global action on climate change. .

the statement noted that the g - 8 members had met with the representatives of brazil , china , india , mexico , and south africa , and welcomed the offer of the united states to host a meeting later this year to continue engaging "these and other major energy consuming and greenhouse gas emitting countries to consider the necessary components for successfully combating climate change. .

reflecting the high priority for climate change expressed by u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon , a high - level heads of state and ministerial meeting on climate change was held at the u.n. general assembly meeting on september 24 , 2007 , at u.n. headquarters in new york .

the meeting consisted of statements by many members of the general assembly on the importance of dealing with climate change .

president bush did not address this meeting , but attended a dinner following the session .

