on may 6 , 2007 , french voters chose the gaullist nicolas sarkozy to be president of france .

in a contentious campaign , he defeated the socialist ségolène royal by a margin of 53.1% to 46.9% .

sarkozy assumed power on may 16 .

sarkozy represents a younger generation of leaders at a time when a majority of the french public believes their country is in decline , in part due to enduring low economic growth and high unemployment , in part to an apparent diminishing influence in guiding the course of the european union ( eu ) .

the second round of the presidential elections saw a near - record turnout of 84.9% in a campaign that was closely watched by voters .

sarkozy succeeded in capturing a majority of both the women's vote and the vote of those over 60 .

he pledged to lower persistent unemployment , deal decisively with issues relating to immigrants , reduce the government bureaucracy , and reform the economy .

his gaullist predecessor , jacques chirac , had made similar promises but proved unable to implement effective change .

the first round of the elections eliminated extremists on the right and the left .

sarkozy finished with 31.17% of the vote , followed by royal with 25.87% .

the third - place finisher , françois bayrou of the centrist union for french democracy ( udf ) , finished third with 18.57% of the vote , triple the support that he received in the 2002 presidential elections .

the racist and xenophobic candidate , jean - marie le pen , gained 10.44% of the vote , a sharp drop form this showing in 2002 .

royal courted udf voters in the second round , but her appeal did not succeed , as they split their vote .

the two - round legislative elections , completed on june 17 , gave sarkozy's party , the union for a popular movement ( ump ) , a solid but reduced majority .

in the 577-seat national assembly , the ump now holds 313 seats , and is supported by 32 deputies from other parties .

the socialist party holds 227 seats .

since 1981 , france has had only two presidents , the socialist françois mitterrand and the gaullist jacques chirac , each a formidable political figure who dominated his respective party .

in 2002 , presidential terms were shortened from seven years to five years ; there are no limits on the number of terms a president may serve .

legislative elections now follow the presidential elections by a month .

under the fifth republic ( 1958-present ) , france has had a strong presidential system , significantly different from many european parliamentary systems .

fifth republic structures were meant to avoid the ever - changing parliamentary governments of the fourth republic ( 1946-1958 ) , when the country needed but rarely found strong leadership after the second world war and during the algerian war for independence ( 1954-1962 ) , a conflict that led to instability and violence in france as well as in algeria .

the president is elected by a national vote and enjoys clear command of national security and the armed forces .

although the president appoints a prime minister who names a cabinet , it is the president who shapes all major policy initiatives and is the unquestioned political leader of the government .

compared with the united states , france is a highly centralized country , not only in political authority but also in economic structures .

although some industries have been privatized in recent years , the state continues to control or to influence many key industries to a degree unknown in the united states .

even the country's main road and rail systems run through or emanate from paris .

important domestic and foreign policy issues were at play in the campaign .

integration of the large muslim minority , now nearly 10% of the population and mostly north african in origin , has been a focal point of discussion for a decade , but most pointedly since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , on the united states and riots in the suburbs , where most muslims live , of several major french cities in 2005 .

control of immigration , was another key electoral issue .

a related issue was high unemployment , plaguing the country for years .

in foreign policy , the unstable middle east and the possible rise of a nuclear - armed iran considerable attention from the key candidates .

france's role in the european union was also a question of importance to the population .

sarkozy's campaign was successful because he presented a clear program of reform to the electorate and appealed to national front voters concerned about immigration , crime , and the economy .

he also effectively managed his party's militants , who helped to bring his message to the population .

royal lost because she at times seemed uncertain of her message , because she sometimes cast herself defensively , as the person to prevent sarkozy from gaining power , and because her own party was divided over her candidacy .

relations between the bush administration and france have been difficult since the run - up to the u.s. invasion of iraq in march 2003 .

while the united states and france cooperate closely on some issues , such as counterterrorism and instability in lebanon , president chirac strongly opposed the invasion of iraq and raised international criticism of administration policy , leading to sharp rejoinders from administration officials and some members of congress .

officials in both countries are hoping that the 2007 french elections will lead to an improved bilateral atmosphere on several issues , some of which are discussed in this report .

france has been an important contributor to a range of nato and eu missions , and an improved relationship could relieve strain on u.s. strategic resources .

over the past year , polls , several books , and media commentary have indicated a widespread view in france that the country is enduring a decline in economic , political , and intellectual vigor and influence .

gdp growth was only 2% in 2006 , and unemployment is now 8.5% , a percentage point above the eurozone average .

in a may 2005 referendum , french voters failed to approve a proposed new eu treaty , commonly referred to as the eu constitution , a development that , even if many voters were expressing displeasure primarily with their government , reduced french leverage to demonstrate leadership in the union .

as a result , there are calls for a "renewal" from both the right and the left .

the gaullist party and the socialist party nominated their candidates from within the party structures .

there are no national primaries in france .

for most of the fifth republic , individuals who emerged as a party's candidate rose through the ranks and were the consensus choice of those who ran the party structures .

the election season of 2006-2007 unfolded somewhat differently .

the essence of the u.s. - french relationship is unlikely to change substantively under sarkozy's presidency .

trade disputes will continue to be managed through the european union .

some u.s. officials believe that sarkozy will be more "practical" in discussing the eu's european security and defense policy ( esdp ) with the united states ; they believe that president chirac has impeded cooperation between nato and the eu by insisting that the united states , rather than nato , engage in discussions over strategic issues with the union , and by pressing for an "eu caucus" in nato , where eu member states would present a united position on selected issues to the united states and nato governments not in the union .

at the same time , any relationship between allies is a two - way street .

just as some u.s. officials believe that president chirac has been an impediment to improved relations , many observers in france , in the wake of the u.s. invasion of iraq and highly politicized criticism of france emanating from parts of the u.s. government and media , believe that only the end of the bush administration will lead to a moment when the political atmosphere between the two countries can improve .

sarkozy expresses admiration for the united states , but many in the gaullist party and in the general population remain disdainful of the bush administration .

despite sharp differences with the bush administration , the chirac presidency worked closely with the united states on several key issues .

these efforts relieved pressure on u.s. resources by contributing to a sharing of the burden for missions important to u.s. and allied security .

by all accounts , u.s. - french cooperation against terrorism , primarily through eu structures but also bilaterally , is excellent .

sarkozy , as interior minister , was intimately involved in this cooperative effort .

france , like the united states , is deeply critical of the syrian government , and the two countries have worked together to reduce syria's influence in lebanon and to shore up the lebanese government .

sarkozy announced after his election that france would once again engage syria in an effort to stabilize lebanon .

at the same time , he had tough words for the syrian government , and said that france will support the continuing u.n. investigation into possible syrian involvement in the murder of former lebanese prime minister rafiq hariri .

on the other hand , some french officials believe that the bush administration should have used its influence to restrain israel in its response to attacks by hezbollah in summer 2006 , a response that badly battered the lebanese economy and political leadership .

as noted above , france is one of the eu - 3 countries working with the united states to block iran's nuclear ambitions through negotiations and by imposing and maintaining economic sanctions .

france also contributes to nato's international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan , where french forces provide security in kabul and train elements of the afghan army .

sarkozy has said that france will keep its forces in afghanistan , but "not indefinitely. .

u.s. officials believe that france continues to modernize its armed forces to be more "expeditionary," or capable of distant missions in an era of global terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

france also plays a role in the eu stabilization mission in bosnia - hercegovina and the nato mission in kosovo .

sarkozy believes that french forces are overextended , largely in peacekeeping missions .

should he withdraw such forces from current missions , there will be more pressure on the united states and other governments to fill in this shortfall with forces of their own .

