although the european union's ( eu ) 27 member states have ceded some national sovereignty ( or competency ) to eu institutions in a variety of areas , including economic and trade policy , energy policy remains primarily the responsibility of the member states .

decisions regarding long - term oil or gas purchases , the development and improvement of energy - related infrastructure , and the use of particular fuels continue to be made at the national level by individual member states .

at their march 2007 summit , eu member states moved to boost european coordination to help secure and diversify energy supplies , increase the development and use of renewable and alternative energy resources within the eu , and reduce energy demand and consumption .

although member state governments remain reluctant to cede national sovereignty over energy - security aspects of their foreign policies , they have set binding eu - wide targets for the use of renewable energies and biofuels , and have agreed to ambitious but non - binding energy efficiency and carbon emission reduction targets for the year 2020 .

in addition , member states are considering potentially significant reforms to further liberalize energy markets .

nonetheless , most observers expect member states to continue to retain significant national control over national energy markets and external relations with energy - producing countries .

eu heads of state are set to discuss specific policy proposals in these areas at their spring 2008 summit .

europe's renewed interest in energy security has been influenced by both internal and external factors .

internally , steadily rising energy prices , declining european energy production and a fragmented internal energy market have contributed to anxieties over europe's ability to meet future energy demand .

the strain on global demand exerted by the emerging economies of countries such as china and india , persistent instability in energy producing regions , the threat of terrorist strikes against energy infrastructure , and russia's apparent willingness to use its energy power for political ends , are all raising concerns in europe over how to address external influences that could affect future energy requirements .

recent calls for eu - wide energy coordination have been driven by rising european concern about the effects of energy production and consumption on global climate change .

to this end , eu member states' recent energy policy decisions center largely on promoting energy efficiency , developing renewable energy and clean fuel sources , and reducing overall greenhouse gas emissions .

as uncertainties surrounding global energy supply and demand persist , issues pertaining to u.s. , european , and global energy security are may gain importance in the second session of the 110 th congress .

members of both parties have introduced legislation aimed at increasing energy independence and energy security and reducing carbon emissions .

several of these proposals envision carbon trading schemes similar to those in use in europe .

in several hearings during the first session of the 110 th congress , members of congress voiced concern about europe's dependence on russian energy resources , and the potential for russian manipulation of european energy markets .

to this end , senator richard lugar has raised the possibility of a more proactive role for nato in guaranteeing energy security for alliance members .

concern over europe's dependence on russian energy resources has corresponded with growing public calls for eu - wide action on climate change .

european leaders have responded by renewing efforts to establish a more cohesive european energy policy .

during their march 2007 summit , eu heads of state adopted a series of european commission proposals that they expect will form the foundation of an "energy policy for europe. .

the adopted measures are among a larger group of recommendations the commission laid out in a march 2006 "green paper" and more detailed action plans unveiled in january 2007 and 2008 .

the commission proposals focus on three broad interconnected goals: increasing european - wide energy security ; enhancing sustainability ; and fostering competition in europe's internal energy market .

commission officials place particular emphasis on the links between energy security , energy efficiency , and an eu - wide reduction in carbon emissions .

in what some consider a reflection both of increasing public pressure to address global climate change and continued member state reluctance to cede national economic and foreign policy making authority , the eu's proposed energy policy focuses largely on enhancing sustainability .

member states have committed in principle to take some steps toward further liberalizing the eu - wide energy market and have broadly endorsed increased foreign policy coordination on securing energy supplies .

however , the eu's most far - reaching commitments focus on increasing energy efficiency , decreasing greenhouse gas emissions , and promoting the use of renewable energy and alternative fuels and associated technologies .

specifically , eu member states have committed to reducing total eu - wide carbon emissions by 20% compared with 1990 levels by 2020 .

they have also pledged to seek international agreement on a 30% reduction target by 2020 in a post - kyoto protocol international carbon emissions reduction treaty .

in addition , the eu seeks a 20% increase in europe - wide energy efficiency by 2020 and has mandated that 20% of all eu energy consumption come from renewable sources and 10% of transport fuel from biofuels by 2020 .

the commission hopes that eu heads of state will agree on proposed country - specific targets to achieve their goals during the spring of 2008 .

european commission president jose manuel barroso estimates that achieving these targets could cost or up to $87.7 billion , or 0.5% of eu member states' combined annual gdp .

however , he has argued that this approximately $4.50 ( 3 euros ) per week per european citizen represents far less than the cost of inaction .

according to a march 2007 study by the global consulting firm mckinsey and company , eu member states will need to invest approximately $1.5 trillion ( 1.1 trillion euros ) in new technologies over the next 14 years in order to achieve their targets .

in preparation for the new push toward alternative and renewable energy sources , the european investment bank has announced plans to earmark slightly over $1 billion ( 800 million euros ) for loans for renewable energy projects from 2007-2010 .

in addition , the commission envisions a 50% increase in eu - spending on carbon technology over the next seven years .

although the eu approach appears to be focused largely on developing new and alternative technologies , the mckinsey study suggests it may be more cost efficient for the eu to focus more of its efforts on reducing energy use than on developing and promoting alternative and renewable energy sources .

the russia - ukraine and russia - belarus oil and gas crises have also ignited calls from the european commission and several eu member states to increase foreign policy coordination to secure and diversify energy supply .

to this end , eu member states have agreed to begin cooperating to form an external policy centered on expanding political partnerships with , and increasing pipeline and energy infrastructure investment in , producer and transit countries .

european states have specifically singled out central asia and the caspian and black sea areas as focal points for such activities .

in addition , the eu has called for the formation of a european energy dialogue with african countries of strategic importance .

the eu's flagship project in the central asia and the caspian region is the nabucco gas pipeline .

the proposed pipeline , which is backed by a promise of $7 billion ( 5 billion euros ) in european commission funding , would bring central asian and caspian gas to europe , without passing through russia .

however , as discussed below , the potential construction start - date has been pushed back several years , and some observers question the project's viability .

with regard to russia , some member states hope to institutionalize a common commitment to market principles as outlined in the energy charter treaty through an eu - russia energy dialogue and in a new eu - russia partnership and cooperation agreement .

however , bilateral energy agreements between some member states , notably germany , italy , and bulgaria , and russian firms , illuminate continued disagreement within the eu on how best to deal with moscow .

in the face of such discord , the european commission is seeking to strengthen multilateral mechanisms , including the energy charter , to better coordinate global energy policy among consumer , transit , and producer nations .

many observers consider the european commission's call to increase competition within and among traditionally protected european energy markets to be its most controversial .

the commission has advanced proposals to reduce the power of state - owned energy companies by forcing them to split up ownership of generation and distribution businesses .

in the face of opposition from countries such as germany , france , and spain , the commission could seek backing for a compromise proposal that would allow national energy industries to continue to operate both generation and distribution facilities , but would subject them to oversight from an independent european regulatory body .

european leaders are expected to agree on a solution during the first half of 2008 .

although european leaders increasingly pay lip - service to the need for enhanced energy cooperation , the success of an eu energy strategy will likely depend on the ability of member states to overcome differences in addressing three fundamental challenges .

first , how to develop strong partnerships with energy producing and transit regions ; second , how to use and further develop indigenous and alternative energy sources while seeking to curb overall consumption ; and third , how to establish an internal system to provide dependable and secure energy supplies to all of europe .

over the past 55 years , relations between the united states and the eu have steadily broadened and deepened so that the two are inextricably linked .

nowhere has transatlantic integration manifested itself more than in the economic sphere .

the u.s - eu economic partnership has been described by many as the single most important influence on global economic growth , prosperity and trade .

within the deepening transatlantic economic relationship , energy security policy is becoming a higher priority for both the united states and the eu .

together , the united states and the european union represent the world's largest energy market .

the united states and the eu produce approximately 23% of the world's energy but combine for almost 40% of global energy consumption .

combined , the united states and the eu account for almost 40% of the world's total carbon emissions .

at the 2006 and 2007 u.s. - eu summits , the parties agreed to increase cooperation on energy security , climate change , and sustainable development issues .

three institutional mechanisms to facilitate this cooperation were established: an annual strategic review of u.s. - eu energy cooperation ; a u.s. - eu high level dialogue on climate change , clean energy and sustainable development ; and a u.s. - eu energy ceo forum .

none of these forums has convened more than twice , however , and at the april 2007 u.s. - eu summit in washington , d.c. , the united states administration reportedly rejected european calls for a commitment to pursue binding international global emissions and energy efficiency targets .

specifically , european officials have urged u.s. support for an international treaty regulating greenhouse gas emissions after 2012 , when the u.n. kyoto protocol is set to expire , and for an international market - based carbon emissions credit trading system .

european officials appear encouraged by what they perceive as an increasing u.s. willingness to acknowledge climate change as a problem with serious global ramifications , and to link energy and climate change policy .

however , they are reportedly frustrated by u.s. reluctance to commit to binding international emissions and energy efficiency targets .

the united states is not party to the kyoto protocol , and the administration reportedly views global regulation to address climate change skeptically ; instead , u.s. officials advocate transatlantic and international cooperation to develop alternative and renewable energy sources and liberalize international energy markets .

to this end , the united states and eu used their 2007 summit to launch a series of initiatives jointly promoting technological advances in clean coal and carbon capture and storage , biofuels , energy efficiency , and methane recovery .

u.s. officials argue that such technological innovation is proving more effective in reducing emissions than global regulation and that such regulation may actually impede the economic growth necessary to sustain further technological advances .

to support their claims , administration officials point out that , despite eu participation in the kyoto protocol , carbon dioxide emissions increased at a faster rate in the eu than in the united states from 2000-2004 .

during the same period , they add , u.s. economic growth outpaced economic growth in the eu .

just as eu member states have expressed concern regarding a perceived u.s. reluctance to link transatlantic energy security to pursuit of a global climate change treaty , u.s. administration officials and analysts point to a potential long - term threat to transatlantic relations arising from european dependence on russian energy and gazprom's growing influence in large segments of europe's energy infrastructure .

to this end , the administration has been supportive of efforts to build pipelines and develop other transportation routes from central asia and the caspian region to europe that bypass russia .

in addition , u.s. critics of eu policy toward russia argue that the eu should strengthen its resolve in requiring russia to ratify the energy charter treaty and to accept standard open market business practices , competition , and foreign investment in its energy sector .

some europeans , and particularly germans , on the other hand , appear reluctant to take concerted action toward russia that may be viewed as antagonizing a country they view as an essential strategic partner on a variety of important issues beyond energy .

lastly , transatlantic discussion of energy supply security also includes energy crisis management and infrastructure protection .

in this regard , some have called for nato involvement in energy security issues , including in securing supply sources , distribution routes , and storage facilities .

in 2006 , poland circulated a proposal for a so - called "energy nato," calling on an increased role for nato in guaranteeing the protection of member state energy supplies .

in a similar vein , in an address at nato's november 2006 summit in riga , latvia , senator lugar proposed the extension of nato's collective defense clause , article 5 , to cases where a member state's energy security is threatened .

other eu member states , notably germany and france , have greeted such proposals skeptically , preferring to advocate an enhanced eu role in energy security matters .

however , still others assert that nato's role in energy security could be complementary to the eu's effort to strengthen market forces and interdependence in the international energy sector by offering assistance for the protection of pipelines or sea lanes during times of political unrest or conflict .

nato partnership for peace countries , such as kazakhstan and turkmenistan , which are important energy producers are seeking ways to associate themselves more closely with nato , in part to diminish russian influence and in part to develop reliable partners in an unstable region .

for some , nato has the ability to help secure the energy infrastructure of such countries .

