the international community has concluded a number of arms control agreements , conventions , and arrangements that affect non - nuclear weapons .

two of these , the conventional armed forces in europe treaty ( cfe ) and the open skies treaty , were a part of the late - cold war effort to enhance stability and predictability in europe .

others seek to control the spread of technologies that might contribute to developing conventional or unconventional weapons programs .

finally , several seek to ban whole classes of weapons through international conventions .

in late 1990 , 22 members of nato and the warsaw pact signed the conventional armed forces in europe ( cfe ) treaty , agreeing to limit nato and warsaw pact non - nuclear forces in an area from the atlantic ocean to the ural mountains .

the cfe treaty did not anticipate the dissolution of the soviet union and the warsaw pact .

consequently , the participants signed the so - called "tashkent agreement" in may 1992 , allocating responsibility for the soviet union's treaty - limited items of equipment ( tles ) among azerbaijan , armenia , belarus , kazakhstan , moldova , russia , ukraine , and georgia .

it also established equipment ceilings for each nation and the implied responsibility for the destruction / transfer of equipment necessary to meet these national ceilings .

in 1999 , the cfe adaptation agreement was signed to further adjust to the dissolution of the warsaw pact and the expansion of nato .

as discussed below , this agreement has not entered into force pending its ratification by nato members , and russia has suspended its participation in the cfe treaty .

cfe placed alliance - wide , regional ( zonal ) , and national ceilings on specific major items of military equipment .

it sought to promote stability not only by reducing armaments , but also by reducing the possibility of surprise attack by preventing large concentrations of forces .

the cfe treaty also provides for ( 1 ) very detailed data exchanges on equipment , force structure , and training maneuvers ; ( 2 ) specific procedures for the destruction or redistribution of excess equipment ; and ( 3 ) verification of compliance through on - site inspections .

its implementation has resulted in an unprecedented reduction of conventional arms in europe , with over 50,000 ( tles ) removed or destroyed ; almost all agree it has achieved most of its initial objectives .

under the cfe treaty all equipment reductions needed to comply with overall , national , and zonal ceilings were to have been completed by november 1995 .

as this deadline approached , it was evident that russia would not meet those requirements , particularly in the so - called "flank zones," which include the leningrad military district in the north , and more importantly , the north caucasus military district in the south .

the outbreak of armed ethnic conflicts in and around the caucasus , most notably in chechnya , led russia to claim it needed to deploy equipment in excess of treaty limits in that zone .

russia placed this claim in the context of broader assertions that some cfe provisions reflected cold war assumptions and did not fairly address its new national security concerns .

further , it argued that economic hardship was making the movement of forces unaffordable in some cases .

to address these concerns , the cfe parties negotiated a flank agreement , in early 1996 .

this agreement removed several russian ( and one ukrainian ) administrative districts from the old "flank zone," thus permitting existing flank equipment ceilings to apply to a smaller area .

to provide some counterbalance to these adjustments , reporting requirements were enhanced , inspection rights in the zone increased , and district ceilings were placed on armored combat vehicles to prevent their concentration .

the 1996 cfe review conference opened negotiations to modify the treaty to account for the absence of the ussr and the warsaw pact , and the expansion of nato into the czech republic , poland , and hungary .

most cfe signatories did not want to completely renegotiate the treaty .

russia , however , sought broader revisions , and , ironically , it sought to maintain the alliance - wide equipment ceilings .

an alliance - wide cap on nato would presumably force adjustments of national holdings as the nato alliance expanded ; such adjustments probably would not favor new member nations close to russia's borders .

the cfe parties did not adopt russia's position and russia ultimately agreed to a largely nato - drafted document .

this agreement called for , among other things , lower equipment levels throughout the "atlantic to the urals" area ; enhanced verification procedures ; and the replacement of nato - warsaw pact "bloc to bloc" ceilings with national limits on all categories of tles .

it also stated that the flank agreement was to remain in effect .

the adaptation agreement reiterates that nato has "no plan , no intention , and no reason" to deploy nuclear weapons on new members' territory ; and seeks to improve new members' defensive capabilities through interoperability and capability for reinforcement , rather than by stationing additional combat forces on new members' territory .

russia's most serious focus has been , however , on nato enlargement and how cfe could adapt to mitigate what many russians see as an encroaching threat .

russia has called for the new members of nato , particularly the baltic states of latvia , lithuania , and estonia , to become cfe state parties .

these countries have indicated a willingness to join , however , they cannot do so until the adaptation agreement is ratified and the new cfe regime comes into force .

at the istanbul summit in 1999 , where the adaptation agreement was concluded , russia undertook the so - called istanbul commitments to remove its troops from both the republic of georgia and the "breakaway" province of transdniestra in moldova .

though not part of the cfe adaptation agreement document , nato members considered russian fulfillment of these commitments a prerequisite for the ratification of the agreement .

consequently , of the cfe signatories only russia , belarus , ukraine , and kazakhstan ratified the adapted treaty .

in past compliance reports , the state department asserted that russian equipment holdings "continue to exceed most of the legally binding limits for both the original and revised flank zones. .

it also cited russia for relatively minor reporting violations and for its failure to complete withdrawals of its troops from georgia and moldova .

it also cited armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , and ukraine for noncompliance .

armenia and azerbaijan , engaged in a conflict over the nagorno - karabakh territory , have not completed equipment reductions ; nor provided complete equipment declarations ; nor provided timely notification of new equipment acquisition .

belarus was also cited for questionable equipment declarations and its refusal to allow inspectors access to an equipment storage site .

the state department deems ukraine to have substantially complied with cfe requirements , but notes that it retained several hundred equipment items in excess of treaty limits .

the state department has raised significant issues with russia's compliance , particularly in the years since russia suspended its participation in the treaty .

on april 26 , 2007 , russian president putin announced a "moratorium" on russian cfe compliance , pointing to , among other things , the nato nations' not having ratified the treaty as adapted .

subsequently , in statements to the press and diplomatic conferences , russian officials elucidated the russian position and its concerns .

among the major points are the following: during its cfe "moratorium" russia will not allow cfe inspections nor will it report on its military movements .

the istanbul commitments regarding troop withdrawals in georgia and moldova are not an integral part of the cfe adaptation agreement document , and consequently not legally binding and should not stand in the way of nato members' ratification of the agreement .

the baltic states and slovakia are not bound by the cfe and their nato membership , coupled with the new u.s. basing agreements with poland , bulgaria , and romania , constitute an unacceptable encroachment on russian national security .

if the nato nations do not ratify the cfe adaptation agreement within a year , russia will consider complete withdrawal from the treaty .

russian officials , military leaders , and political commentators increasingly referred to the cfe treaty as a "cold war agreement," which no longer reflected the realities of the european security environment .

russian military officials' consultations at nato headquarters on may 10 brought no softening of the russian position .

a russian request to the organization for security and cooperation in europe for a special conference of cfe signatories in june was granted .

the conference failed to resolve any of the outstanding issues , and the state parties were unable to find sufficient common ground to issue a final joint statement .

the european and u.s. governments reacted with some surprise at the harshness of russian statements , and urged russia to address its concerns within the consultative framework of the treaty rather than pursue a withdrawal .

however , then - secretary of state rice and secretary of defense gates , in conversations with president putin and russian foreign minister lavrov , and the assistant secretary of state for european and eurasian affairs , in testimony before the u.s. commission on security and cooperation in europe , reiterated the u.s. position that ratification of the cfe adaptation agreement still remained contingent upon russia fulfilling its commitment to withdraw its military forces from georgia and moldova .

on november 30 , 2007 , president putin signed legislation from the duma that suspended russian compliance with cfe , effective december 12 , 2007 .

this action came during the madrid osce summit meeting and evoked an expression of regret on the part of nato officials , who noted that russia's military posture would be under discussion at the nato foreign ministers meeting in december .

under secretary of state nicholas burns characterized the russian action as a "mistake" and urged russia to negotiate its concerns within the cfe framework .

russian officials emphasized that this action was not a withdrawal from the treaty , and that they were willing to participate in further discussions if they perceived a greater willingness on the part of the nato allies to address their concerns .

however , in recent years , it has become clear that russia does not intend to return to the cfe treaty ; it would prefer the negotiation of a new agreement that reflected the new security environment in europe .

moreover , in march 2015 , russia suspended its participation in the joint consultative group of the cfe treaty , leaving little room for continued dialogue or cooperation .

russian officials indicated , in 2007 , that russia did not plan to conduct any significant redeployment of forces outside the treaty limits .

however , in august 2008 , russia sent military forces into georgia without the consent of the georgian government and recognized two provinces of georgia , abkhazia and south ossetia , as independent states .

u.s. officials have noted that these steps are inconsistent with russia's obligation under the cfe treaty "to refrain ... from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state. .

in addition , because russia has suspended its participation in the treaty , it has not allowed any on - site inspections and has not provided any data mandated by the treaty .

some observers , and russian spokesmen , portrayed the russian moves regarding cfe as an asymmetrical response to the bush administration's proposed deployment of a u.s. ground - based missile defense system in poland and the czech republic .

others , including chief of the russian general staff baluyevsky , discounted a specific linkage , seeing the missile defense controversy as merely one element of a more broadly ranged dissatisfaction with changes in the european security environment , which , from the russian perspective , have favored the nato allies .

in november 2011 , the united states announced that it would stop implementing its data exchange obligations under the cfe treaty with respect to russia .

the united states would continue to share data with other treaty partners , and would not exceed the numerical limits on conventional armaments and equipment established by the treaty .

but it would withhold data from russia because russia has refused to accept inspections and ceased to provide information to other cfe treaty parties since its 2007 decision .

the u.s. state department , in its statement on the treaty , indicated that the united states remained committed to revitalizing conventional arms control in europe .

it also indicated that , in order to increase transparency and promote stability in the region , the united states would voluntarily inform russia of any significant change in the u.s. force posture in europe .

open skies was originally proposed by president eisenhower in 1955 .

in the years before satellites began to collect intelligence data , aerial overflights were seen as a way to gain information needed for both intelligence and confidence - building purposes .

the soviet union rejected president eisenhower's proposal because it considered the overflights equal to espionage .

president george h. w. bush revived the open skies proposal in may 1989 .

by this time , both the united states and soviet union employed satellites and remote sensors for intelligence collection , so aircraft overflights would add little for that objective .

but , at the time when europe was emerging from the east - west divide of the cold war , the united states supported increased transparency throughout europe as a way to reduce the chances of military confrontation and to build confidence among the participants .

on march 24 , 1992 , the united states , canada , and 22 european nations signed the treaty on open skies .

the u.s. senate gave its advice and consent to the ratification of the open skies treaty in august 1993 , but russia and belarus delayed their ratification until may 2001 .

the treaty entered into force on january 1 , 2002 .

it currently has 34 participating member states that have conducted more than 1,000 observation flights since the treaty entered into force .

under the open skies treaty , the parties agreed to permit unarmed aircraft to conduct observation flights over their territories .

although the flights often focus on military activities , the information they gather was not intended to be used to verify compliance with limits in other arms control agreements .

instead , open skies is designed as a confidence - building measure , to promote openness and enhance mutual understanding about military activities .

it was designed to allow all nations , including those without access to satellites , to collect information on military forces and activities of other parties to the treaty and to gain an improved understanding of military activities in other nations .

overflights may provide early signs of efforts to build up military forces or , conversely , assurances that an adversary or neighbor is not preparing its military for a possible conflict .

in addition , in recent years , it has helped nations in europe observe and monitor russian forces in areas near its border with ukraine , where russian forces are supporting an insurgency .

the parties to the open skies treaty have agreed to make all of their territory accessible to overflights by unarmed fixed wing observation aircraft .

they can restrict flights over areas , such as nuclear power plants , where safety is a concern , but they cannot impede or prohibit flights over any area , including military installations that are considered secret or otherwise off - limits .

in most cases , the nation conducting the observation flight will provide the aircraft and sensors for the flight .

however , russia insisted that the treaty permit the observed country to provide the aircraft if it chose to do so .

nations can also team up to conduct overflights to share the costs of the effort or use aircraft and sensor suites provided by other nations .

each nation is assigned a quota of overflights that it can conduct and must be willing to receive each year .

the quota is determined , generally , by the size of the nation's territory .

for the united states , this quota is equal to 42 observation flights per year .

the treaty permits the nations to use several types of sensors — including photographic cameras , infrared cameras , and synthetic aperture radars — during their observation flights .

the permitted equipment allows the nations to collect basic information on military forces and activities , but it is not intended to provide them with detailed technical intelligence .

for example , the resolution on the sensors would allow the nations to identify vehicles and distinguish between tanks and trucks , but probably will not allow them to tell one type of tank from another .

each observation flight produces two sets of data — one for the observing nation and one for the observed nation .

this allows the nation under observation to know what information was collected during the flight .

other parties to the treaty can purchase copies of the data , so all parties can share in the information collected during all flights .

each nation is responsible for its own analysis of the data .

the participants to the treaty have revisited the agreement's list of permitted sensors as technology has moved forward .

for example , the permitted cameras use film that is no longer available , and parts that are no longer supported by most manufacturers , leading several countries to pursue a transition to digital cameras .

russia , in particular , has petitioned the open skies consultative commission to use digital cameras in flights over the united states .

russia has also asked the open skies consultative commission for permission to use high - powered digital cameras on flights over the united states .

the capabilities of these cameras are within the scope permitted by the treaty and they use commercially available , unclassified technology .

russia already uses them on flights over europe .

however , some officials in the pentagon and u.s. intelligence community have expressed concern about the quality of data that russia may collect with these cameras , noting that the information could help russia fill in gaps in its satellite surveillance capabilities .

although several of the participating nations conducted practice missions in the years before the treaty entered into force , the first official overflight mission occurred in 2002 .

the parties conduct approximately 100 observation flights each year .

in recent years , the united states has received 4-9 observation flights from russia and has conducted 14-16 flights over russia each year , although there were no flights in 2018 .

the united states also , occasionally , uses its open skies aircraft to monitor natural disasters , such as the recent earthquake in haiti .

it has also joined with ukraine and other participants to conduct flights over ukraine that can monitor russian military forces across the border in russia .

in recent years , the united states has raised concerns about russia's compliance with the open skies treaty .

for example , according to the u.s. state department's annual report on compliance with arms control agreements , russia has refused access for open skies observation over chechnya and nearby areas of southwestern russia .

it has also limited access to a region over moscow , and along the border of russia with the georgian regions of south ossetia and abkhazia .

moreover , according to the state department , russia has failed to provide priority flight clearance for open skies flights on a few occasions .

the united states has responded to limitations imposed by russia by restricting russian flights over the united states .

in late 2017 , it limited the length of flights over hawaii and removed access to two u.s. air force bases the russians used to overnight during their missions over the united states .

in 2018 , the united states also blocked approval of russia's use of new cameras on its open skies aircraft , although this decision was quickly reversed and flights have resumed in 2019 .

the united states , canada , france , germany , italy , japan , and the united kingdom established the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) on april 16 , 1987 .

designed to slow the proliferation of ballistic and cruise missiles , rockets , and unmanned air vehicles ( uav ) capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction , the mtcr is an informal , voluntary arrangement in which participants agree to adhere to common export policy guidelines applied to an "annex" that lists controlled items .

partner - countries adopt the guidelines as national policy and are responsible for restraining their own missile - related transfers .

in addition , partners regularly exchange information on relevant export licensing issues , including denials of technology transfers .

the mtcr has neither an independent means to verify whether states are adhering to its guidelines nor a mechanism to penalize states if they violate them .

the mtcr is based on the premise that foreign acquisition or development of delivery systems can be delayed and made more difficult and expensive if major producers restrict exports .

analysts credit the mtcr with slowing missile development in brazil and india , blocking a cooperative missile program of argentina , egypt , and iraq , and eliminating missile programs in south africa and hungary .

moreover , partner countries have tightened their export control laws and procedures , and several have taken legal action against alleged missile - technology smugglers .

on the other hand , some analysts note that the mtcr does not regulate countries' acquisition or production of missiles and cannot prevent nonpartners from exporting missiles and technology .

it has also been difficult to restrain exports of ballistic and cruise missile technology from some partners — russia has exported technology to iran and great britain has done so to the united arab emirates .

in addition , many analysts have argued that advances in missile - related technology will challenge the mtcr's future ability to check missile proliferation .

analysts and experts in the international community have also discussed the possibility that the "supply side" approach of the mtcr has outlived its usefulness and that a "demand side" approach to proliferation , on a regional or global basis , might prove more effective .

since 1987 , the number of mtcr partners has grown from 7 to 35 , with india joining the regime in 2016 .

several nonpartners , including china , israel , romania , slovakia , and india , have said they will restrict their transfers of missile equipment and technology according to the mtcr .

membership in the regime is decided by consensus .

according to former mtcr chairman per fischer , "[p]otential members are reviewed on a case - by case basis , and decisions regarding applications are based on the effectiveness of a state's export controls … its potential contribution to the regime and its proliferation record. .

the united states supports new requests for membership to the regime only if the country in question agrees not to develop or acquire missiles ( excluding space launch vehicles ) that exceed mtcr guidelines .

the mtcr guidelines call on each partner country to exercise restraint when considering transfers of equipment or technology , as well as "intangible" transfers , that would provide , or help a recipient country build , a missile capable of delivering a 500 kilogram ( 1,100 pound ) warhead to a range of 300 kilometers ( 186 miles ) or more .

the 500 kilogram weight threshold was intended to limit transfers of missiles that could carry a relatively crude nuclear warhead .

a 1993 addition to the guidelines calls for particular restraint in the export of any missiles or related technology if the nation controlling the export judges that the missiles are intended to be used for the delivery of weapons of mass destruction ( nuclear , chemical , or biological ) .

thus some missiles with warheads weighing less than 500 kilograms also fall under mtcr guidelines .

from time to time , regime partners update the mtcr guidelines and annex .

the mtcr annex contains two categories of controlled items .

category i items are the most sensitive .

there is "a strong presumption to deny such transfers," according to the mtcr guidelines .

regime partners have greater flexibility in exports of category ii items .

category i items include complete rocket systems ( including ballistic missiles , space launch vehicles , and sounding rockets ) , uav systems ( including cruise missiles systems , target and reconnaissance drones ) , production facilities for such systems , and major subsystems ( including rocket stages , reentry vehicles , rocket engines , guidance systems , and warhead mechanisms ) .

transfers of category i production facilities are not to be authorized .

category ii items are other less sensitive and dual - use missile - related components that could be used to develop a category i system , and complete missiles and major subsystems of missiles capable of delivering a payload of any size to a range of 300 km .

the hague code of conduct against ballistic missile proliferation ( hcoc ) was inaugurated on november 25 , 2002 .

the hcoc is not a treaty but instead a set of "fundamental behavioral norms and a framework for cooperation to address missile proliferation. .

it focuses on the possession of ballistic missiles , as a complement to the supply - side - oriented mtcr .

subscribing states have held regular conferences since the code came into effect .

the code intends to "prevent and curb the proliferation of ballistic missile systems capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction. .

it calls on subscribing states "to exercise maximum possible restraint in the development , testing and deployment of ballistic missiles capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction [wmd] , including , where possible , to reduce national holdings of such missiles. .

subscribing states also agree not to assist ballistic missile programs in countries suspected of developing wmd .

the hcoc also calls for subscribing states to "exercise the necessary vigilance" in assisting other countries' space - launch programs , which could serve as covers for ballistic missile programs .

additionally , subscribing states "resolve to implement" several transparency measures , such as producing annual declarations that provide outlines of their ballistic missile policies , as well as "information on the number and generic class" of such missiles launched during the preceding year .

the code also calls on subscribing states to provide similar annual declarations regarding their "expendable space launch vehicle" programs .

furthermore , the hcoc calls on states to "exchange pre - launch notifications on their ballistic missile and space launch vehicle launches and test flights. .

signatories are required to provide such notifications to austria , which serves as the immediate central contact and executive secretariat for the hcoc .

the united states and russia each provide such notifications and the annual declarations described above .

in july 1996 , 33 nations approved the wassenaar arrangement ( formally titled the wassenaar arrangement on export controls for conventional arms and dual - use goods and technologies ) on export controls for conventional arms and dual - use goods and technologies .

this agreement replaces the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls ( cocom ) — the cold war organization that controlled sensitive exports of technologies to communist nations .

according to its guidelines and procedures , the wassenaar arrangement is not formally targeted at "any state or group of states. .

but it is "intended to enhance co - operation to prevent the acquisition of armaments and sensitive dual - use items for military end - uses , if the situation in a region or the behaviour of a state is , or becomes , a cause for serious concern. .

the arrangement is designed "to contribute to regional and international security and stability , by promoting transparency and greater responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and dual - use goods and technologies , thus preventing destabilizing accumulations. .

member decisions are made by consensus .

this group has a broader membership but smaller lists of controlled goods than did cocom .

its control regime is also less rigorous .

under wassenaar , each national government regulates its own exports , whereas under cocom , any member could disapprove any other members' export by of a controlled item to a proscribed destination .

there is also no mechanism to punish a participating state for violating wassenaar guidelines .

the arrangement's guidelines specify that several factors must be considered when deciding on a potential new member's eligibility .

these include whether the state has adopted the arrangement's control lists "as a reference in its national export controls," the government's "adherence to fully effective export controls," and whether the state adheres to several other multilateral agreements .

participating states agree to control exports and retransfers of items on a munitions list and a list of dual - use goods and technologies .

the decision to allow or deny transfer of an item is the sole responsibility of each participating state .

the control lists are updated frequently .

twice a year participating states report all transfers or licenses issued for sensitive dual - use goods or technology and all deliveries of items on the munitions list .

the data exchange identifies the supplier , recipient , and items transferred .

participating states also report denials of licenses to transfer items on the dual - use list to nonmember states .

the arrangement does not prohibit a participating country from making an export that has been denied by another participant ( this practice is called "undercutting" ) .

but participants are required to report soon after they approve a license for an export of dual - use goods that are essentially identical to those that have been denied by another participant during the previous three years .

during plenary and working group discussions , participating states voluntarily share information on potential threats to peace and stability and examine dangerous acquisition trends .

the participants review the scope of reporting and coordinating national control policies and develop further guidelines and procedures .

twice a year , the group reviews the munitions list with a view to extending information and notifications .

the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) bans the development , production , transfer , stockpiling , and use of chemical and toxin weapons , mandates the destruction of all chemical weapons production facilities , and seeks to control the production and international transfer of the key chemical components of these weapons .

negotiations began in 1968 , but made little progress for many years .

verification issues , in particular , stalled the talks until the soviet union accepted challenge inspections .

in september 1992 , the conference on disarmament's 40 member - nations agreed on the final draft for the convention , and it opened for signature in january 1993 .

as of november 30 , 2015 , 192 nations were party to the treaty , which entered into force on april 29 , 1997 .

israel has signed but not ratified the convention .

egypt , north korea , and south sudan have not signed the cwc .

under the convention , states - parties provide declarations , which detail chemical weapons - related activities or materials and relevant industrial activities , to the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( opcw ) .

the opcw inspects and monitors states - parties' facilities and activities that are relevant to the convention .

the u.s. senate held hearings and debated the cwc for more than four years before consenting to its ratification on april 24 , 1997 .

congress passed the cwc implementing legislation , as a part of the fy1999 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

105-277 ) , in late october 1998 .

this legislation provides the statutory authority for u.s. domestic compliance with the convention's provisions .

the legislation also provides detailed procedures to be used for on - site inspections by the opcw , including limitations on access and search warrant procedures , should they be required .

parties to the convention have agreed to cease all offensive chemical weapons research and production and close all relevant facilities .

they agreed to declare all chemical weapons stockpiles , allow an inventory by international inspectors , and seal their stocks .

they must also destroy their weapons within 10 years , unless the opcw approves an extension .

they must also destroy all chemical weapons production facilities within 10 years .

in "exceptional cases of compelling need," the opcw may approve the conversion of these facilities to peaceful purposes .

the cwc contains a complex verification regime , with different obligations applying to different types of chemical facilities .

the convention establishes three schedules of chemicals , grouped by relevance to chemical weapons production and extent of legitimate peaceful uses .

some facilities are subject to systematic on - site verification ; others are subject to periodic verification inspections .

facilities for a third class of chemicals are subject to random or "ad hoc" inspections .

signatories may also request challenge inspections at facilities suspected to be in violation of the convention .

the opcw will carry out these inspections on short notice .

inspected nations will have the right to negotiate the extent of inspectors' access to any facility , but must make every reasonable effort to confirm compliance .

according to the opcw , all of the member - states' declared chemical weapons production facilities have been inactivated and , as of march 13 , 2018 , approximately 96% of declared chemical weapons agent stockpiles had been destroyed .

this amount does not include the chemical stockpiles declared by syria ( see below ) .

six countries declared possession of chemical weapons , but none destroyed their stocks by the original april 29 , 2007 , deadline .

in july 2007 , albania became the first country to have destroyed its declared chemical weapons .

south korea became the second on july 10 , 2008 .

india became the third on march 16 , 2009 .

five other states — iraq , libya , russia , syria , and the united states — have declared possession of such weapons .

libya joined the cwc in january 2004 .

at that time , libya declared nearly 25 metric tonnes of bulk sulfur mustard agent , several thousand unloaded aerial munitions designed for use with chemical warfare agents , and several chemical weapons production facilities .

the declared aerial munitions were destroyed in march 2004 .

production facilities were destroyed or converted under opcw supervision .

libya had said that it would destroy its category one weapons by december 31 , 2010 , and its category two weapons by december 31 , 2011 .

however , tripoli was given until may 15 , 2011 , to destroy all of its category one weapons .

as of october 31 , 2010 , libya had destroyed approximately 4% of its category one weapons and over 39% of its category two weapons .

these weapons , which included some undeclared stocks of mustard gas , remained on libyan territory after the 2011 revolution and fall of the muammar al qadhafi regime .

libya's permanent representative to the opcw stated march 11 , 2011 , that the country's "situation regarding the chemical weapons to be destroyed remains unchanged and under control. .

in january 2012 , opcw inspectors returned to libya to verify the status of libya's chemical weapons stockpiles .

in 2013 , libya completed the destruction of its stock of bulk mustard agent .

libya announced in january 2014 that it had completed destruction of the cw - filled munitions it had discovered and declared in 2011 and 2012 .

libya was to have destroyed its stocks of category 2 ( precursor ) chemicals by the end of 2016 , but stated in a february 2016 letter to the opcw director - general that "it is not realistic to expect that the destruction of these chemical weapons will be completed within the set time frame without an effective international assistance. .

libya had informed the opcw executive council in september 2015 that tripoli lacked the appropriate technology for destroying its remaining stockpile .

on february 24 , 2016 , the council requested the opcw director - general "to identify and evaluate the technical , operational , security , financial , and legal factors relevant to all the options for addressing the destruction of the remaining libyan chemical weapons , including the removal of some or all the chemicals from libya and destruction outside libya , and options for in - country destruction. .

the u.n. security council endorsed this in july ( unsc resolution 2298 [2016] ) .

in august 2016 , denmark led a maritime operation that removed all 500 metric tons of precursor chemicals from libya to a destruction facility in germany .

according to the opcw , canada , denmark , finland , france , germany , italy , malta , spain , united kingdom , and the united states contributed financial and technical assistance .

the opcw confirmed the complete destruction of all of libya's chemical weapons in january 2018 .

syria acceded to the cwc as part of a diplomatic effort in the fall of 2013 .

the united states threatened military action against syria in response to chemical weapons use against civilians in august 2013 .

the united states withdrew the threat , and syria agreed to join the cwc and declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons stocks and production facilities .

u.n. security council resolution 2118 ( 2013 ) mandated that syria give up all its chemical weapons under chapter vii provisions of the u.n. charter and created a mechanism for verifying this process , with a primary role for the opcw secretariat .

at the start of its civil war , syria had more than 1,000 metric tons of chemical warfare agents and precursor chemicals , including several hundred metric tons of the nerve agent sarin , several hundred metric tons of mustard agent in ready - to - use form , and several metric tons of the nerve agent vx .

a u.n. and opcw joint mission oversaw the removal and destruction of these chemical weapons agents from syria , and all category 1 and 2 declared chemicals were destroyed as of june 2014 .

destruction of chemical weapons facilities is still underway , and serious questions remain over whether syria has declared all of its chemical weapons stocks .

the opcw's declaration assessment team ( dat ) continues to investigate these outstanding issues through interviews and lab analysis of samples from site visits .

the state department's 2018 report assessing cwc compliance says that the united states cannot certify that syria is in compliance with the cwc , that syria has been using chemical weapons systematically for years , and that syria has not declared "all the elements of its chemical weapons program" and has retained some chemical weapons .

the syrian government continues to deny categorically that it has used chemical weapons or toxic chemicals , while accusing opposition forces of doing so .

the u.n. representatives of the united states , france , and the united kingdom continue to cite information they believe suggests syrian government complicity in conducting ongoing chemical attacks , particularly with chlorine .

expert teams affiliated with the joint u.n. mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the syrian arab republic ( jim ) and the opcw fact finding mission ( ffm ) in syria have investigated some of these allegations and have found evidence that in some cases confirms and in others suggests that chemical weapons ( such as sarin ) and / or toxic chemicals have been used in attacks .

the cwc conference of states - parties gave russia until december 31 , 2009 , to destroy 45% of its category one stockpiles and until april 29 , 2012 , to destroy the rest .

russia did not meet the 2012 deadline but stated that it planned to destroy its stockpiles by december 31 , 2020 .

in september 2017 , the opcw confirmed that the russian federation had totally destroyed its declared chemical weapons stockpile .

the opcw had verified the destruction of 39,967 metric tons of category one chemical weapons at seven facilities .

moscow had previously destroyed its category two and category three chemical weapons stockpiles .

under dod's cooperative threat reduction program , the united states and other partner countries provided russia with considerable financial assistance for chemical weapons destruction .

in congressionally mandated annual reports to congress , the state department has said it could not certify that the russian federation was in compliance with the cwc because its required declarations of stockpile and development and production facilities were incomplete .

in addition , the 2018 report said that due to "russia's march 4 , 2018 , use of a military - grade nerve agent to attack two individuals in the united kingdom , the united states certifies that the russian federation is in non - compliance with its obligations under the cwc. .

the united states has also encountered difficulties in destroying its category one chemical weapons stockpile and did not meet its 2007 deadline for doing so .

washington has already destroyed its category three stockpile and has declared no category two weapons .

in april 2006 , the united states submitted its formal request to the opcw chairman and director - general to extend the united states' final chemical weapons destruction deadline from april 2007 to april 29 , 2012 , the latest possible date allowed under the cwc .

however , ambassador eric javits , then - u.s .

permanent representative to the opcw , added that the united states did "not expect to be able to meet that deadline" because washington had encountered "delays and difficulties" in destroying its stockpile .

these delays have generally resulted from the need to meet state and federal environmental requirements and from both local and congressional concerns over the means of destruction .

the 2008 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

110-116 ) required the defense department to "complete work on the destruction" of the u.s. chemical weapons stockpile by the 2012 deadline "and in no circumstances later than december 31 , 2017. .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( p.l .

114-92 ) changed this deadline to december 31 , 2023 .

the opcw reported in april 2018 that the organization had verified the destruction of about 90.5% of the u.s. category one stockpile .

the united states projects that the colorado and kentucky facilities will destroy the remaining chemical agents stockpiles .

according to a 2017 defense department report , these stockpiles are to be destroyed by november 2019 and september 2023 , respectively .

iraq used chemical weapons during its 1980-1988 war with iran and against iraqi kurds in 1988 .

following the 1991 persian gulf war , the u.n. security council adopted resolution 687 on april 3 , 1991 .

this resolution was the first in a series of resolutions that required iraq to declare its programs for nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons , as well as missiles with ranges exceeding 150 kilometers , and to destroy the weapons and related materials under u.n. monitoring .

regarding chemical weapons , resolution 687 required iraq to "unconditionally accept the destruction , removal , or rendering harmless , under international supervision of ... [a]ll chemical and biological weapons and all stocks of agents and all related subsystems and components and all research , development , support and manufacturing facilities. .

the resolutions also required baghdad to accept an ongoing u.n. monitoring regime to prevent iraqi reconstitution of its prohibited weapons programs .

the u.n. secretary - general subsequently formed the united nations special commission ( unscom ) to verify iraq's compliance with the resolution .

iraq's chemical weapons generally met one of four fates: they were used during the iran - iraq war ; they were destroyed by iraq under unscom supervision ; they were secretly destroyed by iraq outside unscom supervision ; or they were destroyed by coalition forces during the 1991 persian gulf war .

although "a number of issues relating to iraq's chemical weapons programme remain unresolved," according to a 2006 u.n. report , the inspectors "were able to identify the major parameters of this programme , its scope and the results achieved. .

moreover , the "vast majority" of chemical agents and munitions which iraq possessed in 1991 were "declared by iraq , identified by the inspectors and destroyed under international supervision," according to the report .

iraq's legacy chemical weapons were "contained in two sealed bunkers" at an old iraqi chemical weapons production facility , according to a july 31 , 2012 , british ministry of defense statement .

these weapons were "left over after being rendered unusable by the un inspection teams," opcw director - general ambassador ahmet üzümcü said in a june 6 , 2013 , speech .

iraq acceded to the cwc in 2009 and worked with the ocpw and several countries to devise an appropriate disposal method for these weapons .

permanent representative of iraq mohamed alhakim stated in a june 30 , 2014 , letter to u.n. secretary – general ban ki - moon that iraq is currently "unable to fulfill its obligations to destroy chemical weapons" and will resume these "obligations as soon as the security situation has improved and control of the facility has been regained. .

iraq reiterated its "commitment to continue implementing the destruction plan for the remnants of the former regime's chemical programme , as early as possible," according to a march 17 , 2015 , statement .

"due to the ongoing security situation , no further action has been taken," üzümcü stated on november 30 , 2015 .

however , iraq began to destroy the weapons in 2017 , "once the on - going security situation had been addressed. .

the opcw confirmed in november 2017 and february 2018 that the four former chemical weapons production facilities in iraq were completely destroyed .

üzümcü stated in march 2018 that iraq had completed destroying its "chemical weapons remnants. .

on june 11 , 2014 , the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) invaded the al - muthanna chemical weapons facility .

the iraqi government has stated that "the relevant iraqi authorities saw to it that all sensitive equipment and instruments" at the site "were transferred to safe locations. .

iraqi armed forces regained control of the site on october 28 , 2014 .

an iraqi assessment "confirmed the integrity" of the bunkers' "walls and entries. .

however , isil has apparently been using chemical weapons in iraq .

the group "was likely responsible" for some attacks in iraq with mustard agent , state department spokesperson elizabeth trudeau told reporters on april 1 , 2016 .

director - general üzümcü stated on march 23 , 2016 , that the opcw has helped iraq confirm "the use of sulfur mustard in an attack in the kurdistan region of iraq. .

experts and government officials have argued that isil probably did not obtain chemical agents from iraqi stockpiles .

a state department report covering 2014 raised some additional compliance questions , but did not conclude that any other cwc state - party had a chemical weapons program in violation of the convention .

in 1969 , the nixon administration unilaterally renounced u.s. biological weapons ( bw ) .

offensive bw development and production ceased , and destruction of the u.s. bw stockpile began .

simultaneously , the united states pressed the soviet union to follow its example .

after some delay , agreement was reached , and the biological weapons convention ( bwc ) was signed in 1972 .

the united states , after lengthy senate consultations , ratified the convention in 1975 , the same year that the convention entered into force .

the bwc bans the development , production , stockpiling , and transfer of biological weapons , as well as biological agents and toxins .

it also bans "equipment or means of delivery designed to use such agents or toxins for hostile purposes or in armed conflict. .

in addition , the convention requires states - parties to destroy all relevant "agents , toxins , weapons , equipment and means of delivery. .

the bwc permits only defensive biological warfare research ( eg , vaccines , protective equipment ) and allows production and stockpiling of bw agents only in amounts justifiable for protective or peaceful purposes .

unlike the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , the bwc does not specify particular biological agents , but generically defines them as "microbial or other biological agents or toxins whatever their origin or method of production , of types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic or peaceful purposes. .

the convention does not contain any independent verification or enforcement mechanisms .

the fifth review conference of the bwc , which took place in november 2001 , ended in disarray , with the parties unable to agree upon a final declaration .

the primary deadlock was the issue of an adaptive protocol to the convention , intended to enhance its enforcement .

in july 2001 , after almost seven years of negotiations , the united states declared the 200-page protocol unacceptable as basis for further negotiation .

a bush administration review concluded that the draft protocol would not provide adequate security against covert violations , yet could endanger the security of u.s. biodefense programs and u.s. commercial proprietary information .

alone in its complete rejection of the draft protocol , the united states came under widespread international criticism , including from close allies , for "jeopardizing" the future of biological arms control .

in response , the administration put forward several proposals at the 2001 review conference , urging their adoption by bwc state parties at the national level .

these included the following: criminalization of bwc violations and expedited extradition procedures for violators .

united nations investigation of suspicious disease outbreaks or alleged bw use .

procedures for addressing bwc compliance concerns .

improved international disease control .

improved security over research on pathogenic organisms .

the review conference was unable to reach a compromise final declaration on future activities satisfactory to all state parties , and adjourned until november 2002 .

the united states has continued to oppose further negotiations on verification .

confronted with the u.s. position , the chairman of the 2002 review conference presented a minimal program emphasizing only annual meetings to discuss strengthening national laws and ways to respond to bw attacks .

these were endorsed by the united states and accepted by the conference .

the 6 th bwc review conference , held in december 2006 , could not reach consensus on a comprehensive set of guidelines for national implementation of the convention owing to differences between the united states and the nonaligned nations group over technology transfer control issues .

the assumption of u.s. opposition also precluded consideration of enhanced verification or enforcement provisions for the convention .

the conference , however , did establish a new program of work for annual meetings , which took place before the 7 th review conference in december 2011 .

the meetings included discussion and information exchanges on a variety of issues , including domestic enforcement of bwc provisions , pathogen security , and oversight of potentially dual - use research .

the united states required , however , that these sessions be prohibited from reaching binding decisions .

beginning in 2007 , the bwc states - parties have met annually .

the obama administration chose not to support revival of the negotiations on a bwc verification protocol , under secretary for arms control and international security ellen tauscher announced in a december 9 , 2009 , address to the bwc states - parties .

the administration has "determined that a legally binding protocol would not achieve meaningful verification or greater security," she explained , adding [t]he ease with which a biological weapons program could be disguised within legitimate activities and the rapid advances in biological research make it very difficult to detect violations .

we believe that a protocol would not be able to keep pace with the rapidly changing nature of the biological weapons threat .

instead , tauscher stated , the united states believes that "confidence in bwc compliance should be promoted by enhanced transparency about activities and pursuing compliance diplomacy to address concerns. .

pointing out that part of the november 2009 u.s. national strategy for countering biological threats is to "reinvigorate" the bwc , tauscher exhorted the convention's states - parties to join the united states in "increasing transparency , improving confidence building measures and engaging in more robust bilateral compliance discussions. .

she proposed such measures as increasing participation in the convention's confidence - building measures , as well as bilateral and multilateral cooperation in such areas as pathogen security and disease surveillance and response .

the 7 th review conference took place from december 5 to 22 , 2011 .

the conference participants decided to continue the intersessional process with some changes .

the annual meetings will address three standing agenda items: cooperation and assistance , review of relevant scientific and technological developments , and strengthening national implementation .

in addition , during the intersessional program , the states - parties were to discuss enabling fuller participation in bwc - related confidence - building measures and strengthening implementation of article vii of the convention .

after the most recent review conference , which took place from november 7 to 25 , 2016 , the conference participants decided that the states - parties are to meet annually .

the first meeting was to "seek to make progress on issues of substance and process for the period before the next review conference , with a view to reaching consensus on an intersessional process," according to the final conference document .

during that meeting , w hich took place from december 4 to 8 , 2017 , the participants decided that a group of experts meeting would also take place annually .

groups of experts have met annually in the past as part of the intersessional process .

the arms trade treaty ( att ) is a multilateral treaty of unlimited duration .

its stated objectives are to "[e]stablish the highest possible common international standards for regulating or improving the regulation of the international trade in conventional arms ..." and to "[p]revent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms and prevent their diversion. .

though various concepts similar to the att have been discussed in international circles for decades , a speech by the uk foreign secretary backing the concept in 2004 is widely credited as giving critical momentum to the movement by adding a major conventional arms exporter to it .

beginning in 2006 , the treaty was negotiated in the u.n. general assembly ( unga ) and specialized fora .

a unga vote in early april 2013 approved the treaty in its negotiated form .

the att opened for signature on june 3 , 2013 , and entered into force on december 24 , 2014 .

the united states participated in drafting the att and voted for it in the unga on april 2 , 2013 .

the united states signed the att on september 25 , 2013 , but has not ratified it .

because the united states already has strong export control laws in place , the att would likely require no significant changes to policy , regulations , or law .

the att regulates trade in conventional weapons between and among countries .

it does not affect sales or trade in weapons among private citizens within a country .

the treaty obligates states parties engaged in the international arms trade to establish national control systems to review , authorize , and document the import , export , brokerage , transit , and transshipment of conventional weapons , their parts , and ammunition .

the treaty also requires that states parties report on their treaty - specified transfers to other nations on an annual basis to the secretariat .

the scope of the weapons covered by the treaty includes the following , though states parties may voluntarily include other conventional weapons as well: battle tanks , armored combat vehicles , large - caliber artillery systems , combat aircraft , attack helicopters , warships , missiles and missile launchers , and small arms and light weapons .

the att also binds states parties to certain preexport review processes that take into account various criteria related to possible destabilizing effects on international security , terrorism , transnational crime , human rights , and other factors in determining whether or not a transfer should be approved .

a state party is specifically prohibited from approving a transfer to another nation that violates a united nations security council resolution adopted under chapter vii of the united nations charter , especially an arms embargo .

also explicitly prohibited is any transfer where a state party "has knowledge" when reviewing the proposed transfer that the treaty - specified arms , parts , or ammunition would be used in the "commission of genocide , crimes against humanity , grave breaches of the geneva conventions of 1949 , attacks directed against civilian objects or civilians protected as such , or other war crimes as defined by international agreements to which it is a party. .

parties to the treaty are obligated to take measures to prevent the illegal diversion of covered arms and ammunition , to mitigate risks of diversion occurring by cooperating with each other and exchanging information , and to "take appropriate measures" if a diversion is detected .

states parties are also encouraged to exchange relevant information about effectively addressing illicit diversion .

finally , the att encourages cooperation between states parties in the development of implementing legislation , institutional capacity building , and other pertinent areas .

according to the treaty text , the att's secretariat will have a "minimized structure" and shall receive , make available and distribute the reports as mandated by this treaty ; maintain and make available to states parties the list of national points of contact ; facilitate the matching of offers of and requests for assistance for treaty implementation and promote international cooperation as requested ; facilitate the work of the conference of states parties , including making arrangements and providing the necessary services for meetings under this treaty ; and perform other duties as decided by the conferences of states parties .

antipersonnel landmines ( apl ) are small , inexpensive weapons that kill or maim people upon contact .

abandoned , unmarked minefields can remain dangerous to both soldiers and civilians for an indefinite time .

mines were addressed in the convention on prohibitions or restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects , also known as the convention on conventional weapons ( ccw ) .

protocol ii of this contains rules for marking , registering , and removing minefields .

the ccw was concluded in 1980 and entered into force in 1993 .

the united states signed it in 1982 and the u.s. senate gave its advice and consent to ratification on march 24 , 1995 .

in 1992 , congress established a one year moratorium on u.s. exports of apl ( p.l .

102-484 ) and subsequently extended it for 15 more years ( see p.l .

107-115 ) .

h.r .

948 , introduced in the first session , 107 th congress , sought to make the ban permanent but was not brought to a vote .

many nations have followed the u.s. example and imposed their own moratoria .

in the fy1996 foreign operations appropriations act ( p.l .

104-107 ) , congress established a one - year ban on the use of apl by u.s. personnel to begin in 1999 , but the 105 th congress repealed the moratorium in the fy1999 defense authorization act ( p.l .

105-261 ) .

in 1996 , president clinton announced a policy that immediately discontinued u.s. use of "dumb" apl ( except in the dmz of korea ) ; supported negotiation of a worldwide ban on apl in the united nations ; and supported development of alternative technologies to perform landmine functions without endangering civilians and expanded mine detection and clearing technology efforts and assistance to mine - plagued countries .

this initiative temporarily retained the possible use of "smart" mines that render themselves harmless after a certain period of time , either through self - destruction , self - neutralization , or self - deactivation .

clinton subsequently set a goal of 2003 to replace even smart mines everywhere except korea , and of 2006 in korea .

in november 1996 , the united states introduced a resolution to the u.n. general assembly to pursue an international agreement that would ban use , stockpiling , production , and transfer of apl — there were 84 cosponsors .

some countries , such as canada , already abided by the intent of the proposed agreement and pushed for an early deadline to reach agreement .

others , however , were concerned that verifying such an agreement would be difficult , or that ap landmines still have a useful and legitimate role in their security planning .

landmine control , specifically a ban on exports , was briefly on the agenda of the conference on disarmament ( cd ) in geneva for 1999 .

during 2000 , however , that body could not agree on its program of work and the landmine issue was not addressed again .

during 1997 , the government of canada and a number of nongovernmental organizations , such as the international campaign to ban landmines , sponsored conferences to craft a treaty outside the cd process .

over 100 nations signed the ottawa treaty , formally titled the convention on the prohibition of the use , stockpiling , production and transfer of anti - personnel mines and on their destruction , which entered into force for its parties on march 1 , 1999 .

the clinton administration participated in the ottawa process , but declined to sign the treaty after failing to gain certain temporary exceptions to treaty language .

specifically , the united states wanted to continue to use apl in the defense of south korea until 2006 if necessary , and the ability to include smart apl ( or "devices" ) within antitank landmine munitions .

president clinton suggested that the united states would sign the ottawa treaty in 2006 if effective alternatives to apl were available .

the ottawa convention requires states parties to stop the production , use , and transfer of apl , as well as destroy all stockpiled apl , except for the "minimum number absolutely necessary" for training purposes , within four years .

as of april 8 , 2016 , 162 countries had become states - parties to the treaty .

belarus , greece , turkey , and ukraine all missed their stockpile destruction deadlines .

turkey completed destroying its apl in june 2011 .

poland must also destroy apl stockpiles .

states parties are also required to clear apl within 10 years of becoming party to the convention , but can request extensions of up to 10 years to complete this task .

thirty - one states - parties have not yet met their clearance obligations .

the convention does not include a verification body , but states parties may submit allegations of noncompliance , as well as requests for "clarification" from relevant governments , to the u.n. secretary - general .

a state - party may also request that a special meeting of other treaty members address the compliance matters .

states parties can initiate fact - finding missions and also request relevant governments to address compliance issues .

in february 2004 , the bush administration announced that , after 2010 , the united states would not use any type of persistent landmines , whether antipersonnel or — a new policy — antivehicle .

self - destruct and self - deactivating landmines will be used and will meet or exceed specifications of the amended mines protocol , ccw .

it also indicated that alternatives to persistent landmines would be developed that incorporate enhanced technologies .

this policy did not include a date to join the ottawa treaty .

richard kidd , then - director of the state department's office of weapons removal and abatement , said in a november 21 , 2007 , speech that the united states would not sign the ottawa convention .

if needed , u.s. forces will use nonpersistent mines .

various u.s. landmine systems were reportedly prepositioned in the middle east in preparation for the 2003 war in iraq , but were not used .

the obama administration conducted a review of u.s. policy regarding landmines .

on june 27 , 2014 , during the third review conference of the ottawa convention , the united states announced that it "will not produce or otherwise acquire any anti - personnel landmines in the future," including for the purpose of replacing expiring stockpiles .

moreover , the united states is "conducting a high fidelity modeling and simulation effort to ascertain how to mitigate the risks associated with the loss" of such mines .

on september 23 , 2014 , the obama administration stated that the united states is aligning its "apl policy outside the korean peninsula with the key requirements of the ottawa convention. .

specifically , the united states will "not use apl outside the korean peninsula ; not assist , encourage , or induce anyone outside the korean peninsula to engage in activity prohibited by the ottawa convention ; and undertake to destroy apl stockpiles not required for the defense of the republic of korea. .

puneet talwar , assistant secretary of state for the bureau of political - military affairs , stated on december 9 , 2014 , that the united states is "pursuing solutions that would be compliant with the convention and that would ultimately allow us to accede to the convention while ensuring that we are still able to meet our alliance commitments" to south korea .

tina kaidanow , principal deputy assistant secretary of state for political - military affairs , stated during a december 13 , 2017 , press conference that "[t]here is no current review" of u.s. policy regarding landmines , adding that "in most places we have hewn to those standards [of the ottawa convention] , with an exception , for an example , in the korean peninsula , where we cannot make that commitment. .

cluster munitions are weapons that open in midair and dispense smaller submunitions — anywhere from a few dozen to hundreds — into an area .

they can be delivered by aircraft or from ground systems such as artillery , rockets , and missiles .

cluster munitions are valued militarily because one munition can kill or destroy many targets within its impact area , and fewer weapons systems are needed to deliver fewer munitions to attack multiple targets .

they also permit a smaller force to engage a larger adversary and are considered by some an "economy of force" weapon .

on the other hand , critics note that cluster munitions disperse their large numbers of submunitions imprecisely over an extended area , that they frequently fail to detonate and are difficult to detect , and that the submunitions can remain explosive hazards for decades .

they can also produce high civilian casualties if they are fired into areas where soldiers and civilians are intermixed or if inaccurate cluster munitions land in populated areas .

a number of ccw members , led by norway , initiated negotiations in 2007 outside of the ccw to ban cluster munitions .

on may 30 , 2008 , they reached an agreement to ban cluster munitions .

the united states , russia , china , israel , egypt , india , and pakistan did not participate in the talks or sign the agreement .

during the signing conference in oslo on december 3-4 , 2008 , 94 states signed the convention and 4 of the signatories ratified the convention at the same time .

china , russia , and the united states abstained , but france , germany , and the united kingdom were among the 18 nato members to sign the convention .

the convention entered into force on august 1 , 2010 .

the convention on cluster munitions ( ccm ) , inter alia , bans the use of cluster munitions , as well as their development , production , acquisition , transfer , and stockpiling .

the convention does not prohibit cluster munitions that can detect and engage a single target or explosive submunitions equipped with an electronic self - destruction or self - deactivating feature — an exemption that seemingly permits sensor - fuzed or "smart" cluster submunitions .

appendix a .

list of treaties and agreements this appendix lists a wide range of arms control treaties and agreements .

the date listed in each entry indicates the year in which the negotiations were completed .

in some cases , entry into force occurred in a subsequent year .

the geneva protocol , 1925: bans the use of poison gas and bacteriological weapons in warfare .

the antarctic treaty , 1959: demilitarizes the antarctic continent and provides for scientific cooperation on antarctica .

memorandum of understanding .. .

regarding the establishment of a direct communications link ( the hot line agreement ) , 1963: provides for a secure , reliable communications link between washington and moscow .

modified in 1971 , 1984 , and 1988 to improve the method of communications .

limited test ban treaty , 1963: bans nuclear weapons tests or any nuclear explosions in the atmosphere , outer space , and under water .

outer space treaty , 1967: bans the orbiting or stationing on celestial bodies ( including the moon ) of nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction .

treaty for the prohibition of nuclear weapons in latin america ( treaty of tlatelolco ) , 1967: obligates nations in latin america not to acquire , possess , or store nuclear weapons on their territory .

treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , 1968: non - nuclear signatories agree not to acquire nuclear weapons ; nuclear signatories agree to cooperate with non - nuclear signatories in peaceful uses of nuclear energy .

seabed arms control treaty , 1971: bans emplacement of military installations , including those capable of launching weapons , on the seabed .

agreement on measures to reduce the risk of outbreak of nuclear war ( accident measures agreement ) , 1971: outlines measures designed to reduce the risk that technical malfunction , human failure , misinterpreted incident , or unauthorized action could start a nuclear exchange .

biological weapons convention , 1972: bans the development , production , stockpile , or acquisition of biological agents or toxins for warfare .

agreement ... on the prevention of incidents on and over the high seas , 1972: establishes "rules of the road" to reduce the risk that accident , miscalculation , or failure of communication could escalate into a conflict at sea .

interim agreement ... on certain measures with respect to the limitation of strategic offensive arms ( salt i interim agreement ) , 1972: limits numbers of some types of u.s. and soviet strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

treaty ... on the limitation of anti - ballistic missile systems ( abm treaty ) , 1972: limits united states and soviet union to two abm sites each ; limits the number of interceptor missiles and radars at each site to preclude nationwide defense .

modified in 1974 to permit one abm site in each nation .

u.s. withdrew in june 2002 .

agreement ... on the prevention of nuclear war , 1973: united states and soviet union agreed to adopt an "attitude of international cooperation" to prevent the development of situations that might lead to nuclear war .

treaty ... on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests ( threshold test ban treaty ) , 1974: prohibits nuclear weapons tests with yields of more than 150 kilotons .

ratified and entered into force in 1990 .

treaty ... on underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes ( peaceful nuclear explosions treaty ) , 1976: extends the limit of 150 kilotons to nuclear explosions occurring outside weapons test sites .

ratified and entered into force in 1990 .

concluding document of the conference on security and cooperation in europe ( helsinki final act ) , 1975: outlines notifications and confidence - building measures with respect to military activities in europe .

convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques , 1978: bans the hostile use of environmental modification techniques that have lasting or widespread effects .

treaty ... on the limitation of strategic offensive arms ( salt ii ) , 1979: places quantitative and qualitative limits on some types of u.s. and soviet strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

never ratified .

the convention on prohibitions or restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects: this convention , also known as the convention on conventional weapons ( ccw ) , was concluded in geneva in 1980 and entered into force in 1993 .

protocol ii ( protocol on prohibitions or restrictions on the use of mines , booby - traps and other devices ) contains rules for marking , registering , and removing minefields , in an effort to reduce indiscriminate casualties caused by antipersonnel landmines .

protocol iv prohibits laser weapons designed to cause blindness .

document of the stockholm conference on confidence - and security - building measures and disarmament in europe ( stockholm document ) , 1986: expands on the notifications and confidence - building measures in the helsinki final act .

provides for ground and aerial inspection of military activities .

treaty of rarotonga , 1986: establishes a nuclear weapons free zone in the south pacific .

the united states signed the protocols in 1996 ; the senate has not yet provided its advice and consent to ratification .

agreement ... on the establishment of nuclear risk reduction centers , 1987: establishes communications centers in washington and moscow and improves communications links between the two .

treaty ... on the elimination of their intermediate - range and shorter - range missiles , 1987: bans all u.s. and soviet ground - launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges between 300 and 3,400 miles .

u.s. announced withdrawal on february 1 , 2019 .

agreement ... on notifications of launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine launched ballistic missiles , 1988: obligates united states and soviet union to provide at least 24 hours' notice before the launch of an icbm or slbm .

agreement on the prevention of dangerous military activities , 1989: outlines cooperative procedures that are designed to prevent and resolve peacetime incidents between the armed forces of the united states and soviet union .

u.s. - u.s.s.r. chemical weapons destruction agreement , 1990: mandates the destruction of the bulk of the u.s. and soviet chemical weapons stockpiles .

vienna document of the negotiations on confidence - and security - building measures , 1990: expands on the measures in the 1986 stockholm document .

treaty on conventional armed forces in europe ( cfe treaty ) , 1990: limits and reduces the numbers of certain types of conventional armaments deployed from the "atlantic to the urals. .

treaty ... on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms ( start ) , 1991: limits and reduces the numbers of strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

modified by the lisbon protocol of 1992 to provide for belarus , ukraine , kazakhstan , and russia to succeed to soviet union's obligations under the treaty .

entered into force on december 5 , 1994 .

vienna document of the negotiations on confidence - and security - building measures , 1992: expands on the measures in the 1990 vienna document .

treaty on open skies , 1992: provides for overflights by unarmed observation aircraft to build confidence and increase transparency of military activities .

agreement .. .

concerning the safe and secure transportation , storage , and destruction of weapons and prevention of weapons proliferation , 1992: provides for u.s. assistance to russia for the safe and secure transportation , storage , and destruction of nuclear , chemical , and other weapons .

agreement between the united states and republic of belarus concerning emergency response and the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , 1992: provides for u.s. assistance to belarus in eliminating nuclear weapons and responding to nuclear emergencies in belarus .

treaty ... on the further reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms ( start ii ) 1993: would have further reduced the number of u.s. and russian strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

would have banned the deployment of all land - based multiple - warhead missiles ( mirved icbms ) , including the soviet ss - 18 "heavy" icbm .

signed on january 3 , 1993 ; u.s. senate consented to ratification in january 1996 ; russian duma approved ratification in april 2000 .

treaty never entered into force .

convention on the prohibition of the development , production , stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and on their destruction: bans chemical weapons and requires elimination of their production facilities .

opened for signature on january 13 , 1993 ; entered into force in april 1997 .

agreement .. .

concerning the disposition of highly enriched uranium resulting from the dismantlement of nuclear weapons in russia , 1993: provides for u.s. purchase of highly enriched uranium removed from russian nuclear weapons ; uranium to be blended into low enriched uranium for fuel in commercial nuclear reactors .

signed and entered into force on february 18 , 1993 .

agreement between the united states and ukraine concerning assistance to ukraine in the elimination of strategic nuclear arms , and the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: provides for u.s. assistance to ukraine to eliminate nuclear weapons and implement provisions of start i .

signed in late 1993 , entered into force in 1994 .

agreement between the united states and republic of kazakhstan concerning the destruction of silo launchers of intercontinental ballistic missiles , emergency response , and the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , 1993: provides for u.s. assistance to kazakhstan to eliminate nuclear weapons and implement provisions of start i. trilateral statement by the presidents of the united states , russia , and ukraine , 1994: statement in which ukraine agreed to transfer all nuclear warheads on its territory to russia in exchange for security assurances and financial compensation .

some compensation will be in the form of fuel for ukraine's nuclear reactors .

the united states will help finance the compensation by purchasing low enriched uranium derived from dismantled weapons from russia .

treaty of pelindaba , 1996: establishes a nuclear weapons free zone in africa .

the united states has signed , but not yet ratified protocols to the treaty .

comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty ( ctbt ) , 1996: bans all nuclear explosions , for any purpose .

the united states and more than 130 other nations had signed the treaty by late 1996 .

the u.s. senate voted against ratification in october , 1999 .

ottawa treaty , 1997: convention for universal ban against the use of antipersonnel landmines , signed in 1997 and entered into force in 1999 .

the united states and other significant military powers are not signatories .

strategic offensive reductions treaty ( moscow treaty ) , 2002: obligates the united states and russia to reduce strategic nuclear forces to between 1,700 and 2,200 warheads .

does not define weapons to be reduced or provide monitoring and verification provisions .

reductions must be completed by december 31 , 2012 .

treaty lapsed upon entry into force of new start .

signed in may 2002 , entered into force june 1 , 2003 .

treaty … on measures for the further reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms ( new start ) , 2010: obligates the united states and russia to reduce strategic nuclear forces to 1,550 warheads on up to 700 deployed delivery vehicles , within a total of 800 deployed and nondeployed delivery vehicles .

reductions must occur within 7 years , treaty remains in force for 10 years .

signed on april 10 , 2010 , entered into force on february 5 , 2011 .

treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons , 2017: obligates the parties to never "develop , produce , manufacture , otherwise acquire , possess or stockpile nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. .

parties agree not to host nuclear weapons that are owned or controlled by another state or to transfer , receive control over , or assist others in developing nuclear weapons .

the united states has not signed this treaty and does not support its entry into force .

appendix b .

the u.s. treaty ratification process article ii , section 2 , clause 2 of the u.s. constitution establishes responsibilities for treaty ratification .

it provides that the president "shall have power , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , to make treaties , provided two thirds of the senators present concur. .

contrary to common perceptions , the senate does not ratify treaties ; it provides its advice and consent to ratification by passing a resolution of ratification .

the president then "ratifies" a treaty by signing the instrument of ratification and either exchanging it with the other parties to the treaty or depositing it at a central repository ( such as the united nations ) .

in section 33 of the arms control and disarmament act ( p.l .

87-297 , as amended ) , congress outlined the relationship between arms control agreements and the treaty ratification process .

this law provides that "no action shall be taken under this or any other law that will obligate the united states to disarm or to reduce or to limit the armed forces or armaments of the united states , except pursuant to the treaty - making power of the president under the constitution or unless authorized by further affirmative legislation by the congress of the united states. .

in practice , most u.s. arms control agreements have been submitted as treaties , a word reserved in u.s. usage for international agreements submitted to the senate for its approval in accordance with article ii , section 2 of the constitution .

the senate clearly expects future arms control obligations would be made only pursuant to treaty in one of its declarations in the resolution of ratification of the start treaty .

the declaration stated: "the senate declares its intention to consider for approval international agreements that would obligate the united states to reduce or limit the armed forces or armaments of the united states in a militarily significant manner only pursuant to the treaty power set forth in article ii , section 2 , clause 2 of the constitution. .

nonetheless , some arms control agreements have been made by other means .

several "confidence building" measures have been concluded as legally binding international agreements , called executive agreements in the united states , without approval by congress .

these include the hot line agreement of june 20 , 1963 , the agreement on prevention of nuclear war of june 22 , 1973 , and agreements concluded in the standing consultative commission established by the anti - ballistic missile treaty .

in another category that might be called statutory or congressional - executive agreements , the salt i interim agreement was approved by a joint resolution of congress in 1972 .

in a third category , the executive branch has entered some arms control agreements that it did not submit to congress on grounds that they were "politically binding" but not "legally binding. .

such agreements include several measures agreed to through the conference on security and cooperation in europe , such as the stockholm document on confidence - and security - building measures and disarmament in europe , signed september 19 , 1986 .

senate consideration the conclusion or signing of a treaty is only the first step toward making the agreement legally binding on the parties .

first , the parties decide whether to ratify , that is , express their consent to be bound by , the treaty that the negotiators have signed .

each party follows its own constitutional process to approve the treaty .

in the united states , after a treaty has been signed , the president at a time of his choice submits to the senate the treaty and any documents that are to be considered an integral part of the treaty and requests the senate's advice and consent to ratification .

the president's message is accompanied by a letter from the secretary of state to the president which contains an analysis of the treaty .

after submittal , the senate may approve the agreement , approve it with various conditions , or not approve it .

senate consideration of a treaty is governed by senate rule xxx , which was amended in 1986 to simplify the procedure .

the treaty is read a first time and the injunction of secrecy is removed by unanimous consent , although normally the text of a treaty has already been made public .

the treaty is then referred to the senate committee on foreign relations under senate rule xxv on jurisdiction .

after consideration , the committee reports the treaty to the senate with a proposed resolution of ratification that may contain any of the conditions described below .

if the committee objects to a treaty , or believes the treaty would not receive the necessary majority in the senate , it usually simply does not report the treaty to the senate and the treaty remains pending indefinitely on the committee calendar .

after it is reported from the committee , a treaty is required to lie over for one calendar day before senate consideration .

the senate considers the treaty after adoption of a nondebatable motion to go into executive session for that purpose .

rule xxx provides that the treaty then be read a second time , after which amendments to the treaty may be proposed .

the majority leader typically asks unanimous consent that the treaty be considered to have passed through all the parliamentary stages up to and including the presentation of the resolution of ratification .

after the resolution of ratification is presented , amendments to the treaty itself , which are rare , may not be proposed .

the resolution of ratification is then "open to amendment in the form of reservations , declarations , statements , or understandings. .

decisions on amendments and conditions are made by a majority vote .

final approval of the resolution of ratification with any conditions that have been approved requires a two - thirds majority of those senators present .

after approving the treaty , the senate returns it to the president with the resolution of ratification .

if he accepts the conditions of the senate , the president then ratifies the treaty by signing a document referred to as an instrument of ratification .

included in the instrument of ratification are any of the senate conditions that state department officials consider require tacit or explicit approval by the other party .

the ratification is then complete at the national level and ready for exchange or deposit .

the treaty enters into force in the case of a bilateral treaty upon exchange of instruments of ratification and in the case of a multilateral treaty with the deposit of the number of ratifications specified in the treaty .

the president then signs a document called a proclamation which publicizes the treaty domestically as in force and the law of the land .

if the president objects to any of the senate conditions , or if the other party to a treaty objects to any of the conditions and further negotiations occur , the president may resubmit the treaty to the senate for further consideration or simply not ratify it .

approval with conditions the senate may stipulate various conditions on its approval of a treaty .

major types of senate conditions include amendments , reservations , understandings , and declarations or other statements or provisos .

sometimes the executive branch recommends the conditions , such as the december 16 , 1974 , reservation to the 1925 geneva protocol prohibiting the use of poison gas and the understandings on the protocols to the treaty for the prohibition of nuclear weapons in latin america .

an amendment to a treaty proposes a change to the language of the treaty itself , and senate adoption of amendments to the text of a treaty is infrequent .

a formal amendment to a treaty after it has entered into force is made through an additional treaty often called a protocol .

an example is the abm ( anti - ballistic missile ) protocol , signed july 3 , 1974 , which limited the united states and the soviet union to one abm site each instead of two as in the original 1972 abm treaty .

while the senate did not formally attach amendments to the 1974 threshold test ban and 1976 peaceful nuclear explosion treaties , it was not until protocols relating to verification were concluded in 1990 that the senate approved these two treaties .

a reservation is a limitation or qualification that changes the obligations of one or more of the parties .

a reservation must be communicated to the other parties and , in a bilateral treaty , explicitly agreed to by the other party .

president nixon requested a reservation to the geneva protocol on the use of poison gases stating that the protocol would cease to be binding on the united states in regard to an enemy state if that state or any of its allies failed to respect the prohibition .

one of the conditions attached to the inf treaty might be considered a reservation although it was not called that .

on the floor the sponsors referred to it as a category iii condition .

the condition was that the president obtain soviet consent that a u.s. - soviet agreement concluded on may 12 , 1988 , be of the same effect as the provisions of the treaty .

an understanding is an interpretation or elaboration ordinarily considered consistent with the treaty .

in 1980 , the senate added five understandings to the agreement with the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) for the application of safeguards in the united states .

the understandings concerned implementation of the agreement within the united states .

a condition added to the inf treaty resolution , requiring a presidential certification of a common understanding on ground - launched ballistic missiles , might be considered an understanding .

the sponsor of the condition , senator robert dole , said , "this condition requires absolutely nothing more from the soviets , but it does require something from our president. .

a declaration states policy or positions related to the treaty but not necessarily affecting its provisions .

frequently , like some of the understandings mentioned above , declarations and other statements concern internal procedures of the united states rather than international obligations and are intended to assure that congress or the senate participate in subsequent policy .

the resolution of ratification of the threshold test ban treaty adopted in 1990 made approval subject to declarations ( 1 ) that to preserve a viable deterrent a series of specified safeguards should be an ingredient in decisions on national security programs and the allocation of resources , and ( 2 ) the united states shared a special responsibility with the soviet union to continue talks seeking a verifiable comprehensive test ban .

in a somewhat different step , in 1963 the senate attached a preamble to the resolution of ratification of the limited nuclear test ban treaty .

the preamble contained three "whereas" clauses of which the core one stated that amendments to treaties are subject to the constitutional process .

the important distinction among the various conditions concerns their content or effect .

whatever designation the senate applies to a condition , if the president determines that it may alter an international obligation under the treaty , he transmits it to the other party or parties and further negotiations or abandonment of the treaty may result .

during its consideration of the salt ii treaty , the senate foreign relations committee grouped conditions into three categories to clarify their intended legal effect ; ( i ) those that need not be formally communicated to or agreed to by the soviet union , ( ii ) those that would be formally communicated to the soviet union , but not necessarily agreed to by them , and ( iii ) those that would require the explicit agreement of the soviet union .

in the resolution of ratification of the start treaty , the senate made explicit that some of the conditions were to be communicated to the other parties .

the senate approves most treaties without formally attaching conditions .

ten arms control treaties were adopted without conditions: the antarctic , outer space , nuclear non - proliferation , seabed , abm , environmental modification , and peaceful nuclear explosions treaties , the biological weapons and the nuclear materials conventions , and the abm protocol .

in some of these cases , however , the senate foreign relations committee included significant understandings in its report .

even when it does not place formal conditions in the resolution of ratification , the senate may make its views known or establish requirements on the executive branch in the report of the foreign relations committee or through other vehicles .

such statements become part of the legislative history but are not formally transmitted to other parties .

in considering the limited nuclear test ban treaty in 1963 , the senate turned down a reservation that "the treaty does not inhibit the use of nuclear weapons in armed conflict," but senate leaders insisted upon a written assurance on this issue , among others , from president kennedy .

in reporting the nuclear non - proliferation treaty , the committee stated that its support of the treaty was not to be construed as approving security assurances given to the non - nuclear - weapon parties by a u.n. security council resolution and declarations by the united states , the soviet union , and the united kingdom .

the security assurances resolution and declarations were , the committee reported , "solely executive measures. .

appendix c. arms control organization .

