akey concept embodied in the accountability provisions of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) is that of adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) toward proficiency on state assessments .

in order to maintain eligibility for grants under esea title i , part a — grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged pupils , the largest federal k - 12 education program — states must establish and implement standards of ayp that are applicable to all public schools and leas in the state , as well as the state overall .

these ayp standards are to be based primarily , although not solely , on the scores of all pupils as a group , as well as pupils in designated demographic subgroups , on state developed or selected assessments that are linked to state standards of curriculum content and pupil performance .

schools or leas that fail to meet ayp standards for two or more consecutive years face a variety of consequences and , ultimately , corrective actions .

the authorization for esea programs expired at the end of fy2008 , and the 111 th congress is expected to consider whether to amend and extend the esea .

this report will be updated regularly to reflect major legislative developments and available information .

substantial interest has been expressed in the use of growth models to meet the ayp requirements of the nclb .

such ayp models are not consistent with certain statutory provisions of the nclb , as they were originally interpreted by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

in november 2005 , the secretary of education announced a growth model pilot program under which up to ten states would be allowed to use growth models to make ayp determinations for the 2005-2006 school year .

in december 2007 , the secretary lifted the cap on the number of states that could participate in the growth model pilot , and regulations published in october 2008 incorporate this expanded policy .

thus far , the applications of 15 states — alaska , arkansas , arizona , colorado , delaware , florida , iowa , michigan , minnesota , missouri , north carolina , ohio , pennsylvania , tennessee , and texas — have been approved to participate in the pilot program .

this report discusses growth and other models for ayp determinations , and analyzes issues related to the use of growth models to meet the ayp requirements of the nclb .

while ayp definitions or standards may vary in a multitude of respects , their basic structure generally falls into one of three general categories .

the no child left behind act statute , as implemented by ed currently , places primary emphasis on one of these models , while incorporating a second model as an explicitly authorized alternative .

in recent years , critics of current policy have increasingly focused their attention on a third model of ayp , which is the primary topic of this report .

the three basic structural forms for ayp of schools or leas are the group status , successive group improvement , and individual / cohort growth models .

in the context of these terms , "group" ( or "subgroup," in the case of detailed demographic categories ) refers to a collection of pupils that is identified by their grade level and usually other demographic characteristics ( eg , race , ethnicity , or economic disadvantage ) as of a point in time , such as all hispanic 3 rd grade pupils enrolled in a school or lea in a particular year .

the actual pupils in a "group" may change substantially , or even completely , from one year to the next .

in contrast , a "cohort" refers to a collection of pupils in which the same pupils are followed from year - to - year , such as the hispanic pupils who entered 3 rd grade in a school , lea or state in fall 2002 , and have been followed as a cohort since that time .

the key characteristic of the group status model is a fixed "annual measurable objective" ( amo ) , or required threshold level of achievement , that is the same for all pupil groups , schools , and leas statewide in a given subject and grade level .

under this model , performance at a point in time is compared to a benchmark at that time , with no direct consideration of changes over a previous period .

the key characteristic of the successive group improvement model is a focus on the rate of change in achievement in a subject area from one year to the next among groups of pupils in a grade level at a school or lea ( eg , the percentage of this year's 5 th grade pupils in a school who are at a proficient or higher level in mathematics compared to the percentage of last year's 5 th grade pupils who were at a proficient or higher level of achievement ) .

finally , the key characteristic of the individual / cohort growth model is a focus on the rate of change over time in the level of achievement among cohorts of the same pupils .

such models may compare current performance of specific pupils or cohorts to past performance , or may project future performance of pupils / cohorts based on past changes in their performance level .

growth models are longitudinal , based upon the tracking of the same pupils as they progress through their k - 12 education careers .

while the progress of pupils is tracked individually , results are typically aggregated when used for accountability purposes .

aggregation may be by demographic group , by school or lea , or other relevant characteristics .

in general , growth models would give credit for meeting steps along the way to proficiency in ways that a status model typically does not .

to help illustrate the basic differences among these three ayp models , simplified examples of basic aspects of each are described below .

the reader should keep in mind many other variations of these model types are possible .

a group status model , such as the current primary model of ayp under the nclb ( described further below ) , establishes a series of threshold levels or amos , which are percentages of pupils scoring at a proficient or higher level of achievement on state standards - based assessments of reading and mathematics .

these amos have a starting point and a series of increases toward ( in the case of the nclb ) an ultimate goal of 100% of pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement , covering a multi - year period ( for the nclb , the period of 2001-2002 through 2013-2014 ) .

these amos are specific to each grade level and subject ( reading or mathematics ) at which state assessments are administered .

a key feature of the amos in this model is that they are the same for all pupil groups — the "all pupil" group as well as each of the demographic subgroups specified under the nclb ( pupils with disabilities , pupils from low - income families , pupils with limited english proficiency , etc. ) .

this model focuses solely on current year performance of the pupils currently enrolled in each school / lea for every grade level at which assessments are administered .

comparisons to previous year performance play no role in ayp determinations .

an example of a simplified successive group improvement model is the secondary ( "safe harbor" ) model authorized under the nclb .

under this model , as embodied in the nclb , the basic structure of the ayp system is the same as described above , but the primary focus shifts to the change from the previous year for each group assessed .

if any specified demographic group fails to meet the primary group status ayp criterion described above , the school or lea is still deemed to meet ayp standards if the percentage of pupils scoring below the proficient level declines by 10% in comparison to the previous year for pupils in that grade level and demographic group .

thus , the primary focus shifts to the change in achievement from the previous year , comparing ( for example ) this year's pupils from low - income families in the particular school / lea / grade level to last year's pupils from low - income families enrolled in that school / lea / grade level ( i.e. , the pupils are in the same demographic category , but are not necessarily the same pupils ) .

an individual / cohort growth model begins by tracking the performance of individual pupils over multiple ( at least two ) years .

the performance of pupils in the same grade level who share relevant demographic characteristics within a school , lea , or the state overall may be combined into a cohort .

the change in scores for this cohort is compared to a standard of expected growth .

the expected growth may be either "data - driven" ( eg , the statewide average rate of achievement growth for all pupils , or the predicted rate of growth statewide for pupils with similar demographic characteristics ) , or "policy - driven" ( a multi - year growth path sufficient to meet an ultimate goal , such as the nclb requirement for all pupils to reach a proficient or higher level of achievement by 2013-2014 ) .

a school or lea is deemed to meet ayp requirements if the achievement growth of each relevant cohort of pupils meets the expected level of growth .

the path of expected growth , as well as the starting points for the growth path , will likely differ for each relevant demographic group of pupils .

some growth models , often called value - added models , also incorporate a variety of statistical controls , adjustments to account for pupil demographic characteristics or past achievement , to sharpen the focus on estimating the impact of specific teachers , schools , or leas on pupil achievement and to measure pupil growth against predicted growth for pupils with similar characteristics , but these are not essential elements of all growth models .

proponents argue that such models , with their controls for background characteristics and past learning , maximize the focus on factors that are under the control of teachers and other school staff .

the tennessee value - added assessment system ( tvaas ) is one specific form of growth model that uses pupil background characteristics , previous performance , and other data as statistical controls in order to focus on estimating the specific effects of particular schools , districts , teachers or programs on pupil achievement .

the primary model of ayp under the nclb currently is a group status model .

as noted in the example above , group status models set as their amos threshold levels of performance , expressed specifically in terms of the percentage of pupils scoring at a proficient or higher ( advanced ) level on state assessments of reading and mathematics .

these amos must be met by any school or lea , both overall and with respect to all relevant pupil subgroups , in order to make ayp , whatever the school's or lea's "starting point" ( for the multi - year period covered by the accountability policy ) or performance in the previous year .

this amo "uniform bar" is applicable to all pupil subgroups of sufficient size to be considered in ayp determinations .

the threshold levels of achievement are to be set separately for reading and math , and may be set separately for each level of k - 12 education ( elementary , middle , and high schools ) .

for example , it might be required that 45% or more of the pupils in any of a state's public elementary schools score at the proficient or higher level of achievement in reading in order for a school to make ayp .

the initial minimum starting point for the "uniform bar" is to be the greater of ( a ) the percentage of pupils at the proficient or advanced level of achievement for the lowest - achieving pupil subgroup in the base year ( 2001-2002 ) , or ( b ) the percentage of pupils at the proficient or advanced level of achievement for the lowest - performing quintile ( 5 th ) of schools statewide in the base year .

the "uniform bar" must generally be raised at least once every three years , although in the initial period it must be increased after no more than two years .

such group status models attempt to emphasize the importance of meeting certain minimum levels of achievement for all pupil groups , schools , and leas , and arguably apply consistent expectations to all pupil groups .

the secondary model of ayp under the nclb currently is the "safe harbor" provision , an example of a successive group improvement model .

this is an alternative provision under which schools or leas that fail to meet the usual requirements may still be deemed to have made ayp if they meet certain other conditions .

a school where aggregate achievement is below the level required under the group status model described above would still be deemed to have made ayp , through the "safe harbor" provision , if , among relevant pupil groups who did not meet the primary ayp standard , the percentage of pupils who are not at the proficient or higher level in the school declines by at least 10% ( not 10 percentage points ) , and those pupil groups make progress on at least one other academic indicator included in the state's ayp standards .

for example , if the standard amo is 45% , and a school fails to meet ayp because of the performance of one pupil group ( eg , the mathematics scores of white pupils ) and the percentage of such pupils scoring at a proficient or higher level the previous year was 30% , then the school could still make ayp if the percentage of white pupils scoring at a proficient or higher level increases to at least 37% ( the 30% from the previous year plus 10% of ( 100% - 30% ) , or seven percentage points ) .

during debates over the adoption of nclb in 2001 , much of the attention was focused on successive group improvement models of ayp , not group status or individual / cohort growth models .

both the senate - passed version , and the primary elements of the house - passed version , of the bill ( h.r .

1 , 107 th congress ) that became nclb embodied successive group improvement concepts of ayp .

relatively little attention was paid to individual / cohort growth models during consideration of nclb .

the group status model adopted by the conferees on h.r .

1 as the primary ayp concept under nclb substantially resembled the pre - nclb ayp definition used in the state of texas .

possible reasons why relatively little attention was devoted to individual / cohort growth models of ayp during consideration of nclb in 2001 include the fact that they were used by few states at the time to meet accountability requirements under either state law or under federal law preceding nclb ( the improving america's schools act of 1994 ) ; the implicit demand for resources ( both extensive , pupil - level longitudinal data systems and analytical capacity in state educational agencies ) ; their relative complexity , compared to the status and improvement models ; their assumed requirement for annual pupil assessments throughout all , or at least most , of pupils' k - 12 education careers , which very few states had in place ; and the difficulty ( although not the impossibility ) of integrating into growth models an ultimate goal of all pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement by a specified time .

the remainder of this report will focus almost totally on individual / cohort growth models of ayp versus group status models , and little further attention will be paid to successive group improvement models of ayp .

this is primarily because the "safe harbor" alternative model of ayp is already available ( unlike the individual / cohort growth model alternative ) , and because it has reportedly been invoked relatively infrequently .

some analysts argue the "safe harbor" provision is used infrequently because it sets a very challenging standard , at least for pupil groups that are currently at relatively low levels of proficiency , and that the required 10% reduction in pupils below the proficient level should be reduced , perhaps to 3% - 4% .

why is there increased interest in growth models for determining ayp under nclb ? .

what might be the major advantages and disadvantages of growth models of ayp , in comparison to status or improvement models ? .

these questions are addressed in the following pages .

many proponents of growth models for school / lea ayp see them as being more fair — to both pupils and school staff — and accurate than status or improvement models , primarily because they can be designed to take into consideration the currently widely varying levels of achievement of different pupil groups .

growth models generally recognize the reality that different schools and pupils have very different starting points in their achievement levels and recognize progress being made at all levels ( eg , from below basic to basic , or from proficient to advanced ) , giving credit for all improvements over previous performance .

growth models would likely increase the ability to attribute pupil achievement to their current school , as opposed to their past schools or background characteristics , especially ( but not only ) if controls ( and / or predicted growth elements ) are included in the model .

they more directly measure the effect of schools on the specific pupils they serve over a period of years , attempting to track the movement of pupils between schools and leas , rather than applying a single standard to all pupils in each state .

they have the ability to focus on the specific effectiveness of schools and teachers with pupils whom they have actually taught for multiple years , rather than the change in performance of pupil groups among whom there has usually been a substantial amount of mobility .

they can directly ( as well as indirectly ) adjust for non - school influences on achievement , comparing the same students across years and reducing errors due to student mobility .

proponents of growth models often argue that status models of ayp in particular make schools and leas accountable for factors over which they have little control , and that status models focus insufficiently on pupil achievement gains , especially if those gains are below the threshold for proficient performance , or gains from a proficient to an advanced level .

status models , such as the current primary model of ayp under nclb , might even create an undesirable incentive for teachers and schools to focus their attention , at least in the short run , on pupils who are only marginally below a proficient level of achievement , in hopes of bringing them above that sole key threshold , rather than the most disadvantaged pupils whose achievement is well below the proficient level .

the current status model of ayp also confers no credit for achievement increases above the proficient level , that is , bringing pupils from the proficient to the advanced level .

at the same time , growth models of ayp have the significant disadvantage of implicitly setting lower thresholds or expectations for some pupil groups and / or schools .

although any growth model deemed consistent with nclb would likely need to incorporate that act's ultimate goal of all pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement by 2013-2014 ( see below ) , the majority of such models used currently or in the past do not include such goals , and tend to allow disadvantaged schools and pupils to remain at relatively low levels of achievement for considerable periods of time .

growth models of ayp may be quite complicated , and may address the accountability purposes of nclb less directly and clearly than status or ( to a lesser extent ) improvement models .

if the primary purpose of ayp is to determine whether schools and leas are succeeding at raising the achievement of their current pupils to challenging levels , with those goals and expectations applied consistently to all pupil groups , then the current provisions of nclb might more simply and directly meet that purpose than growth model alternatives .

pupil mobility among schools and leas is substantial , and has important implications for all models of ayp .

however , its implications are multifaceted , and do not necessarily favor a particular ayp model .

growth models have the advantage of attempting to track pupils through longitudinal data systems .

but if they thereby attribute the achievement of highly mobile pupils among a variety of schools and leas , accountability is dispersed .

at the same time , the presence of highly mobile pupils in the groups considered in determining ayp under status and improvement models may seem unfair to school staff .

however , the impact of such pupils in school - level ayp determinations is limited by nclb's provision that pupils who have attended a particular school for less than one year need not be considered in such determinations .

growth models of ayp may offer increased value for purposes other than meeting the school and lea accountability requirements of nclb .

these other purposes may include diagnosing pupil needs , conducting educational research , or pinpointing the specific impact of teachers , schools , or other educational resources on pupil achievement .

these advantages derive largely , but not solely , from the incorporation of longitudinal pupil tracking systems within growth models .

of course , current law does not prevent the use of growth models , under state authority , as a diagnostic / research / alternative accountability tool separate from the ayp and other requirements of nclb .

while the current statutory text and policy guidance associated with nclb discourage the use of separate state and federal accountability systems for schools and leas , they are not prohibited in practice , and separate accountability systems are currently being used by several states alongside the ayp system required by nclb .

finally , the usefulness of a model of ayp for purposes other than accountability may be of limited relevance to a debate over whether such a model should be used for the accountability purposes of nclb .

it is generally agreed that growth models of ayp are more demanding than status or improvement models in several respects , especially in terms of data requirements and analytical capacity .

for a longitudinal data system sufficient to support a growth model , it is likely that states would need to have pupil data systems incorporating at least the following: 1 .

a unique statewide student identifier .

2 .

the ability to produce comparable results from grade to grade and from year to year ( vertically - scaled assessments ) .

3 .

student - level enrollment , demographic and program participation information .

4 .

information on untested students .

5 .

student level graduation and dropout data .

6 .

state - wide audit system .

although the availability of information on state data systems is insufficient to enable one to determine with precision how many states could or could not currently implement such models if they chose to do so , it is very likely that growth models generally require resources and data systems that many states currently lack .

this concern is being addressed in part through an ed program intended to help states design , develop , and implement statewide , longitudinal data systems .

an initial appropriation of $24.8 million was provided for this program , administered by ed's institute of education sciences ( ies ) , for fy2005 .

subsequently , $24.6 million was appropriated for each of fy2006 and fy2007 , and $48.3 million for fy2008 .

thus far , a total of 27 states have received awards through two rounds of competition .

in addition , $250 million was recently appropriated for this program for fy2009 under h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act .

under this program , aid is to be provided to state educational agencies ( seas ) via cooperative agreements , not grants , to allow increased federal involvement in the supported activities .

according to the announcement in the april 15 , 2005 federal register , the program is intended "to enable seas to design , develop , and implement statewide , longitudinal data systems to efficiently and accurately manage , analyze , disaggregate , and use individual student data... .

applications from states with the most limited ability to collect , analyze , and report individual student achievement data will have a priority...." according to ed , the program is designed to help seas meet the ayp and reporting requirements of nclb , as well as to conduct value - added or achievement growth research , including "meaningful longitudinal analyses of student academic growth within all subgroups specified by the no child left behind act of 2001. .

there will also be an emphasis on encouraging data sharing among states , while at the same time protecting the security and privacy of data .

most growth models used before initiation of ed's growth model pilot , or still used as part of state - specific accountability systems , have not incorporated an ultimate goal such as the one under nclb — that all pupils reach a proficient or higher level of achievement by 2013-2014 .

non - nclb growth models have generally incorporated one of two types of growth target , the "how much improvement is enough" aspect of the model: ( a ) data driven / predicted growth , or ( b ) policy driven / required growth targets .

the first type of growth target has been most common , while nclb's ultimate goal would represent a growth target of the second variety , with separate paths ( with presumably separate starting points ) for each relevant pupil cohort .

the models approved thus far under ed's growth model pilot arguably meet the ultimate goal requirement .

however , under some of these models , pupils need only be proficient or on track toward proficiency within a limited number of years as of 2013-2014 .

with the initial implementation of the provisions of nclb , several thousand public schools and hundreds of leas have been identified each year as failing to meet state ayp standards .

it frequently appears to be implicitly assumed by potentially interested parties that widespread use of growth models of ayp would result in significantly smaller percentages of schools and leas being identified as failing to meet ayp standards .

this view seems to be based largely on the assumption that differing starting points for various cohorts of pupils would involve lower starting points and initial amos for disadvantaged pupil groups , reducing the number of schools or leas that fail to meet ayp due to the performance of one or a few of such demographic groups .

indeed , it is easy to hypothesize that during the first few years of implementation of growth models of ayp , required performance thresholds would be relatively low for disadvantaged pupil cohorts , and fewer schools or leas would fail to meet ayp standards .

however , if one assumes that any ayp model under nclb must meet that act's ultimate goal requirement , with regular increases in amos leading toward the ultimate goal of all pupils at a proficient or higher level by 2013-2014 , any significant reduction in the number of schools or leas failing to make ayp would likely be temporary .

this is particularly true because we are already several years into nclb's presumed overall timeline of 2001-2002 ( the "base year" for ayp determinations ) to 2013-2014 .

of course , if it is assumed that use of growth models somehow improves the productivity of schools and leas — that is , by improving motivation of pupils or teachers , or by providing better diagnostic data on pupil achievement — then it is possible that this would ultimately reduce the number of schools / leas failing to meet ayp , but there is currently no direct proof that this would occur .

as noted earlier , where estimates are available , the growth models approved for use under ed's pilot program appear to reduce the number of schools failing to meet ayp standards to a very limited degree .

the value and usefulness of growth models of ayp are highly dependent on a regular flow of valid information on pupil achievement levels .

as a result , it is frequently assumed that growth models can be appropriately implemented only when achievement test results , linked to a continuum of state content and performance standards , are available at least annually .

this creates difficulties for implementing growth models across the entire k - 12 grade span , since nclb requires the administration of state standards - based assessments in each of grades 3-8 , plus only one senior high school grade .

it may be possible to fully implement growth models only over grade ranges for which annual assessment results are available .

substantial difficulties might be presented by the large degree of variation in curriculum , and frequently in assessments , for senior high school pupils , although that can present difficulties under any of the three types of ayp model .

