papua , indonesia refers to the western half of the island of new guinea and encompasses the indonesian provinces of west irian jaya , or irian jaya barat , and papua .

some also refer to this region of indonesia as west papua .

papua has a population of approximately two million and an estimated area of 422,000 square kilometers , which represents about 21% of the land mass , and 1% of the population of indonesia .

about 1.2 million of the estimated two million inhabitants of papua are indigenous melanesian people from about 250 different tribes which are distinct from the malay people of indonesia .

most of the rest of the people have transmigrated to papua from elsewhere in indonesia .

the province is rich in mineral resources and timber .

congress' attention to papua has largely focused on the 2002 attack against americans near timika and the human rights situation of the indigenous melanesian people of papua .

congress has also expressed interest in the reported military buildup in papua .

these interests have evolved against a backdrop of greatly improved relations between the united states and indonesia in 2005 .

an expanded separatist movement in papua also could lead to greater violence .

papuan issues tend to be subsumed into overall u.s. relations with and policy toward indonesia .

in 2005 there was considerable change in u.s. relations with indonesia .

the february 2005 decision by the bush administration to allow indonesia to participate in international military education and training ( imet ) was followed by a may 2005 decision to restart non - lethal foreign military sales ( fms ) to indonesia and a november 2005 decision to waive foreign military financing ( fmf ) restrictions due to u.s. national security concerns .

in this way , past concerns over human rights in indonesia , including those in papua , which had limited the extent of the military - to - military relationship have apparently not been given as much weight by policy makers as they have previously due to indonesia's democratic development and american security concerns .

to many , this foreign policy issue has involved a congressional - executive dispute where democratic development in indonesia and american security concerns have shifted the locus of policy determinants in favor of the executive branch which currently is seeking to develop closer ties with indonesia .

there is concern among some that the message that the united states is still concerned with the human rights situation in indonesia needs to continue to be conveyed to indonesia so that jakarta does not view this shift in america's position as a signal that america is now less concerned with human rights issues .

as the peace process in aceh has progressed , increased attention has been focused on the human rights situation in papua .

in testimony before congress in march 2005 , ambassador marie hutala stated that "the democratic transition underway in indonesia ... represents an important opportunity for the u.s." she added "our first priority is to encourage continued indonesian progress on democracy , human rights , and justice. .

the department of state's country report on human rights practices for indonesia makes the following observations , among others , on indonesia and papua .

the [indonesian] government's human rights record remained poor ; although there were improvements in a few areas , serious problems remained.... security force members murdered , tortured , raped , beat , and arbitrarily detained civilians and members of separatist movements , especially in aceh and to a lesser extent in papua .

the government restricted the foreign press from traveling to conflict areas in aceh , papua , sulawesi , and maluku .

the country made substantial progress in strengthening its democracy .

the government issued a decree authorizing the establishment of a 40-member papuan peoples council .

many observers hope that the human rights situation will improve with the further development of democracy , the rule of law , and civil society in indonesia .

in his statement before the senate foreign relations subcommittee on east asia and pacific affairs , deputy assistant secretary of state eric g. john stated that "... papua has suffered from separatist conflict and serious human rights abuses .

the indonesian government has not fully implemented the 2001 special autonomy law that was designed to address political and economic grievances. .

john also pointed out that president yudhoyono had "vowed to peacefully resolve the longstanding conflict in papua" and pledged to "fully implement special autonomy. .

papuans are a melanesian people like the people of papua new guinea ( png ) which is situated on the eastern half of the island of new guinea .

papua's tribal groups are thought to speak some 15% of the world's languages .

the indigenous melanesian people of papua have a culture dating back , by some estimates , 40,000 years .

this background differs significantly from the malay character of the rest of the indonesian archipelago .

the spanish were the first europeans to discover the islands in 1546 .

the dutch laid claim to papua in 1828 , and by 1910 they had an agreement with britain and germany ( who controlled the southeast and northeastern parts of new guinea , respectively ) which recognized dutch control over the western half of new guinea .

like indonesia , papua was a dutch colonial possession .

unlike indonesia , it did not become a part of newly independent indonesia at the time of indonesia's independence in 1949 .

the dutch argued that its ethnic and cultural difference justified dutch control until a later date .

under former president sukarno , indonesia began mounting military pressure on dutch west papua in 1961 .

as outlined in a report by the council on foreign relations , in 1962 the united states pressured the dutch to turn over control of west papua to the united nations ( u.n. ) .

under the american - brokered new york agreement of 1962 indonesia was to "make arrangements with the assistance and participation of the united nations" to give papuans an opportunity to determine whether they wished to become part of indonesia or not .

indonesia assumed control over papua in 1963 .

in the "act of free choice," carried out in 1969 , selected delegates decided to join indonesia .

the act of free choice is generally not considered to have been representative of the will of all papuans .

a broad - based referendum on indonesian control over west papua was not held .

instead , a group of 1,025 local officials voted in favor of merging with indonesia .

the u.n. is generally considered to have failed in its mission to give the people of papua an opportunity for self determination .

to some , "while western colonial policy was coming to an end — a new chapter of asiatic colonial policy was opening. .

the pro - independence free papua movement ( opm ) emerged as these events were unfolding .

it has been estimated by human rights advocate groups that 100,000 papuans have died as the result of indonesian control in papua , though others have more recently challenged the scale of this figure .

declassified documents released in july 2004 indicate that the united states supported indonesia's take over of papua in the lead up to the 1969 act of free choice even as it was understood that such a move was likely unpopular with papuans .

the documents reportedly indicate that the united states estimated that between 85% and 90% of papuans were opposed to indonesian rule and that as a result the indonesians were incapable of winning an open referendum at the time of papua's transition from dutch colonial rule .

such steps were evidently considered necessary to maintain the support of suharto's indonesia during the cold war .

a similar view was taken towards east timor .

central to the conflict in papua is its vast natural wealth , most of which stems from resource extraction industry , particularly mining and logging .

fisheries resources are another potentially valuable resource .

economic activity in built - up areas is dominated by malay migrants from elsewhere in indonesia .

traditionally , only a small percentage of the wealth generated by the natural resources of papua has remained in the province .

papua is one of indonesia's poorest provinces despite its extensive natural resource wealth .

under the special autonomy law for papua of 2001 , 70% of oil and gas royalties and 80% of mining , forestry and fisheries royalties are supposed to go to the province .

while noting that indonesia generally "made substantial progress in strengthening its democracy," the united states department of state country report on human rights practices of 2004 , which was released in february 2005 , describes the human rights situation in indonesia as "poor ; although there were improvements in a few areas. .

it states that "security force members murdered , tortured , raped , beat , and arbitrarily detained civilians and members of separatist movements , especially in aceh and to a lesser extent in papua. .

with the conflict in aceh appearing to be coming to an end through an ongoing peace process , there seems to be increased attention on the human rights situation in papua .

indonesian president susilo bambang yudhoyono has called for a political settlement within the framework of special autonomy within the unitary republic of indonesia .

the opm has continued to press for independence , while the indonesian government has yet to fully implement previous autonomy measures and is going forward with a move to divide the province .

there have been reports that funds allocated for the implementation of the special autonomy law have been used to finance military operations in papua .

in august 2005 , the centre for peace and conflict studies at the university of sydney in new south wales , australia , published a report , genocide in west papua , which assesses the treatment of papuans by the tni .

the report details a series of concerns which , if not acted upon , may pose serious threats to the survival of the indigenous people of the indonesian province of papua .

it covers the threats posed by the indonesian military to the province's stability , the recent increase in large scale military campaigns which are decimating highland tribal communities , the hiv / aids explosion and persistent papuan underdevelopment in the face of rapid and threatening demographic transition in which the papuans face becoming a minority in their own land .

the report also states that "a culture of impunity exists in indonesia which sees its highest manifestation currently in papua ... military operations have led to thousands of deaths in papua ... the republic's armed forces act as a law unto themselves. .

the report cites eyewitness accounts of indonesian "military involvement in acts of arson , theft , rape , and torture. .

indonesian military spokesman general bibit santoso reportedly dismissed the report's findings and stated that there were no militias in papua and added that the government had banned muslim militants from operating in papua .

the australian democrat party foreign affairs spokesman senator natasha stott despoja spoke at the launch of the genocide in west papua report and stated that "the situation in west papua requires much more than words. .

other groups have similarly found evidence of repression .

a report by the u.s. east - west center on the conflict in papua has found that the indonesian government's approach to papua has ranged from "the overtly repressive to the occasionally accommodative" and observed that "the cycles of repression and alienation simply consolidate papuan identity and support for independence. .

human rights watch ( hrw ) has described the tni's actions in papua as responding to the opm with "disproportionate force" adding that "unarmed civilians continue to be among those injured or killed in military reprisals .

arbitrary detention , torture , disappearances , and arson are widespread in this vast and isolated region of indonesia. .

hrw has also pointed to the influx of non - melanesian indonesians , who remain largely in the towns and are mostly malay muslims as opposed to the more rural and christian native melanesian papuans and who present a "volatile mix susceptible to manipulation by unscrupulous political leaders. .

while the 2004 report indonesian human rights abuses in west papua , by the allard k. lowenstein international human rights clinic at yale university law school did "not offer a definitive conclusion about whether genocide has occurred [in papua] it finds in the available evidence a strong indication that the indonesia government has committed genocide against the west papuans. .

it goes on to state that even if the violence committed against papuans were not committed with the intent to destroy the papuans as a group "many of these acts clearly constitute crime against humanity. .

an international dimension to the conflict arose in january 2006 when a group of 43 papuans fled to australia in an outrigger canoe and asked for political asylum .

papuan activists called for increased support from the pacific islands forum in january 2006 .

in a statement on the fy2006 foreign operations conference report , senator leahy stated that the conference agreement requires a report on the status of the fbi investigation into the august 2002 attack as well as on the humanitarian and human rights situation in papua .

senator leahy also stated "... one west papuan individual has been indicted in the u.s. ... and responsibility for this heinous crime does not stop there. .

h.r .

3057 as enacted into p.l .

109-102 on november 14 , 2005 , did not include the language on papua which was included in an earlier draft of the legislation .

language in sec .

1115 of the foreign relations authorization , h.r .

2601 , which passed the house and was placed on the calendar in the senate ( see below ) also created concern in indonesia .

the text of the proposed legislation noted with grave concern human rights violations by the tni "particularly in areas of communal and separatist conflict" and made a number of findings related to papua and would , if passed , require reports on special autonomy for papua and on the act of free choice .

such proposed legislative language created much concern in indonesia and was interpreted by many there as enacted law and u.s. policy .

the conference report , h.rept .

109-265 , while noting that the papua language proposed by the senate ( sec .

6109 ) was not included in the conference agreement , does direct the secretary of state to submit a report on papua as required by the senate provision .

the following text is drawn from h.r .

3057 the foreign operations , export financing and related programs appropriations act , 2006 as enrolled as agreed to or passed by both the house and senate , the earlier public print , which included section 6109 , relevant language from the conference report , and section 1115 of h.r .

2601 as placed on the calendar in the senate .

it should be noted that efforts to revisit the act of free choice are viewed by many in indonesia as a challenge to their sovereignty over papua and are thus viewed as a provocative intrusion by the united states into what they view as an internal domestic issue .

some analysts and practitioners would argue that america's policy toward papua should be balanced against larger policy concerns related to indonesia such as the need to support indonesia's emerging democracy and the need to continue to cultivate indonesia as a partner in the war against terror in southeast asia and for other geopolitical considerations .

others would argue that the united states must do all it can to curb human rights abuses by the indonesian military , while others would argue that these two approaches can be blended .

h.r .

3057 , the foreign operations , export financing and related programs appropriations act , 2006 as enrolled as agreed to or passed by both the house and senate .

indonesia 1 .

sec .

599f .

 ( a ) funds appropriated by this act under the heading `foreign military financing program' may be made available for assistance for indonesia , and licenses may be issued for the export of lethal defense articles for the indonesian armed forces , only if the secretary of state certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that — ( 1 ) the indonesian government is prosecuting and punishing , in a manner proportional to the crime , members of the armed forces who have been credibly alleged to have committed gross violations of human rights ; ( 2 ) at the direction of the president of indonesia , the armed forces are cooperating with civilian judicial authorities and with international efforts to resolve cases of gross violations of human rights in east timor and elsewhere ; and ( 3 ) at the direction of the president of indonesia , the government of indonesia is implementing reforms to improve civilian control of the military .

 ( b ) the secretary of state may waive subsection ( a ) if the secretary determines and reports to the committees on appropriations that to do so is in the national security interests of the united states .

report on indonesian cooperation sec .

599g .

not later than 90 days after enactment of this act , the secretary of state shall submit a report to the committees on appropriations that describes — ( 1 ) the status of the investigation of the murders of two united states citizens and one indonesian citizen that occurred on august 31 , 2002 in timika , indonesia , the status of any individuals indicted within the united states or indonesia for crimes relating to those murders , and the status of judicial proceedings relating to those murders ; ( 2 ) the efforts by the government of indonesia to arrest individuals indicted for crimes relating to those murders and any other actions taken by the government of indonesia , including the indonesian judiciary , police and armed forces , to bring the individuals responsible for those murders to justice ; and ( 3 ) the cooperation provided by the government of indonesia , including the indonesian judiciary , police and armed forces , to requests related to those murders made by the secretary of state or the director of the federal bureau of investigation .

h.r .

3057 public print from july 2005 .

[this section was not included in the act though it is referenced in the conference report , see below. .

west papua report 1 .

sec .

6109 .

not later than 90 days after enactment of this act , the secretary of state shall submit a report to the committee on appropriations , describing — ( 1 ) the approximate number of indonesian troops in west papua including trends in the number and deployment of security forces , the approximate number of armed separatists , and progress toward a political settlement of the conflict there including initiatives from pa puan civil society such as the 'land of peace' proposal ; ( 2 ) current humanitarian and human rights conditions in west papua , including access for international and domestic humanitarian and human rights groups and the media ; ( 3 ) the extent to which international funding for reconstruction in aceh is being contracted or subcontracted to firms controlled by or affiliated with the indonesian military , and the involvement of acehnese local and provincial government and civil society in planning and decision - making in reconstruction efforts ; ( 4 ) human rights conditions in aceh , the approximate number of indonesian troops in aceh including trends in the number and deployment of security forces , and efforts by the united states government to promote a political settlement of the conflict ; and ( 5 ) activities of militia , including jihadist - oriented militia , and the extent to which members of indonesia ' s security forces support these militia .

conference report , h.rept .

109-265 language the conference agreement does not include a provision proposed by the senate ( section 6109 ) regarding a 'west papua report' requiring the secretary of state to submit a report regarding indonesian troops , and current humanitarian and human rights conditions , in the papua region of indonesia .

the house did not address this matter .

the conferees direct the secretary of state to submit , within 90 days of enactment of the act , the report required by the senate provision .

h.r .

2601 ( foreign relations authorization , fy2006-fy2007 as passed by the house and placed on calendar in the senate ) : sec .

1115 .

developments in and policy toward indonesia .

1 .

 ( a ) statement of congress relating to recent developments , human rights , and reform - congress — ( 1 ) recognizes the remarkable progress in democratization and decentralization made by indonesia in recent years and commends the people of indonesia on the pace and scale of those continuing reforms ; ( 2 ) reaffirms — ( a ) its deep condolences to the people of indonesia for the profound losses inflicted by the december 26 , 2004 , earthquake and tsunami ; and ( b ) its commitment to generous united states support for relief and long term reconstruction efforts in affected areas ; ( 3 ) expresses its hope that in the aftermath of the tsunami tragedy the government of indonesia and other parties will succeed in reaching and implementing a peaceful , negotiated settlement of the long - standing conflict in aceh ; ( 4 ) commends the government of indonesia for allowing broad international access to aceh after the december 2004 tsunami , and urges that international nongovernmental organizations and media be allowed unfettered access throughout indonesia , including in papua and aceh ; ( 5 ) notes with grave concern that — ( a ) reform of the indonesian security forces has not kept pace with democratic political reform , and that the indonesian military is subject to inadequate civilian control and oversight , lacks budgetary transparency , and continues to emphasize an internal security role within indonesia ; ( b ) members of the indonesian security forces continue to commit many serious human rights violations , including killings , torture , rape , and arbitrary detention , particularly in areas of communal and separatist conflict ; and ( c ) the government of indonesia largely fails to hold soldiers and police accountable for extrajudicial killings and other serious human rights abuses , both past and present , including atrocities committed in east timor prior to its independence from indonesia ; ( 6 ) condemns the intimidation and harassment of human rights and civil society organizations by members of the indonesian security forces and military - backed militia groups , and urges a complete investigation of the fatal poisoning of prominent human rights activist munir in september 2004 ; and ( 7 ) urges the government of indonesia and the indonesian military to continue to provide full , active , and unfettered cooperation to the federal bureau of investigation of the department of justice in its investigation of the august 31 , 2002 , attack near timika , papua , which killed three people ( including two americans , rick spier and ted burgon ) and injured 12 others , and to pursue the indictment , apprehension , and prosecution of all parties responsible for that attack .

 ( b ) findings relating to papua - congress finds the following: ( 1 ) papua , a resource - rich province whose indigenous inhabitants are predominantly melanesian , was formerly a colony of the netherlands .

 ( 2 ) while indonesia has claimed papua as part of its territory since its independence in the late 1940s , papua remained under dutch administrative control until 1962 .

 ( 3 ) on august 15 , 1962 , indonesia and the netherlands signed an agreement at the united nations in new york ( commonly referred to as the `new york agreement' ) which transferred administration of papua first to a united nations temporary executive authority ( untea ) , and then to indonesia in 1963 , pending an `act of free choice ... to permit the inhabitants to decide whether they wish to remain with indonesia' .

 ( 4 ) in the new york agreement , indonesia formally recognized 'the eligibility of all adults [in papua] ... to participate in [an] act of self - determination to be carried out in accordance with international practice' , and pledged 'to give the people of the territory the opportunity to exercise freedom of choice ... before the end of 1969' .

 ( 5 ) in july and august 1969 , indonesia conducted an `act of free choice' , in which 1,025 selected papuan elders voted unanimously to join indonesia , in circumstances that were subject to both overt and covert forms of manipulation .

 ( 6 ) in the intervening years , indigenous papuans have suffered extensive human rights abuses , natural resource exploitation , environmental degradation , and commercial dominance by immigrant communities , and some individuals and groups estimate that more than 100,000 papuans have been killed during indonesian rule , primarily during the sukarno and suharto administrations .

 ( 7 ) while the united states supports the territorial integrity of indonesia , indonesia's historical reliance on force for the maintenance of control has been counterproductive , and long - standing abuses by security forces have galvanized independence sentiments among many papuans .

 ( 8 ) while the indonesian parliament passed a special autonomy law for papua in october 2001 that was intended to allocate greater revenue and decision making authority to the papuan provincial government , the promise of special autonomy has not been effectively realized and has been undermined in its implementation , such as by conflicting legal directives further subdividing the province in apparent contravention of the law and without the consent of appropriate provincial authorities .

 ( 9 ) rather than demilitarizing its approach , indonesia has reportedly sent thousands of additional troops to papua , and military operations in the central highlands since the fall of 2004 have displaced thousands of civilians into very vulnerable circumstances , contributing further to mistrust of the central government by many indigenous papuans .

 ( 10 ) according to the 2004 annual country report on human rights practices of the department of state , in indonesia `security force members murdered , tortured , raped , beat , and arbitrarily detained civilians and members of separatist movements' and 'police frequently and arbitrarily detained persons without warrants , charges , or court proceedings' in papua .

 ( c ) reporting requirements - ( 1 ) report on special autonomy - not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act and one year thereafter , the secretary of state shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing implementation of special autonomy for papua and aceh .

such reports shall include — ( a ) an assessment of the extent to which each province has enjoyed an increase in revenue allocations and decision making authority ; ( b ) a description of access by international press and non - governmental organizations to each province ; ( c ) an assessment of the role played by local civil society in governance and decision making ; ( d ) a description of force levels and conduct of indonesian security forces in each province ; and ( e ) a description of united states efforts to promote respect for human rights in each province .

 ( 2 ) report on the 1969 act of free choice - not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of state shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report analyzing the 1969 act of free choice .

