when the term general aviation ( ga ) is mentioned , the image most likely to be conjured is one of a small single - engine airplane droning over america's farmland on a tranquil summer's day .

in the post - 9 / 11 context , this pastoral image of ga has been tarnished to a degree by knowledge that the 9 / 11 hijackers trained in small general aviation aircraft in the united states , and amid lingering concerns that ga aircraft could be used to carry out a future terrorist attack .

while some recent high - profile breaches of ga security have pointed to persisting vulnerabilities , and limited intelligence information may suggest a possible terrorist "fixation" on using aircraft to attack u.s. interests , ga aircraft vary considerably with regard to the risks they pose .

the security risk posed by a small single - engine airplane operating in rural settings is intuitively quite different from the risk characteristics of large business jets operating in and near major metropolitan areas .

most experts agree that an adaptive , risk - based approach to securing ga aircraft and airports that takes into account the unique characteristics of the various distinct components of ga is needed to assure that security needs are adequately met and balanced with economic and operational considerations of the ga industry .

policymakers have received mixed signals about the relative risk posed by general aviation .

while the 9 / 11 commission asserted that "[m]ajor vulnerabilities still exist in ... general aviation security," the commission did not further elaborate on the nature of those vulnerabilities nor did it make specific recommendations pertaining to ga security .

the faa has noted that [w]hile the dhs has no specific information that terrorist groups are currently planning to use general aviation ( ga ) aircraft to perpetrate attacks against the united states , it remains concerned that ( in light of completed and ongoing security enhancements for commercial aircraft and airports ) terrorists may turn to ga as an alternative method for conducting operations .

in other words , while ga aircraft and airports may not be optimally suited for terrorist objectives , the hardening of commercial operations may make them an attractive alternative to terrorists seeking to identify and exploit vulnerabilities in aviation security .

in this context , ga airports and aircraft are viewed as comparatively soft targets that may be exploited by terrorists because of known weaknesses and vulnerabilities .

this view focuses primarily on the vulnerability of general aviation and does not systematically assess risk with regard to the interaction between these vulnerabilities , the threat posed by ga aircraft , and the potential consequences of a terrorist attack using ga aircraft .

in fact , there is considerable debate over the threat element of the risk equation for ga operations .

while ga advocates argue that the threat is minimal , some policymakers and security experts have expressed concern that , to the contrary , ga may pose a significant security threat .

part of the difficulty in resolving this debate is the diversity of operations and aircraft types that make up ga , making a single threat assessment for all sectors of the ga industry arguably inappropriate .

to put the threat into context , the following discussion provides an overview of the variety of aircraft types , flight operations , and airport characteristics that make up ga .

this discussion is followed by an analysis of the existing vulnerabilities in ga security , the terrorist threat posed by ga aircraft , the potential consequences of an attack using various ga aircraft , and how these elements factor into a risk - based assessment of ga security .

based on this analysis , possible approaches and ongoing initiatives to enhance ga security are discussed .

in a sense , general aviation ( ga ) is a catch - all phrase that encompasses about 54% of all civil aviation activity within the united states , measured in terms of overall airport flight operations .

therefore , it is often easier to frame general aviation in terms of what it is not rather than what it is .

in this context , ga refers to most aviation operations not conducted by scheduled passenger airlines , large air cargo operators , or the military .

to add to the confusion , commercial charter operations are often grouped in with ga and non - revenue flights , such as maintenance test flights and repositioning flights conducted by passenger and cargo airlines , are usually operated under regulations often regarded as "general aviation" flight rules .

thus , virtually all flight activity outside the scope of scheduled passenger or cargo air carrier flights and military operations may be considered ga .

this encompasses a wide variety of aircraft types and flight operations .

table 1 shows the distribution of aircraft and flight operations formally categorized as ga .

ga security poses significant challenges for policymakers and security experts because ga is highly diverse , geographically dispersed , and relatively open compared to commercial airports servicing passenger airlines and other protected infrastructure such as nuclear reactors and chemical plants .

the security threat is not so much to ga assets themselves , but rather , from terrorists seeking to exploit ga assets to attack critical infrastructure or high - profile targets .

however , some ga assets could themselves be terrorist targets .

for example , some corporate aviation operators have expressed concern that aircraft carrying high - profile business leaders and executives , such as presidents of major u.s. corporations , could be targeted , particularly when operating overseas in areas where security concerns exist .

nonetheless , the primary threat identified regarding ga , both overseas and within the united states , is the concern that aircraft may be used by terrorists to launch an attack against critical facilities or infrastructure .

a secondary threat is that terrorists may infiltrate or otherwise exploit ga to gain knowledge and / or access to the airspace system in the united states .

it is known that some of the 9 / 11 hijackers trained in small ga airplanes in the united states before carrying out their attack using commercial jets .

consequently , following 9 / 11 , there was a specific focus , from both a law enforcement and a policy perspective , on the security of flight schools within the united states .

the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ; p.l .

107-71 ) originally called on the department of justice to implement a program to conduct background checks of all alien applicants seeking flight training in the united states in aircraft weighing more than 12,500 pounds and mandated security training for flight school employees .

vision 100 ( p.l .

108-176 ) placed the responsibility for these flight school background checks in the hands of the tsa and expanded the program to include a notification requirement when foreign students initiate training in lighter aircraft weighing less than 12,500 pounds .

these measures were enacted in direct response to the perceived threat that terrorists may infiltrate flight schools in order to gain operating knowledge of aircraft and the u.s. national airspace system .

since september 11 , 2001 , policies and approaches for protecting ga aircraft and airports from being exploited in terrorist attacks have focused on providing general guidelines and establishing cooperative arrangements between the ga industry and the tsa for carrying out security enhancements without imposing a rigorous statutory or regulatory framework .

the ga industry has argued that inflexible statutory or regulatory measures could impose unnecessary burdens on certain sectors of the ga industry and could be extremely costly to carry out effectively .

legislative actions addressing ga security have focused primarily on the vetting of foreign flight school applicants , ga pilots , and more recently , prospective charter and lease customers .

regulatory actions have primarily focused on airspace restrictions and protections , mostly around the nation's capital , in addition to addressing statutory mandates for vetting certain individuals with access to ga airports and aircraft .

physical security of ga airports and aircraft has largely been left to aircraft owners and pilots , airport operators , and local authorities .

while aircraft owners and pilots have generally favored this approach to avoid potentially restrictive federal security regulations , it has created a perceived burden on airport operators and local authorities to identify and address security needs at the airport level .

the tsa has issued guidelines , largely based on industry recommendations , but the federal involvement in terms of both regulatory activity and funding for ga security initiatives has been relatively limited .

this approach has led the media and some policymakers and security experts to voice concerns over what they perceive to be persisting vulnerabilities at some ga airports .

some media reports have raised significant concerns over what has been described as "practically nonexistent" security at many small general aviation ( ga ) airports .

ga advocates have countered that small general aviation aircraft do not pose a significant threat and point out that many ga airports have taken reasonable steps , largely on their own initiative , to enhance security .

however , security concerns remain and a few high - profile incidents pointing to vulnerabilities in ga security have attracted considerable attention and raised concerns among some policymakers and security experts .

in the first of these high - profile incidents following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , a student pilot intentionally crashed a small single - engine airplane into a skyscraper in downtown tampa , florida on january 5 , 2002 .

the pilot , described as a troubled youth , reportedly had expressed support for osama bin laden and the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , but acted alone and had no known ties to any terrorist groups .

more recently , on july 22 , 2005 , a small ultralight crashed near the german parliament building and chancellor's office in berlin in what was described by german air traffic control officials as a suspected suicide .

the crash prompted german officials to establish a no - fly zone over central berlin and again raised concerns in the united states over protecting key assets from possible attacks using ga aircraft as this incident occurred just over two months after a high - profile breach of the protected airspace around washington , dc , by an unauthorized single - engine airplane that prompted evacuations of the white house and the u.s. capitol .

on october 11 , 2006 , the accidental crash of a small single - engine plane , piloted by new york yankees pitcher corey lidle , into a new york city high - rise condominium — killing lidle and his flight instructor and severely injuring one building occupant — renewed post - 9 / 11 concerns over the safety and security of ga flights operated in closed proximity to major population centers .

following the crash , the faa took action by restricting aircraft access to the east river corridor , a narrow wedge of airspace between manhattan and brooklyn where ga flights had been permitted at low altitudes , mostly on the grounds of safety rather than for security reasons .

however , following the crash , some policymakers resounded their calls for enhanced security measures , such as ga flight restrictions , in the vicinity of new york city .

while these various incidents have received significant attention given the focus on aviation security following the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , ga aircraft have been used maliciously in earlier incidents .

most notably , in the early morning of september 12 , 1994 , a suicidal individual with a history of mental illness , reportedly despondent over personal and business problems , intentionally crashed a stolen small single - engine airplane on the south lawn of the white house .

while the airplane was completely destroyed and the perpetrator was killed in the crash , property damage was minimal and the incident posed no threat to those in the white house .

although these events have attracted substantial media interest , such incidents are relatively rare .

while they identify real vulnerabilities in ga security , ga advocates caution that they should be properly viewed in the broader context of risk assessment , which fully takes into account the security threat and potential consequences to critical infrastructure posed by these aircraft as well as the nature and scope of specific vulnerabilities .

first , while each of these cases highlights a potential threat involving general aviation aircraft , it is important to note that in each of these cases , damage caused by the aircraft was relatively limited and no injuries or deaths to persons on the ground occurred .

second , while the incidents in tampa and berlin and the 1994 white house incident point to a legitimate concern over suicidal pilots , an examination of national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) aviation accident data , spanning from 1962 through 2007 , revealed that suspected suicides using ga aircraft have been extremely rare , occurring at a rate of less than two incidents per year .

perhaps more notably , none of these incidents resulted in any deaths of persons on the ground .

two widely reported thefts of ga aircraft in 2005 raised concerns among several policymakers because they were viewed as indicators of vulnerabilities in ga operations that could be exploited by terrorists .

for example , in an incident that occurred on june 22 , 2005 , a 20-year - old connecticut man allegedly stole an aircraft from a danbury , connecticut , flight school and took two teenage accomplices on a late - night "drunken , three - hour joyride" before landing on a taxiway at the westchester county , new york , airport .

later that year , on october 9 , 2005 , a 22-year - old georgia man stole a cessna citation vii business jet , one that he had served on as a copilot but was not qualified or authorized to fly on his own , from the st. augustine , florida , airport .

the individual took his friends on a late - night joyride of more than 300 miles , landing the jet at its base airport , gwinnett county ( georgia ) - briscoe field airport near atlanta .

this incident raised security concerns because the jet aircraft was flown in close proximity to several florida and georgia cities without raising any suspicion because aircraft operating below 18,000 feet , regardless of size or capability , typically are not required to file flight plans or establish communications with air traffic controllers when operating under visual flight rules .

while thefts of jet aircraft are extremely rare , in another incident that occurred on december 15 , 1997 , an individual with falsified faa credentials stole a lear jet from the fort lauderdale executive airport in florida and piloted the airplane to nicaragua to use the plane for charter flight operations .

like suspected suicides using aircraft , thefts of small ga aircraft are relatively rare , and thefts of jet aircraft are practically unheard of .

the aopa notes that , historically , only about a dozen ga aircraft are stolen each year and recent trends suggest that owners and operators of these airplanes are taking steps to reduce their vulnerability to theft .

statistics from the aviation crime prevention institute , inc. indicate that thefts of ga aircraft have declined considerably since 2000 ( see figure 2 ) .

since the declining trend in thefts of aircraft and aircraft parts , like expensive avionics components , was evident prior to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , it is difficult to draw any meaningful inferences regarding the potential impact that post - 9 / 11 security awareness and initiatives may have had on reducing thefts .

these trends also do not necessarily indicate that ga aircraft are now less vulnerable to theft , but rather may simply suggest that existing vulnerabilities in ga security are less frequently exploited , perhaps because of a general perception that security is now tighter .

while airplane thefts may be rare , high - profile thefts , like the cases cited above , provide some anecdotal evidence that individuals with knowledge of ga airports and aircraft could exploit existing security vulnerabilities and gain access to aircraft relatively easily , despite the increased security awareness at ga airports since the 9 / 11 attacks .

while none of the events discussed above has been linked to terrorism , some limited intelligence information that has been made public suggests a continued terrorist interest in using ga aircraft to carry out attacks both domestically and overseas .

for example , a crop duster pilot in florida identified 9 / 11 suicide hijacker mohammed atta as an individual who had approached him in early 2001 inquiring about the purchase and operation of crop duster aircraft .

similarly , u.s. authorities presented evidence that zacharias moussaoui — who was arrested prior to the 9 / 11 attacks after raising suspicions surrounding his desire to train in large aircraft simulators and pleaded guilty to conspiring with the 9 / 11 hijackers — made similar inquiries about starting a crop - dusting company while living in norman , oklahoma .

evidence was also presented that moussaoui was in possession of a computer disk containing information regarding the aerial application of pesticides .

this evidence raised concerns at the central intelligence agency ( cia ) that al qaeda has "considered using aircraft to disseminate [biological warfare] agents. .

the cia also suggested that , in initially planning the 9 / 11 attacks , one of osama bin laden's associates proposed that the world trade center be targeted by small aircraft packed with explosives , but bin laden himself altered the plan to use large commercial jets instead .

if true , this suggests that terrorists engaged in some deliberative process of weighing the pros and cons of using small general aviation aircraft as compared to commercial airlines in planning the 9 / 11 attacks .

while the terrorists favored commercial aircraft in carrying out their attack on september 11 , 2001 , in the post - 9 / 11 environment , heightened security measures at commercial airports could make ga assets considerably more attractive to terrorists than in the past .

while it is unlikely that small ga aircraft packed with conventional explosives could cause the amount of destruction inflicted on september 11 , 2001 , large jet aircraft in the ga fleet or smaller aircraft carrying chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear ( cbrn ) weapons may pose a more formidable threat .

although no publically available intelligence on terrorist operations since september 11 , 2001 , has indicated any specific threat involving ga aircraft domestically , evidence indicates that al qaeda has maintained a continued interest in using small aircraft to attack u.s. interests overseas .

for example , on april 29 , 2003 , pakistani authorities apprehended waleed bin attash ( a.k.a. , khallad , tawfiq bin attash ) , the suspected mastermind of the u.s.s .

cole bombing and a known associate of the 9 / 11 hijackers , and five other suspected al qaeda operatives in karachi , pakistan .

soon after the arrests , authorities uncovered a plot to crash a small , explosives - laden airplane into the united states consulate office in karachi illustrating al qaeda's continued interest in using aircraft to attack u.s. assets .

the dhs subsequently issued a security advisory indicating that al qaeda was planning to use ga aircraft to attack warships in the persian gulf as well as the u.s. consulate in karachi , pakistan .

while the advisory characterized these threats as a demonstrated "fixation" on using aircraft in attacks against u.s. assets , it was strongly criticized by ga interests for being overly alarmist and overstating the potential threat posed by small ga aircraft .

in examining the security risk posed by aircraft that could be utilized in suicide attacks or as launch platforms for conventional weapons , the threat posed by general aviation aircraft is largely a function of aircraft weight , payload capacity ( including fuel capacity ) , and speed .

other factors would likely play a relatively small role in the overall threat posed by particular aircraft .

for example , aircraft agility — a rough measure of its capability to maneuver and evade countermeasures — may be considered a factor in the risk equation , albeit a relatively minor one .

a small two - seat sport aircraft might be quite agile , but its small size , relatively slow speed , and limited payload capacity may significantly limit the threat posed by such an aircraft .

ga interests point out that most ga aircraft are capable of carrying less payload than a typical light car .

for example , both the cessna 172 and piper warrior — very popular single - engine aircraft — have maximum takeoff weights of less than 2,500 pounds and useful payloads ( including fuel and occupants ) of less than 1,000 pounds .

by contrast , the truck bomb used in the april 19 , 1995 , oklahoma city bombing was believed to have contained about 5,000 pounds of improvised explosives and the truck bomb involved in the february 26 , 1993 bombing at the world trade center in new york city was believed to contain a 1,300 pound device .

while these events involved unusually large explosive devices , typical light ga aircraft would only be able to carry a device a small fraction of this size .

thus , at least with regard to being used as a platform for conventional explosives , the threat posed by light ga aircraft is relatively small compared to trucks which have significantly larger payload capacities .

however , as ground based security measures such as setbacks , barriers , and access controls are implemented around critical infrastructure , terrorists may view ga aircraft as a possible means to circumvent these defenses .

while many forms of ground transportation , especially trucks , can accommodate significantly larger payloads than almost all ga aircraft , some observers fear that aircraft may be used in a terrorist attack because they cannot be as easily thwarted by blockades , barriers , or other physical security measures .

nonetheless , executing an attack that involves loading a ga aircraft with a large quantity of explosives may be difficult without raising some suspicion at the airport , at least domestically where airport operators and pilots have been instructed to be vigilant for such unusual activities .

while the threat posed by light ga aircraft carrying conventional explosives is limited by the size and speed of these aircraft , some experts argue that small aircraft may pose a significant threat if used as a platform to launch a chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear ( cbrn ) attack over a densely populated area .

in these cases , payload capacity and speed may not be considered as significant components of the risk equation .

rather , with regard to the cbrn threat , the most significant element associated with small ga aircraft appears to be their unique capability to fly at relatively low altitudes above densely populated areas and large congregations of people on the ground .

in fact , the slow speed of these smaller aircraft and the ease at which doors and windows on non - pressurized airplanes and helicopters can be operated in flight may actually pose a greater threat from certain types of attacks , such as chemical and biological attacks , as compared to larger , faster aircraft .

agricultural aircraft used for spraying crops with pesticides and fertilizers pose a unique threat as a platform for a biological or chemical attack because they are specifically designed for aerial dispersal and could be exploited by terrorists for this specific purpose .

however , the chemical and biological threat using ga aircraft may not be as ominous as some casual observers may fear .

first , many chemical agents must be released in rather high concentrations .

some , such as cyanides , may only be effective as a chemical weapon if dispensed in an enclosed area therefore greatly limiting the threat of aerial dispersion .

while other chemical agents — such as caustic mustard agents and military nerve agents — may be effective in open air settings , the limited payload of small ga aircraft may limit the scope of an aerial attack using such agents .

second , aerial dispersion of either a chemical or biological agent over populated areas or large congregations of individuals is likely to be easily detected .

if a suspected aerial dispersion of a chemical or biological agent is promptly reported , a timely public health response could significantly limit the impact of such an attack .

in general , experts believe that if any chemical or biological attack were to occur — whether using a small airplane or some other method to attack — it would likely be on a small scale physically , but nonetheless , it may have a large psychological impact on the population .

more specifically , in terms of using small ga aircraft to carry out such an attack , the greatest threat appears to be to large , open - air assemblies such as major outdoor sporting events and concerts .

in fact , one of several homeland security planning scenarios — developed by the white house homeland security council in partnership with the dhs — describes the potential effects of an adversary using a light aircraft to spray a chemical blister agent into a packed college football stadium holding 100,000 people .

the scenario's predicted impact includes 70,000 hospitalizations due to exposure , including many permanent impairments and 150 deaths , but notes that expedient decontamination could reduce injuries by one half .

this would likely be a worst case scenario in which an extremely large assembly of people could potentially be victimized .

even in densely populated areas , this degree of impact from an aerial attack not specifically targeting a large outdoor assembly is unlikely because it might be expected that many individuals would be indoors or adequately protected by buildings and other structures .

nonetheless , while such an attack may be limited in terms of its physical impact , it may cause widespread fear and panic .

by comparison , the threat from radiological and nuclear devices appears to be much greater in terms of the potential for mass casualties and physical destruction .

a small - scale explosive radiological dispersal device — a so - called "dirty - bomb" — could easily fit inside a suitcase or a backpack , and a pilot carrying such a device onto a small airplane may not arouse any particular suspicion at an airport .

however , the threat from such devices is not unique to ga aircraft as these devices could reach their intended target by other means , including being carried in a small car or even being carried by a pedestrian .

most experts concede that , once in the hands of terrorists , it may be difficult to stop an attack with a radiological or nuclear device because many options are available to deliver the weapon to its intended target .

using ga aircraft is one of many means for launching such an attack .

however , there is no reason to believe that ga aircraft are any more appealing to terrorists nor any more vulnerable than other possible methods to carry out such an attack .

concerns have also been raised over the potential threat that an aircraft attack may pose to a nuclear power plant , a chemical plant , or other potentially vulnerable infrastructure where a terrorist attack could inflict widespread damage and mass casualties .

a review of security measures at nuclear reactors prepared by the office of representative markey identified several perceived vulnerabilities at nuclear reactor sites suggesting that these facilities may be vulnerable to 9 / 11-style attacks using general aviation aircraft .

based on information provided by the nuclear regulatory commission , representative markey's office issued a report on nuclear reactor security that included an assessment of the vulnerability of these facilities to an attack by aircraft .

the report noted that while 21 out of 103 reactors in the united states are located within 5 miles of an airport , 96% of u.s. nuclear reactors did not factor the impact from even a small aircraft into their design .

four reactors were evaluated during their design to consider impacts from aircraft weighing up to 12,500 pounds which would include most ga aircraft except for business jets and large twin engine aircraft .

three mile island in pennsylvania was cited as the only facility where portions were designed to withstand the impact of large airliners in addition to smaller aircraft .

in contrast , the report noted that some european countries , including switzerland and germany in particular , incorporate safety features such as reinforced concrete walls and spatial separation of critical safety systems to withstand the crash of certain types of military and commercial aircraft .

other examinations of the potential threat to nuclear facilities from aircraft have focused on perceived vulnerabilities of spent - fuel pools used to cool expended nuclear fuel .

however , power companies maintain that a study modeling the impact of an aircraft crash into a spent - fuel pool wall concluded that while such a scenario could crush or crack the wall , it would not likely cause a release of radiation .

a report prepared for the aopa by robert jefferson , a nuclear reactor safety consultant , concluded that the threat to nuclear reactors from small general aviation aircraft is "practically non - existent" and "... it is unlikely that a terrorist would choose a light general aviation vehicle to threaten a nuclear power plant. .

jefferson's analysis concluded that even the impact of an airliner like those used in the 9 / 11 attacks would , in all likelihood , be unable to penetrate the outer containment vessel and argued that the analysis referenced by representative markey significantly overstates the risk potential and "... overlooks the fact that by their very design , nuclear power plants are inherently resistant to [airborne attacks]. .

the report also concluded that the proximity of nuclear reactors to ga airports does not increase the exposure of these facilities to terrorist threats .

although the specific threat posed to nuclear facilities by ga aircraft remains a contentious issue , the faa has kept in force restrictions on circling , loitering , or otherwise flying in a suspicious manner around nuclear facilities .

arguably , these measures would provide little deterrent against a well - planned terrorist attack .

however , they highlight the continued concern over possible airborne threats to nuclear facilities , whatever the true risk may be .

more elaborate measures to protect nuclear facilities , such as implementing anti - aircraft defense capabilities around nuclear facilities , are wrought with operational and policy complexities including high costs , questionable effectiveness , and a potentially high risk of shooting down an errant ga pilot who meant no harm .

while light ga aircraft appear to pose a relatively limited threat by themselves in terms of physically damaging critical infrastructure , larger ga aircraft pose a potentially more formidable threat .

due to the size and speed of some of these aircraft , particularly mid - sized and large business jets , they could inflict significant damage to buildings and critical infrastructure if used in a suicide attack .

these aircraft have significantly larger payload and fuel capacities which would have a direct bearing on the degree of physical damage they could cause to buildings and infrastructure .

thus , in terms of both assessing risk and identifying options for mitigating the security risk posed by ga , the distinction between small ga aircraft that make up the large majority of the fleet and larger business jets has important implications .

while small aircraft appear to pose a greater threat as possible platforms for chemical or biological attacks , large business jets appear to pose more of a threat from being exploited in a suicide attack scenario similar to the september 11 , 2001 , attacks using commercial airliners .

because the various sectors of ga appear to pose distinct threats , risk mitigation strategies arguably should be tailored to some degree to address the specific security threats posed by different sectors of the ga industry as well as the specific nature of potential security vulnerabilities that also vary across different types of aircraft and flight operations .

a variety of options exist for mitigating security risks posed by ga aircraft and flight operations , many of which have been implemented or are currently under development or consideration .

as previously discussed , the selection of mitigation options may need to be tailored to specific vulnerabilities and threats of different sectors of the ga industry which may differ significantly in their degree and scope .

while a wide range of options is available , many of the more extensive and costly options for providing security may not be economically feasible , practical , or necessary at smaller ga airports away from major population centers .

several available options center on traditional security techniques to improve access controls and surveillance around ga facilities and better protect aircraft against theft and unauthorized use .

additional options include procedures for vetting individuals with authorized access to aircraft and aviation facilities , and procedures for clearing passengers .

another possible option for enhancing ga security would be to address law enforcement and homeland security response to suspicious activities and improved intelligence tracking of such incidents to identify patterns indicative of possible terrorist activity .

finally , in terms of adopting a layered security system to augment measures put in place at airports , airspace restrictions and defenses may be considered to protect high - profile sites and critical infrastructure from the threat of aerial attacks .

costs , in terms of direct implementation and oversight costs as well as the indirect costs related to disruption of air commerce and freedom of movement , are likely to be important considerations in assessing the utility and feasibility of implementing specific options to enhance ga security .

for example , implementing broadly applied security requirements for all ga airports may impose significant cost challenges , particularly to small , rural airports where the need for such measures may be questionable .

also , airspace restrictions tend to be highly contentious because while they directly impact air commerce and the freedom of movement , they are viewed by some experts as being of questionable value in preventing a terrorist attack unless coupled with elaborate air defense capabilities .

deploying air defense capabilities on a large scale to protect against possible aircraft attacks carries a relatively high cost and involves extensive commitments of resources and collaboration between the faa , the dhs and the department of defense ( dod ) .

the costs and benefits associated with various mitigation options can be analyzed in a risk analysis framework — examining the threat and vulnerability of specific sectors of the ga industry as well as the potential consequences of various attack scenarios exploiting general aviation — to better understand the tradeoffs between various options .

because of the diversity of ga airports , aircraft , and flight operations , and the varied threats and vulnerabilities posed by different sectors of the ga industry , a logical starting point in mitigating security risk would be to perform systematic risk analyses or security risk assessments examining specific components of ga .

the fy2006 department of homeland security appropriations act ( p.l .

109-90 ) required the dhs to examine the vulnerability of high - risk areas and facilities to possible attack from ga aircraft .

this mandate focused on the specific vulnerability of critical infrastructure to attack , which relates more closely to the threat to critical infrastructure and other significant sites posed by ga aircraft as discussed in this report .

in this report vulnerability has referred instead to the specific weaknesses in security measures to protect ga airports and aircraft that could be exploited to gain unauthorized access to facilities and aircraft .

a comprehensive risk assessment and risk mitigation strategy would likely take into account both the threat and vulnerability associated with ga operations as well as the potential cost of consequences associated with possible terrorist attack scenarios .

ga security was a topic of considerable legislative interest during the 109 th congress .

based on a senate - passed amendment introduced by senator clinton ( s.amdt .

1106 to h.r .

2360 ) , conference report language in the fy2006 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

109-90 ) required the dhs , in coordination with the department of transportation , to "... study the vulnerability posed to high - risk areas and facilities from general aviation aircraft that could be stolen or used as a weapon against those areas. .

areas to be considered in the assessment included critical transportation infrastructure , nuclear facilities , military bases , and highly populated areas with similarly situated critical infrastructure .

the analysis was required to identify vulnerabilities at ga airports , the sufficiency of existing security measures , and any additional security measures that could be implemented .

additional legislation introduced in the house sought site - specific measures to improve security at ga airports .

the strengthen aviation security act ( h.r .

2649 ) , introduced by representative markey on may 26 , 2005 , would have required airport operators to develop site - specific vulnerability assessments for each ga airport and develop a plan for addressing vulnerabilities identified within one year of enactment .

h.r .

2649 would also have required background checks and terrorist database screening for individuals with access to general aviation aircraft .

the bill would have also required all ga aircraft to be secured by visible immobilizing devices such as prop locks while parked at ga airports .

in addition to these measures , h.r .

2649 called for establishing no - fly zones during periods of high terrorist threat levels and any other applicable times identified by the dhs around all sensitive nuclear facilities , chemical facilities where a release of hazardous materials could endanger one million or more lives , and any other facilities designated by the secretary of homeland security .

also during the 109 th congress , representative sweeney introduced the general aviation security act of 2005 ( h.r .

3397 ) .

this bill would have required all operators of public and private - use airports in the united states to register with the dhs and undergo a registration renewal process every three years .

the proposed registration process was to include a security plan documenting site - specific security procedures consistent with the tsa's most recent security guidelines for ga airports .

in developing security plans , operators would have been required to provide a written description of how the airport has addressed each recommendation or justify why a particular recommendation was not adopted .

the legislation called for using self - assessment tools to identify airport characteristics for security purposes in the development of airport - specific security plans .

in addition to providing security plans to the dhs as part of the registration process , airports would have also been required to submit their security plans to local law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction over the airport .

h.r .

3397 also would have mandated that all public - use airports: ensure that all aircraft crews verify the identity of all aircraft passengers ; maintain logs of all transient aircraft for a minimum of five years ; make a list of emergency telephone contacts available to all airport personnel ; restrict the access of unlicensed individuals and student pilots to aircraft keys ; require aircraft renters to present government - issued identification in addition to their pilot's license ; post applicable security warning signs and advisories where appropriate ; provide emergency responders with confidential emergency locator maps of the airport identifying items such as runways , ramp areas , fence lines , and gates ; and familiarize local law enforcement with the airport and consult with them in developing security procedures .

additionally , at all ga airports — both public - and private - use — all aircraft would have been required to be double - locked with one external lock and one lock inside the aircraft .

also , at all ga airports , hangars would have been required to be locked when not in use and adequate fencing would have been required for secure areas .

besides these more comprehensive measures addressing ga security , concerns over airspace violations that complicate the task of protecting critical assets from aerial attack prompted the introduction of legislation in the 109 th congress calling for stiffer fines for airspace violators and mandatory pilot training on airspace restrictions .

in response to concerns over frequent violations of restricted airspace near washington , dc , representative blunt introduced the capitol airspace enforcement act ( h.r .

3465 ) .

the bill called for civil penalties ranging from $10,000 up to $100,000 for violations of the 15-mile radius flight restricted zone ( frz ) around washington , dc , and fines of up to $5,000 for violations of security protocols while operating in the larger air defense identification zone ( adiz ) .

the measure also included a requirement for mandatory pilot training regarding the airspace restrictions and proper operating procedures and compliance with airspace restrictions .

while this legislation was not passed , the faa issued a proposal to require special security procedures awareness training for all pilots operating aircraft under visual flight rules within 100 nautical miles of washington , dc .

this proposal , however , has been criticized by the aopa which believes that a 100-mile radius is too large and thus would unnecessarily mandate additional training for many pilots that never operate in or near the washington , dc adiz .

the faa has developed a washington , dc adiz training module for ga pilots ; however this training is currently optional .

nationwide , in the five - year period following the 9 / 11 attacks , the faa has documented more than 6,500 violations of security restricted airspace , with almost 50% of these occurring in the airspace around washington , dc .

airspace security procedures training for pilots is seen as an important step toward curtailing inadvertent violations .

however , these statistics suggest that , while the greatest need appears to be for training regarding the washington , dc airspace , increased training and awareness of airspace restrictions in other part of the country may also be needed .

while ga advocacy groups , like the aopa and the nbaa , support education and training for pilots flying in and near restricted airspace and have taken considerable steps on their own initiative to provide educational materials regarding the airspace restrictions , they strongly oppose stricter penalties and believe that administrative actions and fines already available to the faa along with the potential threat of a shoot down already serve as sufficient deterrents for inadvertent airspace violations .

during the 109 th congress , these groups have voiced significant concerns over the impact of airspace restrictions and homeland security regulations on air commerce and the freedom of movement by air .

these groups have also opposed comprehensive legislative measures , such as h.r .

3397 , that sought to mandate broad security requirements over the wide range of ga airports and operations cautioning that imposing such mandates "... would be ridiculously expensive , is unnecessary , and ignores the guiding principle of making investments in security based on risk. .

in response to this criticism , attempting to tailor homeland security policy to fit the risk posed by widely varied ga operations , allocating budgets and resources to address security priorities , and addressing concerns about potentially impeding air commerce or compromising aviation safety are likely to remain ongoing challenges for the congress .

given recent indications of continued congressional interest in ga security issues , the various legislative proposals offered during the 109 th congress may be revisited during the 110 th congress .

several members of congress expressed a continued interest in the security of general aviation operations during the 110 th congress .

at a january 17 , 2007 hearing held by senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , senator rockefeller raised security concerns over small general aviation aircraft , and urged the tsa to increase staffing and resources devoted to ga security .

tsa administrator , kip hawley , responded that a more robust plan for enhancing ga security is forthcoming , however the tsa has not yet proposed any specific regulatory changes related to ga operations .

in the interim , ga industry observers anticipate that increased random inspections of ga aircraft , particularly on ga ramps at larger commercial airports , are likely to increase in the near term .

further congressional oversight of ga security efforts and the introduction of related legislation is anticipated during the 110 th congress .

the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act ( p.l .

110-53 ) includes a specific section ( sec .

1617 ) that required the tsa to develop and implement a standardized threat and vulnerability assessment program for general aviation airports , and implement that program at selected ga airports based on risk .

also , the act required the tsa to complete a feasibility study to assess the concept of providing grants to ga airport operators for security enhancements .

if deemed feasible , the bill authorizes the implementation of such a grant program .

the act also included a specific mandate requiring ga aircraft operators to submit passenger information and advance flight notification to u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) before entering united states airspace for vetting against appropriate databases .

