the u.s. constitution establishes qualifications for representatives and senators , but it is silent about the roles and duties of an individual member of congress .

house and senate rules require only that members be present and vote on each question placed before their chamber .

the job of a member of congress has been characterized as "a license to persuade , connive , hatch ideas , propagandize , assail enemies , vote , build coalitions , shepherd legislation , and in general cut a figure in public affairs. .

beyond voting requirements , there is no formal set of expectations or official explanation of what roles or duties are required , or what different members might emphasize as they carry out their work .

in the absence of such formal authorities , many of the responsibilities that members of congress have assumed over the years have evolved from the expectations of members and their constituencies .

today , the roles and duties carried out by a member of congress are understood to include representation , legislation , and constituent service and education , as well as political and electoral activities .

in a typical week , members may oversee constituent services in the state or district , travel between their state or district to washington , dc , to participate in committee activities , greet a local delegation from the home state , meet with lobbyists , supervise office staff , speak on the floor , conduct investigations , interact with the news media , and attend to various electoral duties , including fundraising , planning , or campaigning for election .

given that no precise definition exists for the role of a member , upon election to congress , each new member is responsible for developing an approach to his or her job that serves a wide range of roles and responsibilities .

one observer of congress notes that the first job of a member is to come to grips with the dimensions of [their] role and develop a personal approach to [their] tasks .

given the many challenges , the overall conclusion is readily apparent: the key to effectiveness in congress is the ability to organize well within a framework of carefully selected priorities .

it is not possible , however , to construct a grand master plan such that priorities and the time devoted to each will neatly mesh , for legislative life is subject to sudden and numerous complications .

observers note that after identifying and organizing priorities , a member typically carries out some of the resulting duties personally , and delegates others to congressional staff who act on his or her behalf .

the staff may work in the member's individual office , on committees to which the member is assigned , in offices connected to leadership posts the member may hold , and in the separate political and reelection operations the member may maintain .

in this understanding , the member sets broad policies to fulfill his or her duties , and the appropriate staff act to carry them out .

the distribution of responsibility will vary according to the preferences and priorities of the member at the center of the effort .

nevertheless , the work carried out by staff is typically attributed to the effort of the member .

many scholars of congress see these member choices and delegation arrangements as dependent in part on their goals .

generally , these observers suggest that members pursue three primary goals: gaining reelection , securing influence within congress , and making good public policy .

the relative priority a member may assign to these goals can affect a wide range of choices regarding a congressional career , including ( 1 ) the emphasis given to different roles and duties ; ( 2 ) activities in the washington , dc , and district or state offices ; ( 3 ) staffing choices in member and committee offices ; and ( 4 ) preference for committee assignments .

it can also affect a member's approaches to legislative work , constituent relations , media relations , party issues , and electoral activities .

given the dynamics of the congressional environment , the priorities that members place on various roles may change as their seniority increases , or in response to changes in committee assignments , policy focus , district or state priorities , institutional leadership , or electoral pressures .

as part of a broader evaluation of house administrative practices in the mid - 1970s , the house commission on administrative review surveyed members of the house and asked them to describe the major jobs , duties , and functions that they believed they were expected to perform .

at the same time , the commission hired the research firm louis harris and associates to conduct a survey of the public to gauge its expectations of congress and its members .

the member survey found that the three most frequently mentioned duties and activities were the drafting and introduction of legislation ; helping constituents solve problems ; and representing the interests of their districts and constituents .

other expectations included position taking and constituent education .

table 1 summarizes the responses received by role categories established by the commission .

according to the public survey conducted by the commission , the most common expectations of members were to represent the people and district according to the wishes of the majority ; to solve problems in the district ; and to keep in contact with the people in the district through regular visits and meetings in the district and polls or questionnaires .

other public expectations included regular attendance in legislative sessions and voting on legislation .

table 2 summarizes the most frequently mentioned responses to the public survey .

despite differences in point of view , both the member and public survey results describe common interests in local representation , constituency services , legislative activity , and regular contact between the member and the district .

the differences between member and public expectations may reflect the different perspectives on the work of a member of congress .

where members are daily confronted with representational , legislative , and institutional duties , the public focuses on representational , legislative , and service responsibilities , apparently without recognizing a broader underlying institutional , procedural , and operational framework in which members of congress operate .

some observers suggest that this narrow public focus is in part a reflection of the attention the public gives , or does not give , to political matters in general .

common member and public interest in local representation , constituency service issues , legislative activity , and regular contact between the member and the constituency may partially explain how individual members of congress receive broad public satisfaction or approval of their performance while congress as an institution , where members engage the procedural and operational barriers the public disdains , routinely trails the executive and judicial branches in public approval .

the responses to the member and public surveys suggest that the roles and duties of a member of congress can be identified in part as an outgrowth of congressional and public expectations .

these congressional roles may be described by focusing on some of the underlying tasks typically required to carry them out .

because some of the duties are complex , and some of the underlying tasks often overlap , some of the roles may overlap .

the roles described below are derived from congressional duties mentioned in the constitution ; responses to the house surveys of members and the general public ; and scholarly studies .

with no formal or definitive requirements , each member of congress is free to define his or her own job and set his or her own priorities .

although elements of each of the roles described can be found among the duties performed by any senator or representative , the degree to which each is carried out differs among members as they pursue the common goals of seeking reelection , building influence in congress , and making good public policy .

each member may also emphasize different duties during different stages of his or her career as other conditions of the member's situation change .

for example , some may focus on outreach , constituent service , and other state or district activity .

others may focus on developing influence in their chamber by developing policy expertise or advancing specific legislation .

no member , however , is likely to focus on any one role or duty at the exclusion of another , because the extent to which a member successfully manages all of those roles is the basis on which his or her constituents may judge the member's success .

