the legal framework for international civil aviation rights dates back to the 1919 convention for the regulation of aerial navigation ( paris convention ) , which was a part of the paris peace conference .

the hallmark aviation principle recognized by the paris convention is that every nation has absolute and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above its defined territory .

this principle was reaffirmed in 1944 at the chicago international civil aviation conference , which produced the chicago convention .

the chicago convention resulted in an international framework based largely on national interests , favoring bilateral air transport agreements over multilateral accords with respect to issues such as routes , frequency and capacity .

the chicago convention's accomplishments included an agreement by the signatories to grant each other two of the so - called "five freedoms" of air transport , specifically , the right to fly across other states without landing and the right to land for nontraffic purposes .

in addition , the chicago convention established the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) to regulate the safety , communications , and technological aspects of international civil aviation .

since the chicago convention , international civil aviation rights have developed primarily through a series of bilateral agreements between the united states and foreign countries .

most of these agreements have been "executive agreements" rather than treaties , thereby avoiding the advice and consent requirement of the constitution , and typically have contained language favorable to the united states .

for example , prior agreements permitted the united states to designate both an unlimited number of gateway cities and an unlimited numbers of carriers .

in addition , the agreements provided the air carriers the right to determine capacity with only the vaguest of guidelines .

as the united states began to deregulate its domestic airline industry , administrations began to seek more liberal , free - market - based international agreements as well .

domestically , however , even as the united states began to adopt more liberal regulations for its aviation industry , several existing laws continue to have a strong impact on international civil aviation .

currently , air transportation and air commerce are governed by the federal aviation act of 1958 .

section 401 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the act states that "an air carrier may provide air transportation only if the air carrier holds a certificate issued under this chapter authorizing the air transportation. .

the statute authorizes the secretary of transportation to "issue a certificate of public convenience and necessity to a citizen of the united states ...." before issuing a certificate , however , the secretary "must find that the citizen is fit , willing , and able to provide the transportation to be authorized by the certificate and to comply with this part and the regulations of the secretary. .

stated another way , to operate in the united states as an air carrier , an entity must be a u.s. citizen and must be judged by the secretary to comply with the statute and any other applicable regulations .

in addition to the citizenship requirements , u.s. law also contains a general prohibition against cabotage activity .

generally speaking , the term cabotage is defined as "the right of a foreign airline to carry passengers and / or cargo between airports of the same country. .

the prohibition states that "aircraft may take on for compensation , at a place in the united states , passengers or cargo destined for another place in the united states only if— ( 1 ) specifically authorized under section 40109 ( g ) of this title ; or ( 2 ) under regulations the secretary prescribes authorizing air carriers to provide otherwise authorized air transportation with foreign registered aircraft under lease or charter to them without crew. .

if neither of those situations exists , foreign aircraft are not permitted to perform cabotage within the united states .

in addition , the secretary of transportation has general discretionary authority to waive other economic - related statutory provisions listed in section 40109 ( c ) "when the secretary decides that the exemption is consistent with the public interest. .

the cabotage prohibition , however , is not among the regulations listed in section 40109 ( c ) .

finally , u.s. law has created an incentive program exclusively available to domestic air carriers ; namely , the civil reserve air fleet program ( craf ) .

under this program , domestic air carriers supply aircraft on a voluntary basis to increase the military's airlift capacity .

the craf allows the u.s. military , in times of need , to demand access to a selected percentage of the civil aircraft fleet to deliver troops and equipment to the battlefield .

in august of 1992 , the department of transportation ( dot ) announced its "open skies" initiative , which was intended to continue the trend of liberalizing international civil aviation .

as defined by the dot , "open skies" consists of the following 11 principles: 1 ) open entry on all routes ; 2 ) unrestricted capacity and frequency on all routes ; 3 ) the right to operate between any point in the u.s. and any point in the european community without restriction , including service to intermediate and beyond points , and the right to transfer passengers to an unlimited number of smaller aircraft at the international gateway ; 4 ) flexibility in setting fares ; 5 ) liberal charter arrangements ; 6 ) liberal cargo arrangements ; 7 ) the ability of carriers to convert earnings into hard currency and return those earnings to their homelands promptly and without restriction ; 8 ) open code - sharing opportunities ; 9 ) the right of a carrier to perform its own ground handling in the other country ; 10 ) the ability of carriers to freely enter into commercial transactions related to their flight operations ; [and] 11 ) a commitment for nondiscriminatory operation of and access to computer reservation systems .

the "open skies" initiative incorporated many elements of the previous bilateral agreements and was designed to be entered into with any country "willing to permit u.s. carriers essentially free access to their markets. .

however , because "open skies" is an executive branch initiative , policies that require legislative changes to u.s. law , such as foreign ownership and control , and cabotage are not included within its principles .

currently , the united states is a party to 74 "open skies" agreements worldwide .

in europe , the first "open skies" agreement was reached in october of 1992 with the netherlands , and over the next several years , similar agreements were reached with other european countries , including austria , czech republic , belgium , denmark , finland , germany , luxembourg , norway , sweden , switzerland , and iceland .

as a result of these agreements , the united states enjoys what can be characterized as quasi - cabotage rights within the european union ( eu ) .

in other words , although u.s. carriers still cannot operate truly domestic routes ( eg , paris to marseille ) , they have created so - called "hub and spoke networks" within europe ; for example , a hub in frankfurt , germany , with spokes to paris and marseille .

on the other hand , it should be noted that u.s. law currently prevents european carriers from enjoying any type of cabotage rights within the u.s. domestic market .

the combination of the number of "open skies" agreements between the united states and individual eu members , and the growing dominance of u.s. air carriers throughout europe , led the european commission to seek a mandate to negotiate a bilateral aviation agreement between the united states and the eu .

the commission , however , was unable to obtain such a broad mandate and , in 2002 , decided to bring legal action against those member states that had independently negotiated and entered into "open skies" agreements with the united states .

while the european court of justice appeared to stop well short of invalidating the existing "open skies" agreements , it did hold that certain specific provisions were discriminatory and therefore contrary to eu law .

these included provisions relating to the allocation of airport slots and those governing pricing , fares , and rates of intra - european air services ; agreements on computer reservation systems ; and the "nationality clauses," which permit the united states to deny access to carriers whose home state has not signed an agreement .

as a result of this decision , the legal status of the existing "open skies" agreements has been questioned , and the eu members have granted the commission a mandate to negotiate a civil aviation agreement with the united states .

since the european court of justice ruling , the united states and the eu have committed to negotiations with respect to a comprehensive air transportation agreement often referred to as an "open aviation area," or the "transatlantic common aviation area" ( tcaa ) .

until recently , negotiations appeared to stall as the countries' differences on key issues prevented them from moving forward .

in november 2005 , however , the parties announced a negotiations breakthrough and the completion of text for a preliminary agreement .

according to u.s. transportation secretary norman y. mineta , the agreement "provides new opportunities for u.s. and european airlines , healthier competition for a growing travel market and greater connections between cities and towns on both sides of the atlantic. .

although a draft agreement is not yet publicly available , according to the state department , the agreement , if implemented , would , inter alia , allow every eu and u.s. airline to fly between every city in the european union and every city in the united states and would permit u.s. and eu airlines to determine the number of flights , their routes , and fares according to market demand .

in addition , the agreement would allow carriers to freely enter into cooperative arrangements with other airlines , such as code - sharing and leasing .

according to some commentators who appear to have seen a version of the text , as comprehensive as the draft agreement appears to be , there cannot be meaningful reform in the international aviation market until congress repeals the so - called "citizenship test," which limits foreign ownership and control of u.s. air carriers .

based on the information currently available regarding the draft agreement , it does not appear that the proposed agreement addresses foreign ownership or control , thus it appears to be left to each party to determine its own rules and regulations independently .

on november 7 , 2005 , the dot published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) seeking comments on a proposal to clarify the policy with respect to when "actual control" rests with a citizen of the united states .

the dot has proposed that the "actual control" requirement be interpreted in two ways .

the first interpretation involves cases where the foreign investor's home country provides u.s. citizens reciprocal investment access and u.s. air carriers full and fair market access , as evidenced by having entered into an "open skies" agreement with the united states , or where it is necessary for compliance with u.s. international obligations .

in these situations , air carriers seeking to be considered u.s. citizens will have to demonstrate that u.s. citizens exercise "actual control" only with respect to ( 1 ) organizational documentation , including such things as incorporation charters , corporate by - laws , stockholder agreements and other documents of a similar nature ; ( 2 ) civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) commitments ; ( 3 ) transportation security requirements as implemented by the transportation security administration ; and ( 4 ) safety requirements as implemented by the federal aviation administration .

the second scenario involves situations where the foreign investor's home county refuses to extend reciprocal investment and / or market access rights to u.s. citizens and carriers and there are no other relevant international obligations .

in these cases , the traditional case - by - case actual control analysis as determined by dot precedent would control the citizenship inquiry .

in asserting a justification for its new interpretation of the "actual control" requirements , the dot relies primarily on nonlegal or policy grounds .

for example , the dot asserts that the present interpretation of the actual control requirement "has failed to keep pace with changes in the global economy and evolving financial and operational realities in the airline industry itself , to the determent of u.s .

carriers. .

as a result of these changing global economic demands , "u.s. air carriers seeking to enter the market should similarly be able to obtain the financial capital necessary to launch their businesses .

we tentatively do not believe that 'actual control' should be interpreted in a way that needlessly restricts the commercial opportunities of u.s. air carriers and their ability to compete. .

legally , it appears that the dot recognizes that congress has established objective statutory requirements that an air carrier must satisfy to be considered a u.s. citizen ; however , they assert that nothing in this nprm would alter or in any way circumvent those statutory requirements .

given dot's assertion that this new interpretation of the actual control requirement is a legitimate exercise of its legal authority , it would appear that should a challenge be brought against this proposal becoming a final rule , a reviewing court would likely address the issue pursuant to the standards delineated by the supreme court in chevron u.s.a. inc. v. natural resources defense council ( chevron ) .

in chevron , the supreme court established a two - part test for judicial review of agency statutory interpretations .

first , a reviewing court must determine "whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. .

if a court finds that there has been an express congressional statement , the inquiry is concluded , as the court "must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress. .

in the event that congress has not unequivocally addressed the issue , a reviewing court must respect an agency's interpretation , so long as it is permissible .

the court further stated that [i]f congress has explicitly left a gap for the agency to fill , there is an express delegation of authority to that agency to elucidate a specific provision of the statute by regulation....sometimes the legislative delegation to an agency on a particular question is implicit rather than explicit .

in such a case , a court may not substitute its own construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an agency .

the court went on to note that "[j]udges are not experts in the [technical] field , and are not part of either political branch of the government," while agencies , as part of the executive branch , appropriately make "policy choices—resolving the competing interests which congress itself either inadvertently did not resolve , or intentionally left to be resolved by the agency charged with the administration of the statute in light of everyday realities. .

thus , the rationale for this deference is predicated on the notion that it is not the role of the judiciary to "assess the wisdom" of policy choices and resolve the "struggle between competing views of the public interest," as well as an agency's greater expertise regarding the subject matter of the regulations .

the dot received numerous comments to its nprm , representing almost every segment of the aviation industry .

many of the comments have focused specifically on the dot's legal authority to reinterpret the "actual control" requirement .

supporters of the dot's action generally assert that the phrase "actual control," though it appears in the statute , is vague and undefined .

as a result , the language is arguably ambiguous and , therefore , subject to departmental interpretation .

thus , pursuant to chevron , the dot has wide latitude and is entitled to substantial deference when rendering an interpretation , provided that it does so reasonably and in a manner that is consistent with the plain meaning of the statute .

conversely , opponents of the nprm assert that when congress specifically added the phrase "actual control" to the statute , they were in effect codifying the dot's long - standing precedent and not granting any additional authority over the interpretation of the phrase than previously existed .

in addition , opponents of the nprm assert that the dot's interpretation is contrary to the express language of the statute .

specifically , they argue that unlike the four narrow areas of control defined by the dot , actual control of an air carrier rests with the entity that makes the fundamental economic decisions that determine the nature of the airlines' operations .

these decisions include , but are not limited to , the types of airplane flown , markets to be served , flight schedules , fares , and aircraft maintenance and other services .

thus , according to opponents of the nprm , relinquishing control over these elements of an air carrier renders any other statutory requirements "pointless. .

finally , opponents of the proposed nprm cite the military's continued reliance on the civil reserve air fleet program ( craf ) .

under this program , domestic air carriers supply aircraft on a voluntary basis to increase the military's airlift capacity .

craf allows the u.s. military , in times of need , to demand access to a selected percentage of the civil aircraft fleet to deliver troops and equipment to the battlefield .

concern with respect to craf is not new ; prior to the nprm , several commentators had noted that changes to the u.s. civil aviation ownership and control requirements could substantially hinder or even destroy craf , as aircraft that move from domestic to foreign ownership would not be under any legal obligation to remain available to the program .

the nprm specifically states that for an air carrier to be considered a u.s. citizen , decisions with respect to craf are to remain under the control of u.s. citizens ; however , at least one commentator has questioned how the dot will ensure that u.s. citizens are not pressured by their foreign partners to either modify or eliminate their participation in this voluntary program .

in addition , both continental airlines and delta airlines noted that new foreign owners might , as a result of their control over other commercial aspects of an airline , divest the use , upkeep , and maintenance of "long - haul" aircraft that are useful to the craf .

divestitures of this type would , argued the commentators , render those airlines of no effective use to craf and , therefore , could potentially result in a diminished air fleet from which dod could call upon .

another major issue facing international civil aviation law is cabotage .

as previously mentioned , cabotage is the right of a foreign airline to carry passengers and / or cargo between airports of the same country ( eg , from new york to los angeles ) .

currently , the federal aviation act contains a general prohibition against cabotage activity by foreign air carriers .

the prohibition states that "aircraft may take on for compensation , at a place in the united states , passengers or cargo destined for another place in the united states only if— ( 1 ) specifically authorized under section 40109 ( g ) of this title ; or ( 2 ) under regulations the secretary prescribes authorizing air carriers to provide otherwise authorized air transportation with foreign registered aircraft under lease or charter to them without crew. .

if neither of those situations exists , foreign aircraft are not permitted to perform cabotage within the united states .

in addition , the secretary of transportation has general discretionary authority to waive other economic - related statutory provisions listed in section 40109 ( c ) "when the secretary decides that the exemption is consistent with the public interest. .

the cabotage prohibition , however , is not among the regulations listed in section 40109 ( c ) .

congress last amended the cabotage laws as part of the vision—100 century of aviation authorization act .

the enacted changes permit "eligible cargo" to be removed from aircraft , including foreign aircraft , in alaska and "not be deemed to have broken its international journey in , be taken on in , or be destined for alaska. .

the statute defines "eligible cargo" as cargo "transported between alaska and any other place in the united states on a foreign air carrier ( having been transported from , or thereafter being transported to , a place outside the united states on a different air carrier or foreign air carrier ) that is carried— ( a ) under the code of a united states air carrier providing air transportation to alaska ; ( b ) on an air carrier way bill of an air carrier providing air transportation to alaska ; ( c ) under a term arrangement or block space agreement with an air carrier ; or ( d ) under the code of a united states air carrier for purposes of transportation within the united states. .

these provisions provide for a very limited statutory exception to the general prohibition against cabotage activities .

while it does not appear that the current draft "open skies" agreement with the european union requires the granting of more cabotage rights to foreign - owned or controlled carriers , it appears to remain a major issue in international civil aviation .

it appears , however , that statutory changes would be required before the executive branch can enter into any sort of agreement purporting to liberalize the cabotage rules .

although foreign aircraft are allowed to navigate within u.s. airspace , unless specifically authorized either by statute or dot regulations , they are not permitted to perform any form of cabotage within the united states .

while it is unclear what , if any , economic effect a more liberal cabotage policy would have on the domestic airline industry , only congress has the legal authority to amend the federal aviation act and permit foreign carriers to have cabotage rights .

