in recent years , the terms "527 organizations," "527 groups," and "527s" have been used interchangeably to describe groups that intend to influence federal elections in ways that may be outside the scope of federal election law .

the terms stem from the fact that these organizations are provided tax - exempt status under section 527 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

these groups have become the subject of controversy due to the different definitions used in federal election law and tax law as to what constitutes political or election - related activity and the lack of uniform opinion as to what election law itself regulates or may permissibly regulate .

strictly speaking , irc § 527 provides tax - exempt status to many more organizations than just those that are colloquially referred to as 527s .

the section applies not only to organizations that are active in federal elections , but also to organizations involved in state and local elections and certain non - electoral activities .

while irc § 527 applies to a broad range of organizations , only the groups colloquially referred to as 527s ( i.e. , those groups that intend to influence federal elections in ways that may be outside the scope of federal election law ) are the focus of current controversy .

this report discusses this limited subset of organizations exempt under irc § 527 and uses the terms 527 organizations , 527 groups , and 527s interchangeably to refer to them .

section 527 was added to the irc in 1975 to provide tax - exempt status to political organizations , as defined in that statute .

at that time , it was generally thought that , with respect to groups participating in federal elections , political organizations correlated directly with political committees as labeled by and operating under federal election law .

indeed , political committees — whether political parties , political action committees ( pacs ) , or candidate committees — have tax - exempt status under irc § 527 .

in 2000 , however , it came to light that some groups engaged in federal - election - related issue advocacy were claiming exempt status under irc § 527 while not being regulated under the federal election campaign act ( feca ) .

these groups were shrouded in mystery because no disclosure was required under either the tax or election laws at that time .

the 106 th and 107 th congresses passed two laws addressing disclosure by 527 organizations and one law , bcra , which addressed , among other things , the larger question of election - related issue advocacy .

during and since the 2004 elections , efforts to address the activity of 527 organizations operating outside the regulatory framework of the feca have been underway on several fronts: in the courts , at the fec , and in congress .

supporters of bcra have led these efforts , insisting that existing federal election law requires that groups working for the election or defeat of candidates for federal office must register as political committees and comply with all aspects of that law , regardless of the nature of the specific activities in which they engage .

these bcra advocates have expressed dismay over the fec's failure to issue regulations to enforce that view of the law and have filed court challenges to the activities of prominent 527 groups on that basis .

concerns about this issue have by no means been limited to bcra supporters .

the bush - cheney campaign filed its own lawsuit to block activities of some prominent 527 groups during the 2004 elections ; both the house administration and senate rules and administration committees held hearings in 2004 and 2005 ; both committees reported bills to regulate 527 organizations under feca in the 109 th congress ; and the house passed such legislation on two occasions in 2006 .

while concern about the 527s has been voiced across the political spectrum , to some extent those concerns have different origins .

bcra supporters have tended to see the enormous amounts of money raised and spent in recent elections as a result of what they argue is the fec's failure to enforce existing law , and they have also launched an effort to replace the agency with what they see as a more effective enforcement body .

bcra critics , however , insist that what has occurred has been the predictable result of the ban on soft money activity by the national parties , thus redirecting massive amounts of unregulated money to outside groups that are less accountable to the political system .

if the 110 th congress chooses to address 527s , a key question will be whether additional regulation should occur via legislation , new fec or other regulation , or enforcement of existing regulations .

regardless of how policy change occurs , perhaps most importantly , it remains unclear whether the courts would uphold additional attempts to regulate 527 activity .

indeed , whether regulation of 527 activity needs to be limited to only those organizations engaging in express advocacy is a topic of much controversy and debate .

nevertheless , there is likely to be continued criticism that activity by 527s in the manner seen in recent elections threatens to undermine the effectiveness of regulation under federal election law .

another issue that has received attention is whether , in the event that congress does require further regulation of 527 organizations , money might flow to other types of tax - exempt organizations , such as irc § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations and § 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations .

these types of organizations may engage in political campaign activity so long as it is consistent with the organization's exempt purpose .

there are , however , two limitations in the irc that would make these organizations less efficient than section 527 political organizations for carrying on election - related activities .

first , the irc implicitly restricts the amount of political campaign activity that these organizations may conduct — specifically , participating in political campaign activity cannot be the organization's primary activity .

second , under irc § 527 ( f ) , irc § 501 ( c ) organizations are subject to tax if they make an expenditure for an irc § 527 exempt function .

as discussed above , an exempt function is influencing or attempting to influence the selection , nomination , election , or appointment of an individual to a federal , state , or local public office , to an office in a political organization , or as a presidential or vice - presidential elector .

under irc § 527 ( f ) , the organization is taxed at the highest corporate rate on the lesser of the organization's net investment income or its total amount of exempt function expenditures .

finally , it should be noted that tax - exempt organizations must also abide by any applicable election laws .

for example , since campaign finance laws ban unions and corporations from making any contribution or expenditure in connection with federal elections , irc § 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) labor unions and any incorporated tax - exempt organizations are generally prohibited from doing so , as well .

