it is difficult to ascertain the number and characteristics of persons experiencing homelessness due to the transient nature of the population , although attempts to collect information about homeless individuals have been made in recent decades .

beginning in the mid - 1990s , for example , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) required its grant recipients to provide information about the homeless clients they served .

in addition , comprehensive attempts to count homeless individuals were made in both the 1980s and 1990s , first via census data and then through a national collaborative survey called the national survey of homeless assistance providers and clients .

however , no systematic method for collecting information about homeless persons has existed until recent years .

in response to a directive from congress in 1998 , hud began in 2001 to develop a system to collect information about homeless individuals ; the processes of data collection , organization , and storage systems , which take place at the local level , have been termed homeless management information systems ( hmis ) .

in july 2009 , hud released results of its fourth analysis of hmis data — the fourth annual homeless assessment report ( ahar ) .

this crs report describes the development of hmis , the results of the four ahars , and previous attempts to count homeless individuals .

homeless management information systems ( hmis ) are databases established at the local level through which homeless service providers collect , organize , and store information about homeless clients who receive services .

hud is implementing the hmis initiative through local "continuums of care" ( cocs ) , which acquire and process data from all participating local service providers .

cocs are local boards formed by communities — typically cities , counties , or combinations of both — made up of representatives from nonprofit service providers , advocacy groups , local government , and other interested organizations .

local boards identify the needs of homeless persons in their communities and try to ensure that they receive the appropriate mix of preventative assistance , emergency services , transitional housing , supportive services , and permanent housing .

local homeless services providers submit requests for funding to their local cocs , which each in turn submit single consolidated applications to hud .

as of 2009 , there were approximately 450 cocs , including those in the territories .

two types of organizations are required to participate in hmis: those that receive funding through the housing opportunities for persons with aids ( hopwa ) program and those that receive homeless assistance grants .

the hopwa program , enacted in 1990 ( p.l .

101-625 ) provides housing and supportive services for persons living with hiv / aids .

the homeless assistance grants , enacted as part of the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act ( p.l .

100-77 ) , consist of both formula grants , which are distributed through the emergency shelter grants program , and competitive grants , which are available through the shelter plus care program , supportive housing program , and section 8 moderate rehabilitation assistance for single room occupancy dwellings program .

other service providers that serve homeless individuals and families but do not receive federal funds from these sources are also encouraged to participate in hmis .

even prior to the congressional directive to implement hmis ( described in the next section of this report , " development of the hmis network " ) , hud began efforts to collect information about homeless clients served in the communities that receive hud homeless assistance grants .

beginning in the mid - 1990s , about the time that the continuum of care system developed , hud required applicants for homeless assistance grants to include in their applications information about the number of persons receiving assistance and the type of assistance they received .

initially this was done in narrative form .

however , by 2003 , the grant application required coc applicants to complete a housing activity chart that included a point - in - time count of homeless individuals and families receiving services , though hud did not specify when this count should take place .

the 2003 application also asked applicants to categorize subpopulations served , including the number of chronically homeless individuals , veterans , those with severe mental illnesses , those with hiv / aids , and victims of domestic violence .

some cocs used database systems similar to hmis to keep track of homeless individuals who were served ; these predecessor systems are sometimes referred to as "legacy systems. .

the 2005 hud point - in - time count of homeless persons marked the first time that hud required all cocs to conduct a count of both sheltered and unsheltered homeless individuals , and to do it at a particular time of year .

hud directed cocs to conduct a one - night count during the last week of january of both clients who used homeless services and those who were on the street .

hud continues to require cocs to conduct point - in - time counts every two years , though some cocs choose to conduct counts every year .

for example , in 2008 , approximately 67% of cocs voluntarily conducted counts .

the most recent point - in - time count in which all cocs participated occurred in january 2009 .

the results of coc point - in - time counts are described later in this report , in the section " coc point - in - time estimates of homeless individuals . .

two aspects of hmis implementation contribute to a coc's ability to capture data regarding homeless persons .

the first aspect is whether a data collection system has been established at the coc level , and the second is the degree to which homeless service providers within a coc are participating in the system .

although almost all cocs have established an hmis system into which data may be entered , the extent to which data are actually entered into these systems remains incomplete , on average .

once established , a comprehensive hmis network is meant to improve the ability of communities to provide services to homeless persons as well as to help hud determine how best to allocate resources .

since the 1980s , a number of attempts have been made to estimate the total number of homeless persons in the country as well as to describe their characteristics .

although the specific methods used in the studies have varied , in most , researchers surveyed a sample of the homeless population and used the sample to estimate the total number of homeless persons in the country .

the time periods covered by these counts vary .

some are "point - in - time" counts that estimate the number of homeless people on a single night during the year .

others estimate the number of persons who are homeless during longer periods — a week or span of months .

researchers have also used samples to estimate the total number of persons who are homeless at some point during the year .

the hmis initiative differs from these previous efforts to count homeless people and gather information .

instead of sampling only certain communities or counting homeless individuals on only a single night , cocs gather information from all homeless assistance providers regarding all homeless individuals who use their services each day of the year .

eventually , once communities have fully implemented hmis , the network of systems is expected to provide an annual unduplicated count of homeless persons from each jurisdiction .

counting homeless populations on the street might continue to be important , however , as their use of services is unknown .

hud released its first report to congress using hmis data , the annual homeless assessment report ( ahar ) , in february 2007 .

since then , hud has released three more ahars ; the most recent was released in july 2009 .

because hmis is not fully implemented in all jurisdictions around the country , the four ahars , like previous efforts to count homeless persons , rely on a sample of jurisdictions .

this section describes several efforts to estimate the number of homeless individuals over the years .

these include coc point - in - time counts that take place at least every two years , estimates in the four ahars using hmis data , and previous estimates from the 1980s and 1990s .

this section also includes a description of demographic information regarding homeless persons from various sources .

in addition to efforts to count the number of homeless individuals , attempts have been made to describe the characteristics of the national homeless population .

each of the four annual homeless assessment reports have collected information regarding age , familial status , race , disability and veteran status .

the demographic findings of these reports are described earlier in this report .

in addition , earlier efforts as part of the national survey of homeless assistance providers and clients and through the census bureau provide demographic information regarding homeless persons from the 1990s .

further , ongoing surveys conducted by the u.s. conference of mayors annually captures information about homeless individuals , and the department of veterans affairs attempts to estimate the number of homeless veterans on an annual basis .

these efforts are described below .

the nshapc data resulted in demographic , income , and other information about homeless individuals in 1996 .

among the findings were that homeless clients were predominantly male ( 68% ) and nonwhite ( 53% ) ; 23% of homeless clients were veterans .

large proportions of homeless adults had never married ( 48% ) and had not received a high school diploma ( 38% ) .

the nshapc also found that although 48% of homeless adults had minor children , only 31% of those with children lived with them .

thirty - eight percent of homeless clients reported alcohol problems during the past month , and 39% reported mental health problems during that period .

over one - quarter ( 27% ) of homeless clients had lived in foster care , a group home , or other institutional setting for part of their childhood .

twenty - five percent reported childhood physical or sexual abuse .

the census bureau released a report using data collected during the 2000 census of individuals living in emergency and transitional housing .

the information was collected on one day in march 2000 and captured information from nearly 171,000 respondents .

the report described some basic demographic characteristics of those who were included in the survey .

of those persons who were interviewed , 74% were adults ( age 18 and older ) , and of the entire population ( adults and children ) , 61% were male and 39% were female .

the most respondents were white ( 41% ) , slightly fewer were african american ( 40% ) , and 20% reported that they were hispanic .

the u.s. conference of mayors has issued an annual report since 1984 , in which between 20 and 30 large cities survey their social service providers' efforts to combat hunger and homelessness and provide housing .

in 2008 , the u.s. conference of mayors appointed 27 mayors to serve on its task force on hunger and homelessness .

the cities where those 27 mayors serve were asked to respond to a survey for the organization's annual report on hunger and homelessness for the time period between october 1 , 2007 , and september 30 , 2008 ; 25 cities responded .

regarding the demographics of the homeless population , the 2008 report focused on the living situation of single adults compared to families .

the surveyed cities reported that the population living on the streets consisted overwhelmingly of single adults ( 94% ) .

persons living in families made up approximately 4% of the total population living on the streets , and unaccompanied youth about 2% .

single adults also made up the greatest share of the population living in emergency shelters ( nearly 67% ) , with members of families making up 29% of those in shelters and unaccompanied youth 1% .

those individuals living in families made up the majority of the transitional housing population – approximately 56% versus 43% who were single adults .

in permanent supportive housing , however , single adults represented 60% of the population , compared to slightly less than 40% who were people living in families .

among cities that were able to provide more detailed information about their homeless residents , an estimated 26% of the homeless population had serious mental illnesses , 13% had physical disabilities , 2% were hiv positive , 13% were veterans , and 15% percent were victims of domestic violence .

in the area of veterans who experience homelessness , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) annually estimates the number of veterans who are homeless through the "community homelessness assessment , local education and networking groups" ( chaleng ) process .

the estimates are based on a variety of sources , although the va is attempting to make its process consistent with hud's coc point - in - time counts of homeless individuals .

in its most recent report , the va estimated that in 2008 approximately 131,000 veterans were homeless on one day during the last week of january .

for more information about the chaleng process and estimates , see crs report rl34024 , veterans and homelessness , by [author name scrubbed] .

