mining of hardrock minerals on federal lands is governed primarily by the general mining law of 1872 .

the original purposes of the mining law were to promote mineral exploration and development on federal lands in the western united states , offer an opportunity to obtain a clear title to mines already being worked , and help settle the west .

the mining law grants free access to individuals and corporations to prospect for minerals on open public domain lands , and allows them , upon making a discovery , to stake ( or "locate" ) a claim on the deposit .

a valid claim entitles the holder to develop the minerals .

the 1872 mining law originally applied to all valuable mineral deposits except coal ( 17 stat .

91 , 1872 , as amended ) .

public domain lands are those retained under federal ownership since their original acquisition by treaty , cession , or purchase as part of the general territory of the united states , including lands that passed out of but reverted back to federal ownership .

"acquired" lands — those obtained from a state or a private owner through purchase , gift , or condemnation for particular federal purposes rather than as general territory of the united states — are subject to leasing only and are not covered by the 1872 law .

some public lands may be "withdrawn" or closed to mineral entry .

the 1872 mining law was one of the primary forces behind the development of mineral resources in the west , along with the industries and services that supported mineral production .

major hardrock minerals developed in the west include copper , silver , gold , lead , zinc , molybdenum , and uranium .

during the 19 th century , major mining districts for silver and gold were developed under the mining law in colorado , california , idaho , and nevada .

early in the 20 th century , there were major developments of porphyry copper in arizona .

large molybdenum and tungsten deposits in colorado were also developed .

the mining law continues to provide the structure for much of the western mineral development on public domain lands .

western mining , although not as extensive as it once was , is still a major economic activity , and a high percentage of hardrock mining is on public lands .

a broad - based bill to reform the general mining law of 1872 , the hardrock mining and reclamation act of 2009 ( h.r .

699 ) , was introduced in the house on january 21 , 2009 .

the bill would limit the issuance of patents to claimants whose patent applications were filed with the secretary of the interior on or before september 30 , 1994 , and met appropriate statutory requirements by that date .

the bill would establish a locatable minerals fund which would include two accounts: hardrock reclamation account and a hardrock community impact assistance account .

an 8% royalty on "net smelter returns" would be imposed on new mines and mine expansions while a 4% "net smelter return" royalty would apply to existing mines .

two - thirds of the royalty revenues would be deposited into the proposed reclamation account , and one - third would be deposited into the proposed community impact assistance account .

exploration and mining operation permits , which would include , among other things , a reclamation plan , would be required of any claim holder to carry out mining or related activities on mining claims .

the operations permit — good for 20 years — may be renewed for a successive 20-year term .

new reclamation standards would be established , and a reclamation bond or other financial guarantee would be required before exploration and operation permits are approved .

states , political subdivisions , and indian tribes would be allowed to petition the secretary of the interior to have lands withdrawn from mining .

certain lands would not be open to location under the mining law .

mineral activities would not be permitted if they "impaired" ( as defined in the bill ) the lands or resources of the national park system or national monuments .

a provision in the bill allows for civil suits to be filed in u.s. district courts should a person feel adversely affected .

the bill was referred to the committee on natural resources .

a hearing was held on h.r .

699 by the house committee on natural resource's subcommittee on energy and minerals on february 26 , 2009 .

testimony at the hearing highlighted the environmental and economic impacts of mining ( including abandoned mine reclamation needs from past mining ) and the types of royalty regimes in - place for hardrock mining at the state level .

the hardrock mining and reclamation act of 2009 ( s. 796 ) was introduced in the senate on april 2 , 2009 .

s. 796 would limit the issuance the patents to claimants whose patent applications were filed with the secretary of the interior on or before september 30 , 1994 , and met appropriate statutory requirements by that date .

annual claim maintenance fees would be increased to $150 per claim from the current $125 per claim .

the annual maintenance fee would be waived if claim holders certify they do not hold more than 10 claims and the claim holder performs required assessment work on each claim .

location fees would increase to $50 per claim from $30 per claim .

a royalty rate ( that would vary according to the mineral ) of not less than 2% and not greater than 5% would be based on the value of production on federal land but would not apply to mining operations already in commercial production or those with an approved plan of operations .

royalty revenues would be deposited into a newly established hardrock minerals reclamation fund .

the secretary of the interior would have the authority to grant royalty relief to mining operations based on economic factors .

an exploration permit and mining operations permit would be required ( with certain specified exceptions ) for non - casual mining operations on federal land .

the applications for the permits would include , among other things , a reclamation plan , the potential impacts on water , and evidence of adequate financial assurances .

the mining operations permit would be good for 30 years and would continue as long as commercial production occurs .

new reclamation standards would be established and a reclamation bond or other financial assurances required .

the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) would be amended to include a complete "review of land" not later than three years after enactment of this bill .

the secretary would have the authority to withdraw land from entry under the general mining law of 1872 based on specified criteria and would revise land use plans as appropriate to allow for a withdrawal from operations under the 1872 mining law .

states , political subdivisions , and indian tribes would be allowed to petition the secretary of the interior to have lands withdrawn from mining , subject to valid existing rights .

the hardrock minerals reclamation fund that would be established by this legislation would be administered by the secretary of the interior and used for restoration and reclamation of land and water resources impacted by past mining in abandoned hardrock mining states ( 14 western states including alaska ) and on indian land within those states .

an abandoned mine land reclamation fee would be set at between 0.3% and 1.0% of the gross value of production and imposed on each mine operator ( as defined in the bill ) and deposited into the reclamation fund .

the national academy of sciences would conduct a study of uranium development on federal land and would issue its findings and recommendations to the secretary of the interior and secretary of agriculture within 18 months after enactment of this legislation .

also in the 111 th congress , s. 140 ( the abandoned mine reclamation act of 2009 ) was introduced january 6 , 2009 , to address cleaning up abandoned hardrock mines throughout the united states by establishing an abandoned mine cleanup fund and imposing various fees on hardrock mining operations on federal land .

a 4% "gross income" ( defined in section 613 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the internal revenue code of 1986 ) royalty would apply to existing hardrock mineral producers on federal land .

under this proposal , the annual hardrock mining maintenance fee would rise to $300 per claim from the current $125 per claim and would apply to claims other than oil shale claims and those with ten or fewer claims .

additionally , hardrock miners on federal lands would be required to pay an annual reclamation fee of 0.3% of their gross annual income from mining except for operators making less than $500,000 , among other specified conditions .

all funds from the reclamation fee and the royalty would be deposited into the cleanup fund .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 796 and s. 140 on july 14 , 2009 .

as in the past , the testimony examined various types of royalty regimes and rates ( e.g .

gross value or net income ) and its potential impact on the mining industry .

industry continues to support a net income royalty while other mining law reform advocates support a gross value royalty .

other related issues such as who would be required to pay a royalty , environmental permitting , mineral import dependence , and the ability to withdraw lands from entry under the general mining law were discussed .

in the 110 th congress , hearings were held on a house bill ( h.r .

2262 ) nearly identical to h.r .

699 ( discussed above ) .

industry groups testified in opposition to much of the bill , particularly opposed to the 8% "net smelter royalty" as defined in section 613 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the internal revenue code of 1986 , and the more stringent environmental standards .

some testified that if the government were to impose a royalty that it be based on "net profit" or the ability to pay , which would then not distort production decisions .

others , however , countered that an ad - valorem royalty — based on value ( that is contained in the bill ) — might be a more appropriate way to collect revenues , claiming that a net profit royalty is fraught with complexities and high administrative cost , thus minimizing the government take .

those in favor of the bill pointed out the high number of uranium claims staked on public land near "sensitive sites" and the need to create a dedicated revenue stream for a vast and costly abandoned hardrock mine cleanup effort .

the house passed h.r .

2262 by a vote of 244-166 .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held an oversight hearing on hardrock mining on federal lands september 27 , 2007 .

funds collected from the annual maintenance fee would be allocated to both the department of the interior for administration of the mining law and to the cleanup fund .

crs report rl32813 , hardrock mining: state regulation , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

gerard , david .

1872 mining law: digging a little deeper , perc policy series , ps - 11 bozeman , mt .

december 1997 .

gordon , richard , vandorn , peter .

two cheers for the 1872 mining law , cato institute , washington , dc , april 1998 .

leshy , john d. the mining law: a study in perpetual motion , resources for the future , washington , dc , 1987 .

national research council .

hardrock mining on federal lands , committee on hardrock mining on federal lands , national academy press , washington , dc , 1999 .

national wildlife federation .

hardrock reclamation bonding practices in the western united states , prepared by james kuipers and cathy carlson , february 2000 .

u.s. congress .

majority staff report of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations of the committee on natural resources of the u.s. house of representatives , taking from the taxpayer: public subsidies for natural resource development , 103 rd congress , committee print no .

8 , august 1994 .

u.s. congress .

testimony to the subcommittee on mineral resources , committee on resources , u.s. house of representatives , 107 th congress , july 23 , 2002 .

hearing on availability of bonds to meet federal requirements for mining , oil , and gas projects .

u.s. general accounting office .

the mining law of 1872 needs revision , rced - 89-72 , washington , dc , march 1989 .

