three important themes support an understanding of public health and medical preparedness and response .

first , preparedness and response are different .

at each level of government , they involve different leadership roles , legal authorities , organizational structures , and funding mechanisms .

generally , during an incident , certain conditions must be met before a jurisdiction can implement response activities , or access funds reserved for that purpose .

second , states , rather than the federal government , are the seats of authority and responsibility for the oversight of both health care and emergency management .

for example , state laws generally authorize governors to order and enforce the evacuation of residents in emergency situations .

except under extraordinary circumstances , the federal government generally does not dictate the conduct of health care or emergency management activities to state or local officials , or to health care providers .

finally , while most public health functions are inherently governmental , the nation's health care system is , in contrast , primarily private and for - profit .

providers and facilities operate in an increasingly competitive marketplace in which emergency planning is not always seen as a necessary expense .

when there is a catastrophe in the united states , state and local governments take the lead in response activities .

state and local legal authorities are the principal means to support these activities .

when the resources of states and localities are overwhelmed , the president can provide certain additional assets and personnel to aid stricken communities , and can provide funding to individuals and to government and not - for - profit entities to assist them in response and recovery .

this assistance is provided under the authority of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) , upon a presidential declaration of an emergency ( a lower level of assistance ) or a major disaster ( a higher level of assistance ) .

recent incidents — the september 11 and anthrax attacks of 2001 , and several major hurricanes — have shown the limitations of existing funding mechanisms in supporting public health and medical incident response .

first , it is not clear that stafford act major disaster assistance is available for the response to infectious disease threats , whether intentional ( i.e. , bioterrorism ) or natural ( eg , pandemic influenza , or "flu" ) .

second , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) has authority under the public health service act ( phs act ) to draw upon a special fund to support departmental activities in response to unanticipated public health emergencies , but there is at present no money in the fund .

finally , there is no existing comprehensive mechanism to provide federal assistance for uninsured or uncompensated individual health care costs that may be incurred as a result of a natural disaster or terrorist incident , though there is not general agreement that such assistance should be a federal responsibility .

this report focuses on incident response activities ( versus preparedness activities ) and examines ( 1 ) the statutory authorities and coordinating mechanisms of the president ( acting through the secretary of homeland security ) and the secretary of hhs in providing routine assistance , and in providing assistance pursuant to emergency or major disaster declarations and / or public health emergency determinations ; ( 2 ) mechanisms to assure a coordinated federal response to public health and medical emergencies , and overlaps or gaps in agency responsibilities ; and ( 3 ) existing mechanisms , potential gaps , and proposals to fund the costs of a response to public health and medical emergencies .

a listing of federal public health emergency authorities is provided in the appendix .

this report will be updated as needed .

for more information on aspects of public health and medical preparedness and response in general , and in the context of specific disasters or threats , see the following crs reports: crs report r40159 , public health and medical preparedness and response: issues in the 111th congress ; crs report rl33589 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) : provisions and changes to preexisting law ; crs report rl33927 , selected federal compensation programs for physical injury or death ; crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergency preparedness ; crs report rl33096 , 2005 gulf coast hurricanes: the public health and medical response ; crs report rl33083 , hurricane katrina: medicaid issues ; crs report rl33738 , gulf coast hurricanes: addressing survivors' mental health and substance abuse treatment needs ; crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts ; and crs report rl34190 , pandemic influenza: an analysis of state preparedness and response plans .

hurricane katrina was the greatest test of esf - 8 since the establishment of dhs and the publication of the nrp .

a variety of public health and medical activities were undertaken in the hurricane response .

the costs of these activities were borne by agencies at the federal , state and local levels , not - for - profit groups , businesses , health care providers , insurers , families , and individuals .

private insurance covered some of the property damage , health care , and other costs resulting from the disaster .

congress provided additional assistance through emergency appropriations to cover expanded federal agency activities and a portion of uninsured health care costs .

some other costs , such as those to rebuild the devastated health care infrastructure in new orleans , have not been fully met at this time , either through existing assistance mechanisms or mechanisms developed since the storm .

the response to hurricane katrina , and ongoing pandemic flu preparedness efforts , each offer a glimpse of the complexity of the challenge , and the adequacy of existing mechanisms to fund the costs of an esf - 8 response .

both the secretaries of homeland security and hhs have statutory authority to provide additional assistance to state and local governments , and others , in response to catastrophes .

following hurricane katrina , congress defined in statute the roles of the two secretaries with respect to the public health and medical response to catastrophes .

numerous aspects of these relationships are yet to be sorted out , through specific planning , exercises , and other approaches .

in carrying out the federal response to public health and medical emergencies and disasters , the secretary of hhs has broad authority and considerable discretion in providing assistance , but lacks a sound funding source to support the response to these unanticipated events .

in contrast , the president , acting pursuant to the stafford act , has , in the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , a ready source of funds to support an immediate response to emergencies and disasters .

stafford act assistance is , however , not especially well - tailored for the response to public health and medical threats .

indeed , some of these threats ( eg , bioterrorism ) may not even trigger stafford act major disaster assistance .

broad authority in section 319 of the phs act the secretary of hhs has broad authority to determine that a public health emergency exists .

congress reauthorized this authority in 2000 , as follows: if the secretary determines , after consultation with such public health officials as may be necessary , that — ( 1 ) a disease or disorder presents a public health emergency ; or ( 2 ) a public health emergency , including significant outbreaks of infectious diseases or bioterrorist attacks , otherwise exists , the secretary may take such action as may be appropriate to respond to the public health emergency , including making grants , providing awards for expenses , and entering into contracts and conducting and supporting investigations into the cause , treatment , or prevention of a disease or disorder as described in paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) .

this authority , found in section 319 of the phs act and codified at 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d , is the basis for much , but not all of , the secretary's authority to waive or streamline administrative requirements and certain statutory requirements , and to take certain other actions , when needed , to prepare for or respond to non - routine threats to public health .

see table 1 for a listing of public health emergency determinations made pursuant to this authority since 2000 .

also in 2000 , congress reauthorized a no - year public health emergency fund that is available to the hhs secretary for use during a public health emergency , determined pursuant to the authority above , as follows: there is established in the treasury a fund to be designated as the 'public health emergency fund' to be made available to the secretary without fiscal year limitation to carry out subsection ( a ) only if a public health emergency has been declared by the secretary under such subsection .

there is authorized to be appropriated to the fund such sums as may be necessary .

... not later than 90 days after the end of each fiscal year , the secretary shall prepare and submit to the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and the committee on appropriations of the senate and the committee on commerce and the committee on appropriations of the house of representatives a report describing — ( a ) the expenditures made from the public health emergency fund in such fiscal year ; and ( b ) each public health emergency for which the expenditures were made and the activities undertaken with respect to each emergency which was conducted or supported by expenditures from the fund .

subsequent to the 2000 reauthorization , congress expanded or clarified the section 319 emergency authority , as follows: duration of emergency , notification of congress: "any such determination of a public health emergency terminates upon the secretary declaring that the emergency no longer exists , or upon the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date on which the determination is made by the secretary , whichever occurs first .

determinations that terminate under the preceding sentence may be renewed by the secretary ( on the basis of the same or additional facts ) , and the preceding sentence applies to each such renewal .

not later than 48 hours after making a determination under this subsection of a public health emergency ( including a renewal ) , the secretary shall submit to the congress written notification of the determination. .

data submittal and reporting deadlines: "in any case in which the secretary determines that , wholly or partially as a result of a public health emergency that has been determined pursuant to subsection ( a ) , individuals or public or private entities are unable to comply with deadlines for the submission to the secretary of data or reports required under any law administered by the secretary , the secretary may , notwithstanding any other provision of law , grant such extensions of such deadlines as the circumstances reasonably require , and may waive , wholly or partially , any sanctions otherwise applicable to such failure to comply .

before or promptly after granting such an extension or waiver , the secretary shall notify the congress of such action and publish in the federal register a notice of the extension or waiver. .

requirement for notification: during the period in which the secretary of hhs has determined the existence of a public health emergency under 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d , the secretary "shall keep relevant agencies , including the department of homeland security , the department of justice , and the federal bureau of investigation , fully and currently informed. .

emergency use of countermeasures: the secretary may declare an emergency justifying expedited use of certain medical countermeasures on the basis of: ( 1 ) a determination by the secretary of homeland security that there is a domestic emergency , or a significant potential for a domestic emergency ; or ( 2 ) on the basis of a determination by the secretary of defense that there is a military emergency , or a significant potential for a military emergency ; or ( 3 ) on the basis of a "determination by the secretary of a public health emergency under section 247d of title 42 that affects , or has a significant potential to affect , national security , and that involves a specified biological , chemical , radiological , or nuclear agent or agents , or a specified disease or condition that may be attributable to such agent or agents. .

this provision in the federal food , drug and cosmetic act is referred to as the emergency use authorization .

waiver of certain requirements: in order to assure "that sufficient health care items and services are available to meet the needs of individuals in ... ( an emergency , and ) ... that health care providers ... that furnish such items and services in good faith , but that are unable to comply with one or more requirements ... may be reimbursed for such items and services and exempted from sanctions for such noncompliance , absent any determination of fraud or abuse," the secretary may modify or waive certain statutory or regulatory requirements following a determination of public health emergency pursuant to 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d and an emergency or disaster declaration by the president pursuant to the national emergencies act ( 50 u.s.c .

§ 1601 et seq . ) .

or the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 5121 et seq . ) .

requirements that may be waived or modified pursuant to this section include ( 1 ) conditions of participation and certain other requirements in the medicare , medicaid and schip programs ; ( 2 ) federal requirements for state licensure of health professionals ; ( 3 ) certain provisions of the emergency medical treatment and active labor act of 1985 ( emtala ) ; ( 4 ) certain sanctions prohibiting physician self - referral ( so - called "stark" provisions ) ; ( 5 ) modification , but not waiver , of deadlines and timetables for performance of required activities ; ( 6 ) limitations on certain payments for health care items and services furnished to individuals enrolled in a medicare + choice plan ; and ( 7 ) sanctions and penalties that arise from noncompliance with certain patient privacy requirements of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 .

alternate medicare drug reimbursement method: in situations where a public health emergency has been determined to exist under 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d , and "there is a documented inability to access drugs and biologicals," the secretary may , under certain circumstances , use an alternative methodology for determining payments of certain drugs under the medicare program .

deployment of the public health service commissioned corps: the secretary may deploy officers in the commissioned corps of the u.s. public health service to respond to an "urgent or emergency public health care need," as determined by the secretary , arising as the result of ( 1 ) a national emergency declared by the president under the national emergencies act ( 50 u.s.c .

§ 1601 et seq .

 ) ; ( 2 ) an emergency or major disaster declared by the president under the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 5121 et seq .

 ) ; ( 3 ) a public health emergency declared by the secretary pursuant to 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d ; or ( 4 ) any emergency that , in the judgment of the secretary , is appropriate for the deployment of members of the corps .

other public health emergency authorities of the hhs secretary the following is a list of statutory authorities or requirements of the secretary or others within hhs to take certain additional actions during public health emergencies that are not explicitly defined or linked to an emergency determination pursuant to section 319 authority .

in some cases these actions flow from federal emergency or major disaster declarations pursuant to the stafford act .

in other cases reference is made to a situation of public health emergency , but such emergency is not defined .

assistance to states: pursuant to section 311 of the public health service act , the secretary of hhs has broad authority to assist state and local governments in their disease control efforts , upon their request , as follows: "the secretary may , at the request of the appropriate state or local authority , extend temporary ( not in excess of six months ) assistance to states or localities in meeting health emergencies of such a nature as to warrant federal assistance .

the secretary may require such reimbursement of the united states for assistance provided under this paragraph as he may determine to be reasonable under the circumstances .

any reimbursement so paid shall be credited to the applicable appropriation for the service for the year in which such reimbursement is received. .

the term "health emergencies" is not defined in this context , but this authority underpins a variety of unanticipated activities which are undertaken each year such as cdc's deployment of epidemic intelligence service officers to assist states affected by an ongoing mumps outbreak .

national health security strategy: "preparedness and response regarding public health emergencies: beginning in 2009 and every four years thereafter , the secretary shall prepare and submit to the relevant committees of congress a coordinated strategy ( to be known as the national health security strategy ) and any revisions thereof , and an accompanying implementation plan for public health emergency preparedness and response .

such national health security strategy shall identify the process for achieving the preparedness goals described in subsection ( b ) and shall be consistent with the national preparedness goal , the national incident management system , and the national response plan developed pursuant to section 502 ( 6 ) of the homeland security act of 2002 [6 u.s.c .

§ 314 ( 6 ) ] , or any successor plan. .

hhs exemption from " select agent " regulation: the secretary maintains regulatory control over certain biological agents and toxins which have the potential to pose a severe threat to public health and safety .

the secretary may temporarily exempt a person from the regulatory requirements of this section if "the secretary determines that such exemption is necessary to provide for the timely participation of the person in a response to a domestic or foreign public health emergency ( whether determined under section 247d ( a ) of this title or otherwise ) . .

 ( emphasis added ) .

usda exemption from " select agent " regulation: the secretary , after granting an exemption under 42 u.s.c .

§ 262a ( g ) ( relating to regulation of certain biological agents and toxins ) pursuant to "a finding that there is a public health emergency" may request the secretary of agriculture to "temporarily exempt a person from the applicability of the requirements of this section with respect to an overlap agent or toxin , in whole or in part , to provide for the timely participation of the person in a response to the public health emergency. .

activation of ndms: the secretary may activate the national disaster medical system ( ndms ) to "provide health services , health - related social services , other appropriate human services , and appropriate auxiliary services to respond to the needs of victims of a public health emergency ( whether or not determined to be a public health emergency under section 247d of this title ) " ( emphasis added ) .

authority for the strategic national stockpile: "the secretary , in coordination with the secretary of homeland security , shall maintain a stockpile or stockpiles of drugs , vaccines and other biological products , medical devices , and other supplies in such numbers , types , and amounts as are determined by the secretary to be appropriate and practicable , taking into account other available sources , to provide for the emergency health security of the united states , including the emergency health security of children and other vulnerable populations , in the event of a bioterrorist attack or other public health emergency. .

authority for the emergency system for advance registration of volunteer health professionals ( esar - vhp ) : "not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act , the secretary shall link existing state verification systems to maintain a single national interoperable network of systems , each system being maintained by a state or group of states , for the purpose of verifying the credentials and licenses of health care professionals who volunteer to provide health services during a public health emergency. .

"public health emergency" is not defined .

federal quarantine authority: the secretary has the authority to "make and enforce such regulations as in his judgment are necessary to prevent the introduction , transmission , or spread of communicable diseases from foreign countries into the states or possessions , or from one state or possession into any other state or possession. .

these regulations may "provide for the apprehension and examination of any individual reasonably believed to be infected with a communicable disease in a qualifying stage. .

the term "qualifying stage" means that the disease is "in a communicable stage" or is "in a precommunicable stage , if the disease would be likely to cause a public health emergency if transmitted to other individuals. .

authority for the administration of smallpox countermeasures: the secretary may issue a declaration "concluding that an actual or potential bioterrorist incident or other actual or potential public health emergency makes advisable the administration of" certain countermeasures against smallpox for public health service employees .

liability protection for certain countermeasures: if the secretary "makes a determination that a disease or other health condition or other threat to health constitutes a public health emergency , or that there is a credible risk that the disease , condition , or threat may in the future constitute such an emergency , the secretary may make a declaration , through publication in the federal register , recommending , under conditions as the secretary may specify , the manufacture , testing , development , distribution , administration , or use of one of more covered countermeasures.... " liability protection is provided for certain persons with respect to claims resulting from the administration of covered countermeasures following a declaration of a public health emergency under this authority .

disaster relief for aging services organizations: the assistant secretary for aging , in hhs , "may provide reimbursements to any state ( or to any tribal organization receiving a grant under title vi [42 u.s.c .

§§ 3057 et seq .

] ) , upon application for such reimbursement , for funds such state makes available to area agencies on aging in such state ( or funds used by such tribal organization ) for the delivery of supportive services ( and related supplies ) during any major disaster declared by the president in accordance with the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act. .

authority to expedite research: if the secretary "determines , after consultation with the director of nih , the commissioner of the food and drug administration , or the director of the centers for disease control and prevention , that a disease or disorder constitutes a public health emergency , the secretary , acting through the director of nih," shall expedite certain review procedures for applications for research grants on diseases relevant to the disease or disorder involved in the emergency and take other specified administrative measures to assist relevant grants or contracts .

 ( nih is the national institutes of health. ) .

fisheries management: the secretary of commerce may take certain measures relating to the national fishery management program in case of an emergency .

if the emergency is a public health emergency , then the secretary of hhs is to "concur" with the "emergency regulation or interim measure promulgated" by the secretary of commerce .

atsdr assistance for exposure to toxic substances: the administrator of the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr , an agency within hhs ) shall , "in cases of public health emergencies caused or believed to be caused by exposure to toxic substances , provide medical care and testing to exposed individuals. .

mosquito - borne diseases: the secretary has enhanced budget authority for the response to public health emergencies related to mosquito - borne diseases as follows: "in the case of any control programs carried out in response to a mosquito - borne disease that constitutes a public health emergency , the authorization of appropriations ( in this provision ) is in addition to applicable authorizations of appropriations under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002. .

additional public health emergency authorities the following are public health emergency authorities of individuals other than the hhs secretary .

authority of the attending physician to congress: "the attending physician to congress shall have the authority and responsibility for overseeing and coordinating the use of medical assets in response to a bioterrorism event and other medical contingencies or public health emergencies occurring within the capitol buildings or the united states capitol grounds .

this shall include the authority to enact quarantine and to declare death .

these actions will be carried out in close cooperation and communication with the commissioner of public health , chief medical examiner , and other public health officials of the district of columbia government. .

health and medical monitoring following a disaster : the president , acting through the secretary of hhs , is authorized to carry out a program for the coordination , protection , assessment , monitoring , and study of the health and safety of individuals ( including but not limited to responders ) who may have had hazardous exposures as a result of a disaster declared pursuant to the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 5121 et seq . ) .

if the president carries out such a program , it must be commenced in a timely manner to ensure the highest level of public health protection and effective monitoring .

crisis counseling assistance and training during a disaster: "the president is authorized to provide professional counseling services , including financial assistance to state or local agencies or private mental health organizations to provide such services or training of disaster workers , to victims of major disasters in order to relieve mental health problems caused or aggravated by such major disaster or its aftermath. .

this provision in the stafford act is jointly administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and the substance abuse and mental health services administration in hhs .

authority of the secretary of dhs to deploy the strategic national stockpile: "the [dhs] secretary [secretary's responsibilities] ... shall include ... coordinating other federal response resources , including requiring deployment of the strategic national stockpile , in the event of a terrorist attack or major disaster.... " authority of the secretary of veterans affairs to provide care: the secretary of veterans affairs is authorized to furnish hospital care and medical services to individuals , including non - veterans , affected by ( 1 ) a major disaster or emergency declared by the president under stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 5121 et seq. ) .

or ( 2 ) a disaster or emergency in which ndms is activated .

notification during potential public health emergencies: "in cases involving , or potentially involving , a public health emergency , but in which no determination of an emergency by the secretary of health and human services under section 319 ( a ) of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

247d ( a ) ) , has been made , all relevant agencies , including the department of homeland security , the department of justice , and the federal bureau of investigation , shall keep the secretary of health and human services and the director of the centers for disease control and prevention fully and currently informed. .

methodology the above listing of federal public health emergency authorities was developed by reviewing the results of a search of the u.s. code for the terms "public health emergency," "health threat," or "disaster," or for citations to the public health emergency authority at 42 u.s.c .

§ 247d .

not included in the listing are references to the suspension of certain routine activities in the event of a disaster , requirements for disaster planning in health care facilities , or other provisions not directly related to the declaration or determination of a federal public health emergency or the activities authorized or required when such a declaration or determination is made .

