the principal authorities underlying the reconciliation process are set forth in two keysections of title iii ( "congressional budget process" ) of the congressional budget act of 1974 .

section 310 ( 2 u.s.c .

641 ) establishes the basic reconciliation procedures , and section 313 ( 2u.s.c .

644 ) establishes a senate rule aimed at preventing the inclusion of extraneous matter inreconciliation legislation .

the text of section 310 and section 313 is provided in appendix a and appendix b , respectively .

in addition , other provisions in title iii have a bearing on the reconciliation process .

section300 ( 2 .

u.s.c .

631 ) , for example , lays down the timetable of the congressional budget process,indicating that congress should complete action on any required reconciliation legislation by june15 during a session .

section 301 ( 2 u.s.c .

632 ) contains a provision authorizing the inclusion in a budgetresolution of reconciliation directives ( in subsection ( b ) ( 2 ) ) , a deferred enrollment procedure to usedin connection with reconciliation ( in subsection ( b ) ( 3 ) ) , and other appropriate "matters" and"procedures" under the elastic clause ( in subsection ( b ) ( 4 ) ) .

section 305 ( 2 u.s.c .

636 ) sets forth , in subsection ( b ) , senate procedures for theconsideration of budget resolutions , which , by virtue of a reference in section 310 ( e ) , also apply tothe consideration of reconciliation measures ( except for the time limit on debate ) .

points of order pertaining to the enforcement of timing requirements , substantive budgetresolution policies , and the jurisdiction of the house and senate budget committees , that couldapply to the consideration of reconciliation measures , are found in sections 302 , 303 , and 311 .

additional points of order that could apply to reconciliation measures , dealing with budgetarylegislation not subject to appropriations and unfunded mandates , are set forth in title iv of the act .

finally , section 904 ( 2 u.s.c .

621 note ) imposes a three - fifths vote requirement on waivers ( andappeals of the ruling of the chair ) with respect to certain points of order under the act .

four aspects of house action at this stage of the reconciliation process areaddressed in this section: ( 1 ) the development of legislative recommendations by theinstructed committees ; ( 2 ) the preparation of an omnibus measure by the housebudget committee ; ( 3 ) the special rule providing for the consideration ofreconciliation legislation ; and ( 4 ) floor consideration of reconciliation legislation .

the initial consideration of reconciliation measures in the senate ispotentially a complex process that parallels house action in some respects , but differssignificantly in others .

four aspects of senate action at this stage of thereconciliation process are addressed in this section: ( 1 ) the development oflegislative recommendations by the instructed committees ; ( 2 ) the preparation of anomnibus measure by the senate budget committee ; ( 3 ) floor consideration of reconciliation legislation ; and ( 4 ) the operation of the senate's "byrd rule. .

under the usual practice , the house and senate initially consider and passtheir own reconciliation measures .

in addition , reconciliation measures are complex,and in many instances , quite lengthy legislation .

accordingly , these factorseffectively guarantee that the house and senate bills will be different .

the twochambers must , however , as with all legislation , agree to the same reconciliationmeasure in the exact same form before it can be sent to the president .

for the mostpart , the house and senate employ the usual legislative procedures and practicesunder their rules to resolve differences on reconciliation measures , although thecongressional budget act of 1974 specifies some aspects of procedure at this stage .

as with other complex legislation , the house and senate typically use aconference as the means of developing an agreement on reconciliation legislation .

in the case of all but one of the 19 reconciliation measures ultimately submitted bycongress to the president , the house and senate convened a conference on themeasure and a conference report was issued .

in the one instance in which aconference was not used , the two chambers passed identical legislation and therewere no differences to resolve .

 ( in response to reconciliation directives in thefy1984 budget resolution , the senate passed a house - passed reconciliation billwithout amendment , clearing it for the president. ) .

the pattern with regard to conference procedure on reconciliation measureshas been for the senate to consider one or two senate bills initially , then to take upand amend the house - passed bill in order to proceed to conference .

table 8 provides information on house and senate actions on conference reports onreconciliation measures .

the one exception to the pattern occurred in 1982 .

inresponse to reconciliation directives in the fy1983 budget resolution , the senateinitially considered , and went to conference with the house on , a house - numberedbill , h.r .

4961 ( which became the tax equity and fiscal responsibilityact of 1982 ) .

the house and senate also may use an amendment exchange instead of aconference in order to resolve differences regarding legislation , or as a fallbackprocedure when conference agreements are not completed successfully .

in the caseof reconciliation legislation , amendment exchanges are seldom used .

the conferencereport on the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 , forexample , was rejected by the house on december 19 , 1985 , by a vote of205-151 .

 ( 81 ) between december 19 , 1985 , and march 20 , 1986 , the house and senate exchangedamendments nine times before their disagreements were resolved .

 ( 82 ) in addition,a successful point of order raised under the byrd rule against the conference reporton the balanced budget act of 1995 resulted in the senate receding and concurringwith a further amendment that effectively deleted the offending matter .

although thehouse had previously adopted the conference report , it resolved the disagreement byconcurring in the further senate amendment .

reconciliation measures follow the same legislative path to enactment asother legislation .

after a bill is submitted to him , the president has 10 days ( excluding sundays ) in which to approve or disapprove it .

if the president signs ordoes not sign the bill during the 10-day period , it becomes law ; however , if congressadjourns sine die during the 10-day period , thereby preventing the bill's return , it isdisapproved by "pocket veto. .

if the president vetoes the bill during the 10-dayperiod , it is returned to the chamber in which it originated ( as a "return veto" ) , alongwith a message explaining the president's objections .

the house and senate thenhave an opportunity to override the president's veto , thus enacting the measure intolaw .

in 1996 , the line item veto act conferred line - item veto authority on thepresident , which president clinton used in 1997 in connection with tworeconciliation measures and several annual appropriations acts ; the act was nullifiedby the supreme court in 1998 .

 ( section 310 of the congressional budget act of 1974 ; 2 u.s.c .

641 ) reconciliatio .

 ( section 313 of the congressional budget act of 1974 ; 2 .

u.s.c .

644 ) extraneous matter in reconciliation legislatio .

crs report 98-814 , budget reconciliation legislation: development and consideration , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl30458 , the budget reconciliation process: timing of legislativeaction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30862 , the budget reconciliation process: the senate's "byrdrule," by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30714 , congressional action on revenue and debt reconciliationmeasures in 2000 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31902 ( pdf ) , revenue reconciliation directives in the fy2004 budgetresolution , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20870 , revenue reconciliation directives to the senate financecommittee in congressional budget resolutions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21993 , spending reconciliation directives to the senate financecommittee in congressional budget resolutions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22098 , deficit impact of reconciliation legislation enacted in 1990,1993 , and 1997 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22160 ( pdf ) , reconciliation and the deficit in fy2006 and throughfy2010: fact sheet , by philip d. winters .

crs congressional distribution memorandum , january 14 , 2005 , reconciliationdirectives to house committees in budget resolutions for fy1976-fy2005 , by billheniff jr. crs congressional distribution memorandum , reconciliation directives to senatecommittees in budget resolutions for fy1976-fy2005 , january 14 , 2005 , by billheniff jr .

