congress and the department of defense ( dod ) are engaged in an extended discourse overthe future direction of u.s. defense strategy and military force structure .

 ( 1 ) in the past , these discussionshave focused almost exclusively on questions related to u.s. conventional military forces , withdiscussions about nuclear weapons held in separate fora .

however , the 2005 quadrennial defensereview ( qdr ) examined both nuclear and conventional forces , a first in the qdr's history .

 ( 2 ) as a result , this indicates thatanalysts both inside and outside government are beginning to review and assess the relationshipbetween conventional and nuclear weapons .

the purpose of this report is to support this assessment,using possible conflict with china as a framework or case study .

dod's attention to possible military conflict with china appears to have increased since theend of the cold war .

such a potential conflict presents the challenge of a very complicatedpolitical / economic / social relationship among the participants .

it also presents the noteworthymilitary challenges of defending a distant ally or friendly country from a proximate adversary,possessing large conventional forces and nuclear weapons capable of reaching the continental unitedstates .

many in dod appear to consider military conflict with china to be a "pacing threat": themilitary capabilities required to successfully cope with this scenario are likely to be adequate to copewith other , and presumably less challenging state - on - state conflicts .

practical decisions regardinghow the united states might most effectively equip its forces and develop strategies for their use tocontend with possible military conflicts with china raise obvious issues concerning the structure ofu.s .

conventional forces and the role of nuclear deterrence .

understanding how nuclear weapons and deterrence might combine with u.s. conventionalforces in a possible conflict with china , requires some understanding of both u.s. and chinesenuclear strategy and doctrine .

forces and strategy are not static , but evolve over time .

thus , ageneral discussion of the subject may be useful .

the status and tenor of political and military relations among the united states and theprimary actors in east asia will strongly affect the options considered and pursued to deter or defeatany aggression in the region .

u.s. policymakers face the challenge of balancing u.s. relations withthe prc , taiwan , and japan , in particular .

requirements for military force structure and capabilities are often expressed in terms of thenumber and type of conflicts that can be addressed by that force .

for example , dod's 1993 bottomup review found that "the united states must field forces sufficient to fight and win two nearlysimultaneous major regional conflicts. .

 ( 54 ) subsequent reviews recommended different formulas , such asthe "1-4-2-1" formula: u.s. forces should be able to defend the u.s. homeland , operate in four keyforward regions , engage in two nearly simultaneous regional contingencies , and swiftly prevail inone of those conflicts .

 ( 55 ) debate rages over such formulas because they "are euphemisms for bread - and - butter issues , suchas larger or smaller fighter aircraft forces , a bigger or smaller army , and whether to spend moremoney on space systems or on ground equipment. .

 ( 56 ) in the 2005 national defense strategy of the united states of america , dod describes howit has adopted a "new approach for planning to implement our strategy. .

dod's "capabilities - based"planning is intended to focus more on how adversaries may challenge us , than on whom thoseadversaries might be .

some find "capabilities - based" planning to be artificial or misleading .

in theend , analysis always returns to the question of which countries or non - state actors we may need tofight .

to effectively analyze the desired size and characteristics of tomorrow's military , some arguethat we must take "a hard look at feasible , real - world contingencies. .

 ( 57 ) examining feasible contingencies , or scenarios , can be useful in determining the preferredsize and characteristics of u.s. military forces in various contexts .

do some scenarios place a greateremphasis on air and naval forces ? .

do others require greater commitment of ground forces ? .

perhapsmore important , how relevant are nuclear weapons in particular scenarios , and how exactly mightthey influence the conflict or crisis ? .

for example , some observers contend that the availability ofnuclear weapons can help de - escalate a conflict by reminding all the parties of the risks of escalation ; others argue that a nation's ability to strike critical targets at the start of a conflict can place pressureon the other nation to preempt such a potential attack , escalating the crisis and possibly complicatingefforts to end it short of all - out war .

dod's 2006 report to congress on china's military capabilities notes that china's currentoptions to prevent taiwan from claiming formal independence include persuasion and coercion .

ifchina were to resort to overt military force , the dod report outlines four possible "courses ofaction"the pla would be likely to take: missile strikes and information operations , an air and missilecampaign , a naval blockade , and an amphibious invasion .

dod's scenarios are not exhaustive , however , as additional sources of conflict could emergebetween the united states and china .

for example , taiwan , in expectation of a chinese attack,could take the initial overt military action in the conflict .

further , possible conflicts between chinaand japan might unfold and draw in the united states .

illustrative scenarios that capture theseadditional dynamics are addressed below .

examining these scenarios can contribute to an understanding of u.s. force requirements andthe potential dynamics of the conflict .

this assessment focuses on the possible interaction betweenconventional and nuclear forces , rather than on the specific order of battle and force levels the unitedstates might need in each particular scenario .

the analysis that follows seeks to study the role that u.s. nuclear and conventional forcesmight play in four stages of each potential conflict: deterrence prior to the start of the conflict ; crisisstability in the early stages of the conflict ; warfighting during the height of the conflict ; and wartermination .

objectives and potential challenges or shortcomings are identified .

a possible conflict with china attracts considerable attention from defense planners becauseit is a regional competitor today and could over time grow to be a "near - peer" competitor .

analystscan also easily identify flashpoints where the two nations might meet and feel compelled to defendnational interests .

the united states has a long - standing nuclear deterrent relationship with china .

however , during the cold war , managing this relationship was far less important than managing therelationship with the soviet union .

with the demise of the soviet union and the improvedrelationship between the united states and russia , the nuclear equation between the united statesand china raises its own series of questions: are existing u.s. capabilities sufficient to deter or defeat china or otherpotential challengers ? .

would added or different capabilities enhance the u.s. position in a conflict,by enhancing deterrence , easing crisis instabilities , or hastening the end of hostilities on termsfavorable to the united states and its allies ? .

the answers to these questions can inform decisions about the balance of nuclear and conventionalcapabilities in the u.s. military force structure .

in a time of growing budget scrutiny , investment in several conventional weapon systemsor concepts is frequently justified by their perceived utility in a possible conflict with "near - peer"competitors such as china .

 ( 61 ) often , these weapon systems are among the more expensiveprograms in dod's budget .

examples of these weapons or concepts include ballistic missile defense,prompt long - range conventional strike , the f - 22a raptor advanced combat aircraft , and the airbornelaser .

the desired number of u.s. navy aircraft carriers , attack submarines , anti - submarine warfareships and aircraft is also frequently linked to a need to effectively counter potential chinese militaryaction .

although not explicitly linked to china , other u.s. weapon systems programs appear to begeared toward large - scale conventional war during a time of increasing threats from non - state actors .

examples of these weapon system programs include the navy's conversion of trident nuclear missilesubmarines into conventional guided - missile delivery systems ( ssgn ) .

after reviewing thescenarios , and using the weapon system programs above as examples of potential future investments,the following questions arise: what potential do these weapons offer for enhanced deterrence , crisis stability,warfighting or conflict termination ? .

are the potential enhancements to deterrence , crisis stability , warfighting orconflict termination worth the estimated costs of developing and fielding theseweapons ? .

are the potential enhancements in one situation offset by potential liabilities in other situations ? .

might other investments offer more promise at lowercosts ? .

what linkages exist between nuclear and conventionalforces ? .

the answers to these questions can also inform decisions about the balance of nuclear andconventional capabilities in the u.s. military force structure .

this report highlights a number of policy issues that may bear consideration in the ongoingdebate regarding investments in conventional and nuclear forces: it appears that china and the united states currently have a stable deterrentrelationship .

this deterrence appears to be based on a complicated nexus of economic,political , and military factors .

despite this deterrent relationship , military conflict might ensue either as partof a consciously planned strategy or due to mistakes , misperception , oraccident .

together , u.s. nuclear and conventional capabilities contribute to militarydeterrence , and therefore it appears that it would be worthwhile to consider the interplay of nuclearand conventional capabilities in force structure and strategy decisions .

nuclear and conventional military capabilities can simultaneously havepositive effects on deterrence or warfighting , and negative effects on crisis stability or wartermination objectives .

therefore , it may be overly simplistic to make changes in military forcestructure or capabilities to improve deterrence , for example , without considering potential effectson crisis stability , for example .

investments in military capabilities that may positively contribute to allpotential stages of military conflict ( e.g .

deterrence , crisis stability , warfighting , and wartermination ) , might be preferred to investments that have a mixed effect on the potential range ofconflict .

