army personnel estimates point toward a future shortage of active duty officers , especially in the ranks of "senior" captain and major .

since it currently takes 10 years to "grow" or promote to the rank of major ( from lieutenant to promotion to major ) and 14 years if a major is an academy or rotc graduate , this is not a problem that can be quickly nor easily solved as the army continues to transform its force structure and , simultaneously , fight the global war on terror ( gwot ) .

for background on the army's complex system of recruiting and managing its officer corps , see appendix .

the army currently projects an officer shortage of approximately 3,000 "line" officers in fy2007 , a situation that worsens to 3,700 officers in fy2008 and continues to average more than 3,000 annually through fy2013 .

this could result in 15% to 20% of all positions at the rank of major being vacant or filled by more junior and less experienced officers .

while a number of potential causes are reviewed , this report will focus on two: reduced officer accessions ( the number of new lieutenants brought to active duty annually ) during and after the drawdown of the early to mid - 1990s , and the significant increase in officer requirements as the army transforms to a "brigade - centric" force , a key element in the army's modular force initiative .

to at least partially address this situation , the army has recently introduced several non - financial retention incentives that result in extended service obligations .

however , unlike the navy , the only army officer retention or continuation bonus currently being paid to line officers is aviation career incentive pay , which only applies to a small fraction of the army officer corps .

this report assesses the extent of the army officer shortfall , examines perceived causes , reviews recent retention initiatives , identifies other possible retention incentives , and concludes with a review of possible options for congress .

this report is focused on the army's "line" or basic branch officers , and does not address the army medical department , judge advocate general corps or chaplain corps .

this "line" cohort is also referred to as the army competitive category .

also , the report is focused on the active component and does not review officer strength in the army national guard or army reserve .

the projections contained in this report are based on an authorized army end strength of 512,400 .

the dimensions of the army's shortage of captains and majors are illustrated by figure 1 , which depicts the projected status of the army line officer cohort in fy2007 .

the vertical bars show the expected strength of each year group , while the solid sloping line reflects officer requirements for each year group .

as figure 1 shows , the army will be somewhat over - strength in year groups 2004 through 2007 — composed mostly of lieutenants and junior captains .

the shortage emerges with year group 2002 and continues through year group 1991 — composed mostly of more senior captains and majors .

the shortage disappears with year group 1990 and earlier , which includes officers at the ranks of lieutenant colonel and colonel .

based on the shortages being experienced by year groups 1991 through 2002 , the army projects an officer shortage of 120 lieutenant colonels , 2,195 majors , and 393 captains for an aggregate shortage of 2,708 for fy2007 .

as a result , 82.6% of all requirements for the rank of major are projected to be filled , and the army defines a personnel fill rate of 85% or less as a "critical" shortage .

for fy2008 , the shortages worsen , and the army projects it will be short 364 lieutenant colonels , 2,554 majors , and 798 captains for an aggregate shortage of 3,716 officers .

in fy2008 , only 80.5% of all requirements for major are projected to be filled .

officer shortages in excess of 3,000 annually are projected to persist through at least 2013 .

some analysts believe that the projected shortages of captains , especially from year groups 1998 through 2001 , and majors , especially from year groups 1991 through 1996 , will result in critical positions being vacant or filled with more junior and less experienced officers or even noncommissioned officers .

this could have a negative impact on unit readiness or cause some officers to fill more than one position simultaneously .

with the current operational and deployment tempo , this additional stress could result in higher attrition and , therefore , a worsening shortage situation .

other analysts , however , would argue that with an overall line officer population of approximately 52,000 , a shortage of only 3,000 represents only a 6% shortfall and this is not a significant operational problem .

additionally , they note that it is not unprecedented for officers to be assigned to positions which are formally designated for an officer one rank higher .

some may attribute the current officer shortage , in part , to the army drawdown of the early 1990s that resulted from the end of the cold war and a desire to reduce end strength to reap a "peace dividend. .

while the post - vietnam drawdown had targeted specific grades for reduction , the cold war drawdown "resized" each year group cohort using a variety of voluntary incentive programs and the threat or actual use of involuntary separation tools .

as a result , the active duty army was reduced from approximately 777,000 service members to 495,000 during the period between 1989 and 1996 while the officer corps was downsized from 91,000 to 69,000 .

beginning in 1991 , annual officer accessions were reduced and many lieutenants on active duty were involuntarily separated through lieutenant retention boards .

captains were permitted to voluntarily separate prior to completing their active duty service obligations ( adso ) and were later offered relatively robust financial incentives under the voluntary separation incentive ( vsi ) and special separation benefit ( ssb ) programs .

officers opting for the vsi received an annual annuity for twice their number of years of service while ssb provided a lump sum payment .

if these programs failed to generate sufficient reductions , the army could have resorted to involuntary reduction - in - force ( rif ) , but this was never necessary for captains.the reduction in accessions and the separation of lieutenants and captains from 1991 to 1996 had a significant bearing on current officer shortages because many of these individuals would be majors today if they had remained in the army .

other voluntary and involuntary programs were used to separate more senior officers .

by the end of 1995 , over 20,000 officers had been voluntarily or involuntarily separated or retired through one of the drawdown programs ; a total of 1,681 lieutenants and 8,959 captains were included in this total .

of the 30-year group cohorts on active duty today , 21 of them were subject to the drawdown .

a major factor influencing today's shortage situation appears to be reduced accessions both during and immediately following the drawdown and the forced separation of over 10,000 lieutenants and captains .

the drawdown did not , however , result in increased attrition rates as some analysts had predicted .

usually , army reserve component units are activated through a cycle of mobilization , deployment , redeployment and return to reserve status .

however , army reserve and national guard individuals are sometimes activated as individual replacements .

active component officer grade and skill shortages can be reduced by permitting reserve component officers to voluntarily return to active duty for extended periods through a "call to active duty. .

these officers must be able to complete 20 years of active duty to attain retirement eligibility before age 62 .

alternatively , they can be involuntarily activated through the use of partial mobilization authority .

in fy2005 , a total of 800 reserve officers ( 90 from the army national guard and 720 from the army reserve ) were called to active duty under this program .

this procedure , however , depletes the officer corps in the reserve components and both the army reserves and army national guard already report significant shortages at the grades of captain and major , according to army officials .

in addition to increasing promotion opportunity , decreasing promotion timing and increasing officer accessions , the army recently announced three new programs focused on retaining officers through career satisfaction initiatives that require an additional active duty service obligation ( adso ) .

these programs include: 1 .

branch for service .

there are 15 basic accession branches or initial job specialties for line officers in the active duty army .

until now , usma and rotc cadets could request their personal preferences for branch assignment but the actual branching decision was made by a centralized selection board that considered academic major , grade point average , cadet performance and the needs of the army for specific branch skills .

the new program guarantees cadets their branch of choice in return for an additional three - year adso .

for a usma graduate , this will result in eight years of obligated service .

for the rotc scholarship cadet , it will result in a seven year obligation .

so far , over 700 cadets have signed up for the branch for service program .

however , its impact on the current officer shortfalls will not be felt for at least five years .

2 .

post for service .

previously , newly accessed officers were assigned to a unit or installation that could provide a solid developmental opportunity for the officer with little regard to personal preference .

the new program allows usma and rotc scholarship cadets to select an initial post of assignment in return for an additional three - year obligation .

this initial assignment would generally be for three years .

as in the previous example , participation in this program will result in a seven to eight year mandatory obligation .

so far , over 120 cadets have requested the post for service program .

as with the branch for service program , the impact of this program will not be felt for at least five years .

3 .

expanded graduate school opportunities .

the army usually selects 400 to 500 officers annually to attend fully funded graduate school programs .

most of these support the skill and education requirements associated with the information operations , institutional operations and operations support career fields .

the existing program is being expanded to retain current company grade officers and to guarantee a graduate school opportunity for current usma cadets , rotc three and four - year scholarship students and all rotc distinguished military graduates ( dmg ) .

scholarships under the expanded portion of this program will be capped at $13,000 annually for tuition and books but officers will also continue to receive their full pay and allowances while attending school full - time .

the portion of this program that targets current commissioned officers features decentralized nomination by the officer's chain of command and centralized selection by the army .

the expansion will focus primarily on additional graduate opportunities for the operations career field .

approximately 200 officers will begin school in 2006 with a goal of 227 in 2007 , 238 in 2008 , 268 in 2009 and achieve a steady state of 300 per year in 2010 .

officers participating in this program will incur an additional active duty service obligation ( adso ) of three days for each day of graduate school attendance up to a maximum of 72 months .

upon graduation , officers will serve a three - year utilization tour in a key developmental billet .

if this program is successful , it might have an immediate , if modest , impact on reducing attrition among captains .

however , by taking these officers out of the operating force , it could exacerbate officer shortages as well .

the other portion of the program is focused on usma cadets and rotc scholarship students .

these cadets must agree to serve an additional three - year adso for the guaranteed opportunity to attend graduate school between their 6 th and 11 th years of service .

they will then incur an additional adso of three days for each day of graduate school attendance for a maximum of 72 months and will be required to serve a three - year utilization tour upon graduation .

as with the other new programs , its impact on any officer shortages will not be felt for at least five years .

nearly 300 cadets have already signed up for the guaranteed graduate school program .

of the 200 graduate school slots set aside for high - performing captains , nearly 180 officers are scheduled to begin school this year .

at full implementation in 2010 , the army will be sending approximately 1,100 officers a year to graduate school .

there are , however , potential management implications with this number of officers in graduate school .

typical graduate programs require 15 to 24 months to complete .

therefore , up to 2,200 officers could be in graduate school at any given time and all must then complete a three - year utilization tour related to their academic study .

this combination will potentially limit their assignment flexibility for up to five years , and could therefore hinder the army's ability to man the new positions generated by its current modular force initiative .

these three new incentive programs - branch for service , post for service and graduate school - directly respond to a recent army survey of officers and reflect three of the top five incentives desired by army officers .

other than aviation career incentive pay , the army is not paying any type of financial incentive or bonus to retain line officers , compared to the extensive network of such incentives used by the navy .

however , congress has already enacted legislation that , if implemented by the army , could assist in recruiting and retaining officers .

specifically .

crs report rs21754 , military forces: what is the appropriate size for the united states ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34549 , a brief history of veterans ' education benefits and their value , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32476 , u.s. army ' s modular redesign: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

management of the army's commissioned officer corps is a dynamic , highly visible and complex system that is significantly influenced by law and policy .

historically , the congress has been very interested in all aspects of officer management and supportive of enhancing the effectiveness and professionalism of the officer corps .

a number of parameters frame and define the challenges of managing the army's officer corps: multiple commissioning sources .

army officers are commissioned by three primary sources: the u.s. military academy ( usma ) at west point , n.y. ; the reserve officer training corps ( rotc ) located on 272 college and university campuses ; and the officer candidate school ( ocs ) program at fort benning , ga. usma and rotc are generally four - year programs that result in a baccalaureate degree and commission followed by attendance at a basic branch course .

ocs is a much shorter program — 12 weeks — which is also followed by attendance at a branch basic course .

historically , usma and rotc have been the primary sources of army officers , with ocs providing a "surge" capability and advancement opportunity for talented enlisted personnel .

while a college degree is not a prerequisite for ocs , by policy all officers must possess a degree to be eligible for promotion to captain .

however , nearly 80% of recent ocs graduates have already earned a baccalaureate degree .

obligated service .

officers enter active duty for an initial period of obligated service based on their source of commission .

usma graduates incur a five - year active duty service obligation ( adso ) while rotc scholarship graduates have a four - year obligation and rotc non - scholarship and ocs graduates incur a three - year obligation .

upon completion of this obligation , an officer may apply for voluntary separation or continue on active duty .

additional service obligations , of varying lengths , are required for certain reassignments and civil / military schools. .

year group " ( yg ) centric officer cohorts .

all officers accessed to active duty during a fiscal year constitute a year group that will compete for promotion , school and command opportunities within the cohort as it progresses through a 30-year military career .

for example , year group 2006 will enter active duty between october 1 , 2005 and september 30 , 2006 .

of note for the discussion of officer shortages , a yg can be reduced after it is accessed , but it is difficult to enlarge it under the current system .

figure a - 1 graphically depicts ideal or optimal year group management .

each of the vertical bars in figure a - 1 represents the projected strength of that year group with the shading indicating the proportion of the year group in a given rank .

the sloping solid line represents the total number of officers required from each year group .

figure a - 1 depicts the perfect personnel management situation where each yg is perfectly aligned with the requirements slope .

year groups above the slope would be considered overstrength , while year groups below the slope would be understrength. .

closed " system .

officers usually enter the system at the lowest commissioned rank ( second lieutenant ) and will progress by promotion through as many as six officer ranks below general / flag officer .

there is normally no lateral entry at a higher grade based on education or experience as would be found in an "open" system .

 ( as an exception , lateral entry is permitted into the medical corps and chaplain corps. ) .

" rank in person. .

rank or status is based on individual performance and competency , not the content or organizational position of a particular job. .

up - or - out " promotion system .

the "up" represents promotion to the next higher grade ; the "out" refers to the forced separation of those twice failing promotion to the next higher grade .

this type of promotion system also supports a pyramid - shaped force structure which has a higher number of junior officer ( company grade ) requirements and fewer senior ( field grade ) requirements .

career field based management .

officers are developed in only one basic branch and the branch remains primary for the first 10 years of an officer's career .

coincident with selection for promotion to major , all army competitive category officers are designated into one of four career fields - operations , information operations , institutional support and operations support .

each career field brings together selected disciplines with associated functional expertise .

officers will then have repetitive assignments and compete for promotion within the career field .

only officers in the operations career field and army acquisition corps can compete for centrally selected command opportunities .

stable career paths .

the defense officer personnel management act ( dopma ) of 1981 defined a general career path for all of the services by establishing limits or "bands" of promotion opportunity and promotion timing .

this enables an officer to project whether a promotion is likely to occur and when .

dopma promotion opportunity and timing are listed in table a - 1 , below .

short careers .

compared to many in private industry and foreign militaries , u.s. officers have relatively short careers .

they may retire at any age upon completion of 20 years of service and , unless promoted into the general officer ranks , will be mandatorily retired at 30 years .

maximum service is further defined by rank ( lieutenant colonels at 28 years and colonels at 30 years ) and age ( maximum age is 62 years ) .

