debate about the appropriate relationship between the branches in the federal budget process seems inevitable , given the constitutional necessity of shared power in this sphere .

under the constitution , congress possesses the "power of the purse" ( "no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law" ) , but the president enjoys broad authority as the chief executive who "shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. .

the constitution is silent concerning the specifics of a budget system for the federal government .

informal procedures sufficed for many years .

the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( p.l .

67-14 ) for the first time required the president to submit a consolidated budget recommendation to congress .

to assist in this task , the act also created a new agency , the bureau of the budget , "to assemble , correlate , revise , reduce , or increase the estimates of the several departments or establishments. .

in 1970 , the budget agency was reconstituted as the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

omb also plays an important role later in the budget process when funds are actually spent as appropriations laws are implemented .

impoundment of funds by the president represents an important component in this stage of budget execution .

presidential impoundment actions have sometimes been controversial .

the subject of granting the president item veto authority , akin to that exercised by 43 governors , also has elicited considerable debate .

with an item veto , the executive can delete specific provisions in a piece of legislation presented for signature , and then proceed to sign the measure into law .

action on an expanded rescission measure commenced early in the 104 th congress .

this reflected the results of the november midterm elections , which returned a republican majority to both the house and senate .

on september 28 , 1994 , many house republican members and candidates signed the republican contract with america , which pledged action on a number of measures , including a "legislative line item veto," within the first 100 days , should a republican majority be elected .

hearings began on january 12 , 1995 , when the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight held a joint hearing on h.r .

2 , to give the president legislative line item veto authority .

on january 18 , the senate budget committee held a hearing on related measures ( s. 4 , s. 14 , and s. 206 ) .

the senate judiciary subcommittee on the constitution held a hearing on january 24 to consider constitutional amendment proposals .

on january 25 , the house committee on government reform and oversight ordered h.r .

2 reported , as amended , and the next day the house rules committee likewise reported a further amended version of h.r .

2 .

house floor consideration of h.r .

2 commenced on february 2 , 1995 , on the version of h.r .

2 reported as an amendment in the nature of a substitute , with an open rule and over 30 amendments pending .

the house debated the measure for three days during which time six amendments were approved and 11 amendments were rejected , along with a motion to recommit with instructions .

on february 6 , 1995 , the house passed h.r .

2 , as amended , by vote of 294-134 .

the date of passage had special meaning , as it was the 84 th birthday of former president ronald reagan , long a supporter of an item veto for the president .

on february 14 , 1995 , the senate budget committee held markup on pending rescission measures .

the committee ordered s. 4 , as amended , reported without recommendation , by vote of 12-10 .

s. 14 was also ordered reported without recommendation , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute further amended , by vote of 13-8 .

the committee failed to order reported proposed legislation to create a legislative item veto by requiring separate enrollment of items in appropriations bills and targeted tax benefits in revenue bills .

on february 23 , 1995 , the senate governmental affairs committee held a hearing on s. 4 and s. 14 .

there had been a joint hearing with the house government reform and oversight committee on january 12 , but some senators on the committee , including the ranking minority member , maintained that the additional hearing day was needed because they had been unable to attend in january , due to competing duties that day on the senate floor .

on march 2 , 1995 , the governmental affairs committee held markup , with similar results as occurred in the budget committee: both bills were ordered reported without recommendation .

s. 4 was ordered reported by voice vote ; previously the stevens amendment to the glenn motion to report carried by vote of 9-6 .

during markup of s. 14 , the pryor amendment to exempt budget authority for the operations of the social security administration from expedited rescission was adopted by voice vote .

s. 14 was then ordered reported by vote of 13-2 .

in the senate , general debate on the subject of item veto began on march 16 ; it continued on march 17 and on march 20 until late in the afternoon , when floor consideration of s. 4 began .

the republican leaders in the senate reportedly delayed consideration of legislative line item veto bills in hopes of developing a compromise measure that supporters of s. 4 and s. 14 could all embrace .

the "republican compromise" substitute appeared as dole amendment no .

347 on march 20 ; this substitute amendment incorporated the separate enrollment approach , which seeks to confer item veto authority by statutory means .

during consideration of s. 4 on march 20 , two perfecting amendments added by the budget committee were withdrawn ; the provisions so deleted related to procedures for deficit reduction and to a sunset date for the enhanced rescission authority ( both are still found in s. 14 ) .

floor debate on s. 4 continued on march 21-23 .

eight amendments were adopted by voice vote , including the dole amendment itself , providing for separate enrollment for presentation to the president of each item of any appropriation and authorization bill or resolution providing direct spending or targeted tax benefits .

the senate ultimately passed s. 4 , with the dole amendment in the nature of a substitute and additional amendments , on march 23 , 1995 , by vote of 69-29 .

the significant differences between the house - passed h.r .

2 ( enhanced rescission approach ) , and the senate - passed s. 4 ( separate enrollment approach ) , needed to be resolved in conference .

on may 17 , 1995 , the house passed s. 4 , after agreeing to strike all after the enacting clause of senate - passed s. 4 and insert in lieu the language of the house - passed h.r .

2 .

the senate agreed to a conference and named eighteen conferees on june 20 .

on august 1 , the senate approved ( 83-14 ) a dorgan amendment to h.r .

1905 , fy1996 energy and water appropriations , to express the sense of the senate that the house speaker should move immediately to appoint conferees on s. 4 .

on september 7 , 1995 , the speaker appointed eight house conferees , after a motion to instruct conferees to make the bill applicable to current and subsequent fiscal year appropriation measures was agreed to by voice vote .

the conference committee held an initial meeting on september 27 , 1995 , at which opening statements were presented , and representative clinger was chosen as conference chairman .

the members present then instructed staff to explore alternatives for reconciling the two versions .

on october 25 , 1995 , the house agreed to a motion to instruct the house conferees on s. 4 to insist upon the inclusion of provisions to require that the bill apply to the targeted tax benefit provisions of any revenue or reconciliation bill enacted into law during or after fy1995 , by vote of 381-44 .

the conferees met again on november 8 , 1996 , at which time the house republicans on the committee offered a compromise package .

some key elements included accepting the house approach of enhanced rescission , using the senate definition of "item" for possible veto , using compromise language approved by the joint committee on taxation for defining "targeted tax benefits," including new direct spending , accepting senate "lockbox" language ( designed to ensure that any savings from cancellations could be used only for deficit reduction ) , and dropping the senate sunset proposal .

in his state of the union message on january 23 , 1996 , president clinton urged congress to complete action on a line item veto measure , stating "i also appeal to congress to pass the line item veto you promised the american people," but negotiations apparently remained stalled .

following return from the congressional recess in february , the pace of conference activity appeared to pick up considerably .

on march 14 , 1996 , republican negotiators on the conference committee reported that they had reached agreement on a compromise version of s. 4 , and the conference report was filed on march 21 , 1996 .

although there was no public conference meeting for approval , the republican negotiators obtained the signatures of a majority of conferees , thus readying the conference report for final action .

the conference substitute reflected compromise between the house and senate versions , although the enhanced rescission approach of h.r .

2 rather than the separate enrollment framework of s. 4 was chosen .

as in the november compromise package , new direct spending and certain targeted tax benefits were subject to the new authority of the president as well as items of discretionary spending in appropriation laws .

the measure was to take effect on january 1 , 1997 , absent an earlier balanced budget agreement , and would terminate on january 1 , 2005 .

the senate approved the conference substitute on march 27 , 1996 , by vote of 69-31 , and the house followed suit on march 28 , 1996 , by vote of 232-177 .

president clinton signed s. 4 on april 9 , 1996 .

the line item veto act of 1996 ( liva ) amended the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 ) , to give the president "enhanced rescission authority" to cancel certain items in appropriations and entitlement measures and also certain narrowly applicable tax breaks .

the act authorized the president to cancel in whole any dollar amount of discretionary budget authority ( appropriations ) , any item of new direct spending ( entitlement ) , or limited tax benefits with specified characteristics , contained in a bill otherwise signed into law .

the cancellation was to take effect upon receipt in the house and senate of a special notification message .

"cancellation" in this context meant to prevent from having legal force ; in other words , provisions canceled never were to become effective unless congress reversed the action of the president by enacting a "disapproval bill. .

the president was only to exercise the cancellation authority if he determined that such cancellation would reduce the federal budget deficit and would not impair essential government functions or harm the national interest ; and then notified the congress in a special message of any such cancellation within five calendar days after enactment of the law providing such amount , item , or benefit .

the act provided 30 days for the expedited congressional consideration of disapproval bills to reverse the cancellations contained in the special messages received from the president .

detailed provisions for expedited consideration of the disapproval bill in the house and senate were outlined .

the liva also contained a "lockbox" procedure to help ensure that any savings from cancellations go toward deficit reduction .

this was to be accomplished by binding the new procedures to existing requirements relating to discretionary spending limits and the paygo requirements of the budget enforcement act of 1990 .

to facilitate judicial review , the act provided for ( 1 ) expedited review by the u.s. district court for the district of columbia of an action brought by a member of congress or an adversely affected individual on the ground that any provision of this act violates the constitution ; ( 2 ) review of an order of such court by appeal directly to the supreme court ; and ( 3 ) expedited disposition of such matter by the supreme court .

the act became effective on january 1 , 1997 .

during 1997 , the first year with the line item veto act in effect , several noteworthy developments involved judicial challenges and the first use of the new authority by president clinton .

in congress , disapproval bills to overturn the cancellations by the president were introduced , along with alternative measures for providing the president with expanded rescission authority , bills to repeal the line item veto act , and even a bill to correct an apparent "loophole" in the original act .

in 1998 , there were additional court challenges , with the supreme court eventually striking down the new law as unconstitutional .

on january 31 , 2006 , in his state of the union address , president bush reiterated his request for line - item veto authority , noting: "and we can tackle this problem [of too many special - interest "earmark" projects] together , if you pass the line - item veto. .

in his budget submission for fy2006 , transmitted february 7 , 2005 , president bush called for a "line item veto linked to deficit reduction. .

on march 6 , 2006 , president bush sent a draft bill titled the legislative line item veto act of 2006 to congress , and the measure was introduced the next day ( see h.r .

4890 and s. 2381 below ) .

title notwithstanding , the bills sought to amend the impoundment control act of 1974 ( ica ) to incorporate a typical expedited rescission framework , intended through procedural provisions to require an up - or - down vote on presidential requests to cancel certain previously enacted spending or tax provisions .

since congressional approval would remain necessary for the rescissions to become permanent , expedited rescission is generally viewed as a weaker tool than an item veto .

h.r .

4890 and s. 2381 , as introduced , also contained rather novel provisions authorizing the president to withhold funds proposed for rescission or to suspend execution of items of direct spending for up to 180 days .

these provisions arguably might sanction the return of policy deferrals , originally provided for in the ica , subject to a one - house veto , but invalidated by the chadha and new haven decisions , as well as the statutory provisions in p.l .

100-119 .

on march 15 , 2006 , the house rules subcommittee on the legislative and budget process held a hearing on h.r .

4890 .

testimony was received from representative paul ryan , sponsor of h.r .

4890 , and from representative jerry lewis , chairman of the house appropriations committee .

the deputy director of omb and the acting director of cbo also appeared before the subcommittee .

on april 27 , 2006 , the house judiciary subcommittee on the constitution held a hearing on the line item veto and received testimony from representatives paul ryan and mark kennedy ; and from two attorneys , charles j. cooper in private practice , and cristina martin firvida of the national women's law center .

on may 2 , the senate budget committee held a hearing on s. 2381 ; witnesses included senator robert byrd , austin smythe from omb , donald marron from cbo , [author name scrubbed] from the library of congress , and attorney charles j. cooper .

the house budget committee held two hearings on h.r .

4890 , on may 25 and june 8 , 2006 .

the first day focused on "line - item veto: perspectives on applications and effects" and featured four witnesses representing private sector groups , including a former member and two former congressional aides .

the second hearing concentrated on constitutional issues , with testimony received from charles cooper , [author name scrubbed] , and professor viet d. dinh from the georgetown university law center .

on june 14 , the house budget committee held markup of h.r .

4890 .

representative paul ryan offered a substitute amendment , which was further amended .

an amendment offered by representative cuellar to add a sunset provision , whereby the act would expire after six years , was approved by voice vote .

also successful was an amendment offered by representative neal , as further amended by representative mccotter , expressing the sense of congress regarding possible abuse of proposed cancellation authority: no president or other executive official should make any decision for inclusion or exclusion of items in a special message contingent upon a members' vote in congress .

the ryan substitute , as amended , was adopted by voice vote .

the committee then voted 24-10 to report the bill favorably .

several amendments offered by minority members were rejected , generally with a straight party - line vote .

democrats sought to exempt future changes in social security , medicare , and veterans' entitlement programs from possible cancellations under the lliva .

democrats also attempted unsuccessfully to restore pay - as - you - go budget rules , to strengthen requirements for earmark disclosures , and to facilitate enforcement of the three - day lay - over rule for appropriations bills before floor votes .

on june 15 , the house rules committee met to markup h.r .

4890 and voted 8-4 to approve a substitute amendment containing the same version as approved by the budget committee .

several changes in the substitute version addressed concerns with the bill as introduced .

for example , in response to concern expressed over a return to policy deferrals by allowing the president to withhold spending for up to 180 calendar days , the substitute would allow the president to withhold funds for a maximum of 90 calendars days ( an initial 45-day period , which could be extended for another 45 days ) .

submission of special rescission or cancellation messages by the president would occur only within 45 days of enactment of the measure , and the president would be limited to submission of five special messages for each regular act and 10 messages for an omnibus measure .

submission of duplicative proposals in separate messages would be prohibited .

on the other hand , some changes in the substitute version approved by the budget and rules committees , and subsequently by the full house , arguably might be subject to additional critiques .

the substitute narrowed the definition of a targeted tax benefit to a revenue - losing measure affecting a single beneficiary , with the chairs of the ways and means and finance committees to identify such provisions .

the definition in h.r .

4890 as introduced referred to revenue - losing measures affecting 100 or fewer beneficiaries , as did the line item veto act of 1996 .

the bill as introduced , however , would have allowed the president to identify the provisions by default , whereas the 1996 law assigned the duty to the joint committee on taxation .

supporters of the substitute version suggested that it would treat targeted tax benefits comparably to earmarks in appropriations bills .

critics countered that the new definition was too narrow , and that few tax benefits would be subject to cancellation .

on june 21 , the house rules committee voted to report h.res .

886 , providing for the consideration of h.r .

4890 , as amended , favorably by a nonrecord vote .

a manager's amendment offered by representative paul ryan was adopted as a part of the rule for debate .

in response to concerns raised by the transportation and infrastructure committee , the amendment added clarifying language that any amounts cancelled which came from a trust fund or special fund would be returned to the funds from which they were originally derived , rather than revert to the general fund .

the following day the house took up h.r .

4890 , approved the rule ( h.res .

886 ) by vote of 228-196 , and passed the measure by vote of 247-172 .

a motion by representative spratt to recommit h.r .

4890 to the budget committee with instructions to report it back to the house with an amendment was rejected by vote of 170-249 .

meanwhile , on june 20 , 2006 , the senate budget committee marked up s. 3521 , the stop over spending act of 2006 , an omnibus budget reform measure containing provisions for expedited rescission in title i .

minority amendments to exclude medicare , social security , and veterans' health programs from possible rescissions were rejected 10-12 on party - line votes .

a manager's amendment was adopted by voice vote , which among other things would prohibit the resubmission of items of direct spending or targeted tax benefits previously rejected by congress , but would allow the president to resubmit proposed cancellations if congress failed to complete action on them due to adjournment .

whereupon the committee voted 12-10 to report s. 3521 , as amended , favorably .

the report to accompany s. 3521 was filed on july 14 , 2006 .

on june 27 , 2006 , the president met with some senators at the white house to discuss the legislative line item veto bill , and he subsequently urged that the senate act quickly to approve such a measure .

despite the white house lobbying effort , press accounts questioned the likelihood of further senate action in the 109 th congress .

as reported in a story on july 20 , 2006 , "senate budget chairman judd gregg , r - nh , all but pronounced the white house's item veto proposal dead for the year , telling reporters that the bush administration had not worked aggressively enough to round up the votes. .

according to a similar story appearing the same day: senate budget chairman judd gregg , r - nh , conceded this week that his budget overhaul package ( s. 3521 ) , which includes a sunset commission , line - item rescission authority and other budget enforcement measures has little chance of passage .

supporters have been unable to overcome democratic opposition and a reluctance among some republicans to address it in an election year .

in addition to the alternative of possible action on s. 3521 , the senate could have chosen to consider a stand alone item veto measure , such as h.r .

4890 , as passed by the house , or s. 2381 .

a news story published shortly before congress departed for the august recess suggested that the issue remained an open question: "senate majority leader bill frist , r - tn , has made no decisions about timing or which [line item rescission measure] to bring up , and is taking a wait - and - see approach to the white house lobbying effort. .

none of these bills , however , saw floor action in the senate before the 109 th congress adjourned .

h.r .

4890 ( paul ryan ) / s. 2381 ( frist ) .

legislative line item veto act of 2006 .

amends the ica of 1974 to provide for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of budget authority or cancellation of targeted tax benefits proposed by the president in special messages .

requires any rescinded discretionary budget authority or items of direct spending to be dedicated to deficit reduction .

grants the president authority to withhold funds proposed for rescission or to suspend execution of direct spending and targeted tax benefits .

both bills introduced on march 7 , 2006 .

h.r .

4890 referred jointly to committees on budget and on rules ; s. 2381 referred to budget committee .

reported favorably , as amended , by house budget committee on june 16 ( h.rept .

109-505 part 1 ) , and by rules committee on june 19 , 2006 ( h.rept .

109-505 part 2 ) .

passed house , as amended , by vote of 247-172 on june 22 , 2006 .

s. 3521 ( gregg ) .

stop over spending act of 2006 .

an omnibus budget reform bill .

title i , the legislative line item veto act , amends the ica of 1974 to provide for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of budget authority or cancellation of targeted tax benefits proposed by the president .

introduced on june 15 , 2006 ; referred to the budget committee .

committee voted 21-10 to report bill , as amended , favorably on june 20 , 2006 .

the report was filed on july 14 , 2006 ( s.rept .

109-283 ) .

early in the 110 th congress , line item veto measures received senate floor consideration .

on january 10 , 2007 , senator judd gregg introduced "the second look at wasteful spending act of 2007" as an amendment ( s.amdt .

17 to s.amdt .

3 to s. 1 ) to the legislative transparency and accountability act of 2007 , an ethics and lobbying reform bill .

according to senator gregg , the language in s.amdt .

17 was similar to the expedited rescission provisions contained in a democratic amendment , known as the daschle substitute , offered in 1995 during senate consideration of the line item veto act of 1996 .

the bush administration went on record in support of s.amdt .

17 : "the administration strongly supports senator gregg's legislative line item veto amendment — an initiative that is consistent with the president's goals. .

s.amdt .

17 would have provided for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of discretionary or new mandatory spending or cancellation of targeted tax benefits proposed in special messages from the president .

the president could submit up to four rescission packages a year ( once with the budget and three other times at the president's choosing ) .

the president could withhold funding contained in a special message for up to 45 days .

the new authority would expire in four years .

at one point , it appeared that the ethics and lobbying reform measure might become stalled , with the minority leader insisting on a vote on the gregg amendment before proceeding to final action on s. 1 .

an agreement was worked out , however , between the majority leader and the minority leader , with a promise of a vote on the line item veto amendment during debate on the minimum wage bill ( h.r .

2 ) the following week .

on january 18 , 2007 , s.amdt .

17 was withdrawn , and s. 1 passed by vote of 96-2 .

in accordance with the leadership agreement , senator gregg filed another amendment ( s.amdt .

101 to h.r .

2 ) on january 22 , 2007 , and two hours of floor debate on the line item veto measure ensued .

senator gregg noted "one major change" in provisions from the previous s.amdt .

17 incorporated into s.amdt .

101 : addition of the right to strike .

during consideration of a rescission package proposed by the president , a senator , with the support of 11 others , could move to strike one or more of the rescissions included in the bill ; in other words , congress could amend the president's proposal by deleting selected items .

senator gregg suggested that this change brought s.amdt .

101 even more in line with the daschle substitute in 1995 .

he also observed that several of the 20 cosponsors of the previous daschle amendment were still in the senate .

senator kent conrad , chair of the budget committee , suggested that the two amendments differed in important respects .

the gregg amendment would have allowed the president to propose rescinding items of new direct spending in programs such as medicare , whereas the daschle amendment did not cover such mandatory spending .

the gregg amendment would have permitted the president to propose rescissions from multiple bills in one rescission package whereas the daschle amendment would have required that a presidential rescission package cover just one bill .

according to senator conrad , this latter arrangement would give the president less leverage over an individual member .

debate on s.amdt .

101 resumed on january 24 , 2007 .

a vote to invoke cloture on the line item veto amendment failed to attain the necessary 60 votes ( 49-48 ) .

the amendment was subsequently set aside , and formally withdrawn on january 31 .

in his budget submission for fy2008 transmitted on february 5 , 2007 , president bush once again called for enactment of a line item veto mechanism , such as the administration's proposal from march 2006 , that "would withstand constitutional challenge. .

expedited rescission bills were also introduced in the house in the 110 th congress ( see below ) .

on the same day as the cloture motion on the gregg line item veto proposal failed in the senate , representative paul ryan , ranking republican on the house budget committee , along with 83 cosponsors , introduced h.r .

689 , the legislative line item veto act of 2007 .

h.r .

689 was nearly identical to h.r .

4890 as passed by the house in the 109 th congress .

on april 23 , 2007 , companion bills titled the congressional accountability and line - item veto act were introduced as h.r .

1998 by representative paul ryan , and as s. 1186 by senator russell feingold .

in his introductory remarks , senator feingold sought to differentiate this measure from previous bills , noting the following: there have been a number of so - called line - item veto proposals offered in the past several years .

but the measure congressman ryan and i propose today is unique in that it specifically targets the very items that every line - item veto proponent cites when promoting a particular measure , namely earmarks .

when president bush asked for this kind of authority , the examples he gave when citing wasteful spending he wanted to target were congressional earmarks .

the universe of items subject to rescission or cancellation by the president in s. 1186 showed noteworthy differences from those contained in the 109 th congress bills , as passed by the house ( h.r .

4890 ) and reported in the senate ( s. 3521 , title i ) .

instead of allowing the president to propose rescission of any amount of discretionary spending in appropriations acts , et al .

 ( as did the 109 th bills ) , in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 the newly expedited rescission authority would have only applied to "congressional earmarks" ( as defined in the bill ) .

the provisions regarding the cancellation of limited tax benefits seen in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 reflected language both from the house - passed bill ( chairmen of ways and means and finance committees to identify them ) and senate - reported version ( applicable to any revenue - losing provisions affecting a single or limited group ) .

most significantly , perhaps , under h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 , the expedited rescission authority would have covered no mandatory spending , but in a departure from provisions in the bills receiving action in the109 th congress , would have applied to limited tariff benefits .

the 110 th congress bills , h.r .

1998 and s. 1186 , had some provisions similar to those seen in one or more bills from the 109 th congress .

for example , language in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 regarding the relationship with the ica paralleled that in the house - passed version of h.r .

4890 , 109 th congress , as did the language regarding seriatim rescissions , abuse of the proposed cancellation authority , and using any savings for deficit reduction .

the expedited congressional procedures in the 109 th , compared with the 110 th , bills are virtually the same .

in most cases , when provisions in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 differed from those in the 109 th congress bills , the new features served to further confine the boundaries of the additional rescission authority to be granted the president .

the deadline for submission of special rescissions or cancellation messages under h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 would have been within 30 days of enactment , compared to 45 days in the house - passed bill in the 109 th congress and one year in the senate - reported bill ( s. 3521 , title i ) .

in a similar manner , s. 1186 would have set a limit of one special message for each act , except for an omnibus budget reconciliation or appropriations measure when two special messages would have been allowed .

on the other hand , stipulations regarding deferrals ( withholding of spending ) by the president in s. 1186 appeared to be less restrictive than those found in the house - passed and senate - reported versions in the 109 th congress .

both h.r .

4890 as passed by the house and s. 3521 as reported , allowed withholding for a period not to exceed 45 calendar days .

s. 1186 would have permitted the president to withhold funding for designated earmarks or suspend execution of limited tax or tariff benefits for a period of 45 calendar days of continuous session .

in addition , s. 1186 would have allowed the extension of the withholding for another 45-day period if the president submitted a supplemental message between days 40 and 45 in the original period .

under the ica , the president likewise may withhold funds included in a rescission request for 45 calendar days of continuous session , which often equals 60 or more calendar days .

under the provisions in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 , the president could conceivably have withheld funds for 100 days or longer .

as noted already , the original administration bill in 2006 allowed the president to withhold funds for 180 calendar days .

in 2006 , some contended that the 180-day withholding mechanism arguably might be viewed as sanctioning the return of policy deferrals , originally provided for in the ica , subject to a one - house veto , but invalidated by the chadha and new haven decisions , as well as the statutory provisions in p.l .

100-119 .

the extension of the withholding period in h.r .

1998 / s. 1186 conceivably to over 100 days , compared with the 45-calendar - day period in the house - passed and senate - reported bills , might arguably be appraised as representing a de facto return to policy deferrals .

two constitutional amendment proposals were introduced in the 110 th congress .

h.j.res .

38 would have allowed the president to decline to approve any dollar amount of discretionary budget authority , any item of new direct spending , or any tax benefit .

this coverage was similar to that seen previously in the line item veto act of 1996 .

s.j.res .

27 would have allowed the president to reduce or disapprove any appropriation in a measure presented to him ; after so "amending" the measure , the president may have signed the legislation as modified into law .

h.r .

595 ( mark udall and paul ryan ) .

stimulating leadership in limiting expenditures act of 2006 .

amends the ica to provide for expedited consideration of certain presidential proposals for rescission of budget authority contained in appropriation acts .

introduced on january 19 , 2007 ; jointly referred to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

689 ( paul ryan et al. ) .

 .

legislative line item veto act of 2007 .

amends the ica of 1974 to provide for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of discretionary budget authority or cancellation of an item of new direct spending , limited tariff benefit , or targeted tax benefits proposed by the president in a special message .

dedicates any savings only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

introduced on january 24 , 2007 ; jointly referred to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

1375 ( buchanan ) .

earmark accountability and reform act of 2007 .

amends the ica of 1974 to provide for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of discretionary budget authority or cancellation of an item of new direct spending or targeted tax benefit proposed by the president in a special message .

dedicates any cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

amends house rules to provide that any earmark not contained in house - or senate - passed versions be deemed out of scope in conference .

introduced on march 7 , 2007 ; referred jointly to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

1998 ( paul ryan ) .

congressional accountability and line - item veto act .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose in a special message the repeal of any congressional earmark or the cancellation of any limited tariff benefit or targeted tax benefit .

provides expedited procedures for congressional consideration of the proposals contained in special messages .

dedicates any savings from a repeal or cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

introduced on april 23 , 2007 ; referred jointly to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

2084 ( hensarling ) .

family budget protection act .

omnibus budget reform bill .

section 311 establishes expedited procedures for congressional consideration of certain rescission proposals from the president .

similar expedited rescission provisions were considered by the house in 2004 and rejected by vote of 174-237 .

introduced on may 1 , 2007 ; referred to the committee on the budget and in addition to the committees on rules , ways and means , appropriations , and government reform for consideration of those provisions falling within their respective jurisdictions .

h.j.res .

38 ( platts ) .

constitutional amendment .

allows the president to decline to approve in whole any dollar amount of discretionary budget authority , any item of new direct spending , or any tax benefit .

introduced on february 27 , 2007 ; referred to the judiciary committee .

s. 1186 ( feingold ) .

congressional accountability and line - item veto act .

companion bill to h.r .

1998 ( see above ) .

introduced on april 23 , 2007 ; referred to the budget committee .

s.j.res .

27 ( dole ) .

constitutional amendment .

allows the president to reduce or disapprove any appropriation in any bill , order , resolution , or vote which is presented to him .

introduced on december 11 , 2007 ; referred to the judiciary committee .

h.r .

1294 ( paul ryan et al. ) .

congressional accountability and line - item veto act .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose in a special message the repeal of any congressional earmark or the cancellation of any limited tariff benefit or targeted tax benefit .

provides expedited procedures for congressional consideration of the proposals contained in such a special message .

dedicates any savings from a repeal or cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

introduced on march 4 , 2009 ; referred to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

1390 ( buchanan ) .

earmark accountability and reform act of 2009 .

amends the ica of 1974 to provide for expedited consideration of certain rescissions of discretionary budget authority or cancellation of an item of new direct spending or targeted tax benefit proposed by the president in a special message .

dedicates any cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

amends house rules to provide that any earmark not contained in house - or senate - passed versions be deemed out of scope in conference .

introduced on march 9 , 2009 ; referred to committees on budget and on rules .

h.r .

3268 ( reichert et al. ) .

 .

earmark transparency and accountability reform act , title ii , earmark rescission authority .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose in a special message the repeal of any congressional earmark or the cancellation of any limited tariff benefit or targeted tax benefit .

provides expedited procedures for congressional consideration of the proposals contained in such special messages .

dedicates any savings from a repeal or cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

authorizes temporary presidential authority to withhold congressional earmarks and to suspend any limited tariff or targeted tax benefit .

requires the comptroller general to develop and implement a systematic process to audit and report to congress annually on programs , projects , and activities funded through earmarks .

introduced on july 20 , 2009 ; referred to house committees on rules , standards of official conduct , judiciary , and oversight and reform .

h.r .

3964 ( hensarling et al. ) .

spending , deficit , and debt control act of 2009 .

title ii , subtitle b: legislative line - item veto act of 2009 .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose to congress in a special message the cancellation of any item of discretionary spending , item of direct spending , or limited tariff benefit or targeted tax benefit .

provides expedited procedures for congressional consideration of the proposals contained in such special messages .

dedicates any savings from a repeal or cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

authorizes the president to withhold discretionary budget authority temporarily from obligation ( or to defer ) , or to suspend temporarily direct spending , a limited tariff , or targeted tax benefit .

requires the comptroller general to report to congress when any item of discretionary spending is not made available or any item of direct spending , limited tariff benefit , or targeted tax benefit continues to be suspended after the deferral period has expired .

introduced on october 29 , 2009 ; referred to the committee on the budget , and in addition to the committees on rules , appropriations , oversight and government reform , and ways and means , for a period to be subsequently determined by the speaker , in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned .

h.r .

4921 ( minnick et al ) .

budget enforcement legislative tool act of 2010 .

companion bill to s. 907 ( see below ) .

introduced on march 24 , 2010 ; referred to the budget committee and in addition to the rules committee , for a period to be subsequently determined by the speaker , in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned .

h.r .

5454 ( spratt et al. ) .

 .

reduce unnecessary spending act of 2010 .

amends the ica of 1974 to provide an expedited process for consideration of certain rescission requests from the president , submitted within 45 days after signing a bill into law .

the president would be able to request in such a rescission package the reduction or elimination of any new budget authority or obligation limits in spending measures except to the extent that the funding would provide for an entitlement law .

items in the special message would be considered as a package and would be subject to expedited procedures in congress , designed to ensure an up - or - down vote on the approval bill .

introduced on may 28 , 2010 ; referred to the budget committee and in addition to the rules committee , for a period to be subsequently determined by the speaker , in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned .

h.j.res .

15 ( platts ) .

constitutional amendment .

allows the president to decline to approve in whole any dollar amount of discretionary budget authority , any item of new direct spending , or any limited tax benefit .

introduced on january 8 , 2009 ; referred to the judiciary committee .

s. 524 ( feingold and mccain ) .

congressional accountability and line - item veto act of 2009 .

companion bill to h.r .

1294 ( see above ) .

introduced on march 4 , 2009 ; referred to the budget committee .

s. 640 ( gregg and lieberman ) .

second look at wasteful spending act of 2009 .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose rescission of dollar amounts of discretionary budget authority , items of direct spending , or cancellation of targeted tax benefits in a special message to congress .

provides expedited procedures for consideration of the draft bill accompanying the special message from the president .

introduced on march 19 , 2009 ; referred to the budget committee .

similar to provisions in s. 3521 ,109 th congress , reported favorably by the budget committee on ( s.rept .

109-283 ) .

s. 907 ( carper et al. ) .

 .

budget enforcement legislative tool act of 2009 .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose certain rescissions of discretionary budget authority in a special message to congress within three days of enactment of the appropriations act .

establishes expedited procedures for congressional consideration of a draft measure ( to accompany each special message ) , approving of the requested rescissions .

introduced on april 28 , 2009 ; referred to the budget committee .

s. 1808 ( feingold ) .

control spending now act .

title i , subpart b: legislative line item veto act of 2009 .

congressional accountability and line item veto act of 2009 — amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose the repeal of any congressional earmark or the cancellation ( line item veto ) of any limited tariff or targeted tax benefit .

dedicates any such repeal or cancellation only to deficit reduction or increase of a surplus .

prescribes procedures for expedited consideration in congress for such proposals .

authorizes the president temporarily to withhold congressional earmarks from obligation or suspend a limited tariff or targeted tax benefit .

requires the comptroller general to report to congress when any item of discretionary spending is not made available or any item of direct spending , limited tariff benefit , or targeted tax benefit continues to be suspended after the deferral period has expired .

expresses the sense of congress on abuse of proposed repeals and cancellations .

introduced on october 20 , 2009 ; referred to the committee on finance .

s. 3026 ( bayh and mccain ) .

fiscal freeze act of 2010 .

title i , congressional accountability and line - item veto act of 2010 .

this title of the omnibus budget reform measure is virtually the same as h.r .

1294 and s. 524 .

introduced on february 23 , 2010 ; referred to the budget committee .

s. 3423 ( kerry ) .

veto wasteful spending and protect taxpayers of 2010 .

amends the ica of 1974 to authorize the president to propose cancellation of any dollar amount of discretionary budget authority , any item of new direct spending , or any limited tax benefit , within 10 days of enactment .

provides expedited procedures for congressional consideration of the approval bill accompanying each special message from the president .

introduced on may 25 , 2010 ; referred to the budget committee .

s. 3474 ( feingold et al. ) .

reduce unnecessary spending act of 2010 .

companion bill to h.r .

5454 ( see above ) .

introduced on june 9 , 2010 ; referred to the budget committee .

s.j.res .

22 ( lemieux ) .

constitutional amendment .

includes provisions relative to requiring a balanced federal budget and granting the president the power to exercise a line - item veto .

introduced on december 15 , 2009 ; referred to the judiciary committee .

