on february 8 , 2006 , president bush signed the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) .

the bill was cleared for the president's signature earlier that month after the house voted to accept the changes made by the senate ( in december 2005 ) to a previously agreed - upon conference agreement ( h.rept .

109-362 ) .

a primary purpose of budget reconciliation is to make statutory changes that reduce direct ( or mandatory ) spending out of the federal treasury .

the largest child welfare programs receive mandatory federal funding , and certain changes to these programs would be made by the deficit reduction act of 2005 .

some of these were initially provided for only in the house version of the reconciliation bill , and some were in neither the initial senate nor house version of the reconciliation legislation ( s. 1932 ) as it was passed in november 2005 .

these were added during the december 2005 conference agreement negotiations .

the federal foster care and adoption assistance programs are open - ended entitlement programs .

this means that the statutory language ( contained in title iv - e of the social security act ) commits the federal government to reimbursing states for every eligible claim submitted on behalf of an eligible child receiving foster care maintenance payments or an adoption assistance subsidy .

because of the open - ended nature of this mandatory spending , any statutory changes that redefine who is eligible to receive foster care or adoption assistance—or what kind of costs a state may submit as eligible for reimbursement—should have a direct effect on the level of federal spending in the program .

in fy2004 ( the most recent data available ) , federal spending on the foster care and adoption assistance programs combined was approximately $6.1 billion .

the federal promoting safe and stable families program ( title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) provides capped mandatory funds ( and also authorizes discretionary funds ) for states to offer services aimed at maintaining or reuniting families and promoting and supporting adoption .

a set - aside from the program's funding is used for grants intended to help state courts assess and improve their handling of child welfare proceedings .

for fy2005 , mandatory funding of $305 million for the safe and stable program was increased by discretionary funding of $98.6 million , for total program funding of $404 million .

as proposed by the president in his fy2006 budget request and included in the house reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4241 ) , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) , as enacted , rewrites the eligibility provisions for federal foster care under title iv - e of the social security act ; it also made related changes to the adoption assistance eligibility provisions ( also contained in title iv - e ) .

this change is sometimes called the rosales provision because , as intended , it makes moot a 9 th circuit u.s. court of appeals decision , rosales v. thompson ( 321 f. 3d .

835 ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that this provision will reduce federal outlays to the foster care program by $380 million over five years ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and $863 million over 10 years ( fy2006-fy2015 ) .

the senate did not include the rosales provision in the reconciliation legislation it approved in early november .

however , after an effort on the senate floor by senator conrad to strike this language from the final conference agreement failed , the provision remained in the conference agreement approved in both chambers , and was enacted in p.l .

109-171 .

as enacted , the deficit reduction act ( p.l .

109-171 ) will also limit the ability of states to claim federal reimbursement of certain costs related to administering their title iv - e foster care programs .

in january 2005 , the administration published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) that proposed regulations similar to the statutory changes included in p.l .

109-171 .

those statutory changes were included in the house budget reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4241 ) , but were not a part of the reconciliation bill that passed the senate in november .

in sum , this provision puts in statute a definition of "candidate for foster care" that is more narrow than previous hhs policy , and which consequently limits the ability of states to receive federal reimbursement for foster care administrative costs made on behalf of certain children .

cbo estimated that these provisions will reduce federal outlays for the title iv - e foster care program by $174 million over five years ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and $405 million over 10 years ( fy2006-fy2015 ) .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) increased the fy2006 mandatory funding authorization level for the promoting safe and stable families program to $345 million from the previous level of $305 million .

if congress appropriates the full mandatory funding level for the program now authorized for fy2006 , this money , combined with the $89 million in discretionary funds appropriated for the program in fy2006 , would bring the program's total fy2006 funding to $434 million .

neither the house nor the senate version of reconciliation legislation proposed this funding increase .

while the deficit reduction act increased the mandatory funding authorization for fy2006 only , under cbo budget scoring rules this higher level of mandatory funding authority is assumed in future baselines .

thus the five - year cost of this provision totaled $200 million .

further , if congress chooses to reauthorize the promoting safe and stable program before its fy2006 expiration , mandatory funding of $345 million would be available for the program ( in each fiscal year ) without scoring additional costs .

the deficit reduction act also amended the court improvement project ( authorized under section 438 of the social security act ) to provide funding for two new grant programs aimed at strengthening the performance of courts on behalf of children who have been abused and neglected .

these provisions were not included in the house or senate version of the reconciliation bill .

however , grant programs with similar or related purposes were proposed by the bipartisan pew commission on children in foster care in its may 2004 report and in legislation introduced earlier in 2005 ( s. 1679 by senators dewine and rockefeller and h.r .

3756 by representative schiff ) .

the statutory language appropriates $100 million for these grants , out of which $10 million is available for each of the two new cip grants in each of fy2006-fy2010 .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) requires ( as a condition of eligibility for funding under the child welfare services program , title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ) that a state demonstrate "substantial , ongoing , and meaningful collaboration" with state courts in developing and implementing the state plan for child welfare services , the state plan for the promoting safe and stable families program ( title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) , the state adoption assistance and foster care plan ( under title iv - e of the social security act ) , and any program improvement plan that may be required .

this provision was not initially included in either the house or senate versions of the reconciliation legislation , but was proposed by the bipartisan pew commission on children in foster care in its may 2004 report .

further legislation introduced in 2005 ( s. 1679 by senators dewine and rockefeller ) sought similar legislative changes .

the deficit reduction act also amends the state plan requirements for foster care and adoption assistance ( section 471 in title iv - e of the social security act ) to clarify that required confidentiality provisions related to information about the children served do not limit the ability of a state to determine its policies regarding public access to court proceedings on child abuse and neglect or other child welfare related court proceedings ( except that the policies must , at a minimum , ensure the safety and well - being of the child , parents , and family ) .

this provision was not included in either the senate or house version of the reconciliation bill but it is consistent with similar clarifying language added to the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) in 2003 and is substantively identical to language introduced this year in the senate ( s. 1679 by senators dewine and rockefeller ) .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) includes statutory language ( previously included in both the house and senate versions of the reconciliation bill ) that intends to clarify when states may make medicaid claims related to optional targeted case management ( tcm ) services .

the statutory clarification extends to claims made on behalf of any medicaid - eligible individual who may also be served by another federal or state program ( eg , juvenile justice , foster care , or special education ) , but it provides special details regarding unallowable claims on behalf of medicaid - eligible foster care children .

the newly enacted law further provides that hhs must issue formal regulations to implement this clarification .

 ( neither the house nor senate version of the reconciliation bill required hhs to issue regulations. ) .

the administration called for clarification with regard to tcm claims in its fy2006 budget request and in legislative language it later sent to congress for consideration .

however , the language included in the p.l .

109-171 is significantly different from that offered by the administration , and it appears to be less restrictive to state tcm claims .

cbo estimated that the changes will shift some costs to the federal foster care program—increasing federal title iv - e foster care spending by $350 million over five years ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and $940 million over 10 years ( fy2006-fy2015 ) .

this increased foster care spending would offset savings to the medicaid program ; the net federal savings are consequently estimated at $760 million over the same five years ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and $2.1 billion over 10 years ( fy2006-fy2015 ) .

reconciliation legislation , passed initially in the senate ( s. 1932 ) and the house ( h.r .

4241 ) also included several other provisions relevant to child welfare , and for which no significant budget effect ( savings or cost ) was estimated or expected .

these provisions , which would have extended the authority of hhs to issue waivers of federal child welfare policy through fy2010 ( house bill only ) , authorized a federal student loan forgiveness program for child welfare workers and others ( house bill only ) ," and amended the higher education act in ways intended to encourage greater access to youth aging out of foster care ( primarily included in the senate bill ) were not included in the final conference agreement .

a brief summary of the deleted provisions follows .

the authority of hhs to approve new waivers of some federal child welfare program requirements ( included in title iv - b or title iv - e of the social security act ) expired with march 31 , 2006 .

this is not expected to affect previously approved and / or implemented waivers , but means that hhs is no longer authorized to approve additional waivers .

waivers are intended to allow states to demonstrate innovative programs for the delivery of foster care and other child welfare services .

congress previously temporarily extended this waiver authority numerous times as part of short - term reauthorizations of the temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) block grant , including most recently in p.l .

109-161 ( signed by the president on december 30 , 2005 ) .

however , while the deficit reduction act reauthorized the basic tanf block grant through fy2010 , it did not similarly extend child welfare waiver authority past march 2006 .

as initially passed , the house reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4241 ) would have extended ( through fy2010 ) hhs authority to grant child welfare waivers , would have removed the limit on the total number of demonstration programs hhs may approve in any given year ( set at 10 by current law ) and would have made other changes related to the approval of waiver projects and availability of information about the projects .

these provisions were not in the senate reconciliation legislation nor the conference agreement , and were thus not a part of the deficit reduction act as enacted ( p.l .

109-171 ) .

h.r .

4241 would have authorized the department of education to repay up to $5,000 in student loan debt if an individual has worked full - time for five years in one of several "areas of national need"—defined to include child welfare workers .

this provision was not in the senate reconciliation legislation and was not included in the enacted deficit reduction act of 2005 .

both the house and senate reconciliation bills ( using slightly different language ) would have amended the higher education act to clarify that youth in foster care ( or formerly in foster care ) on his / her 18 th birthday are included in the definition of "independent student. .

 ( the definition is used for purposes of determining eligibility for federal student financial aid. ) .

this clarifying change was not included in the deficit reduction act as it was finally enacted .

the higher education act authorizes a range of grant programs , collectively called the federal trio programs .

these programs are designed to identify potential post - secondary students from disadvantaged backgrounds , to prepare these individuals for post - secondary education , to provide certain support services to them while they are in post - secondary education—and to train individuals who provide these services .

collectively , the programs are authorized to provide a wide range of services , such as tutoring , financial aid , personal or career counseling , mentoring , exposure to cultural activities and educational institutions , academic advising , and financial literacy training .

the senate reconciliation bill would have amended a number of these programs to help ensure that youth in foster care and those leaving the foster care system because of their age ( typically the 18 th birthday ) are served by these programs .

these changes were not included in the deficit reduction act as it was finally enacted .

