following the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 , congress passed the authorization to use military force ( aumf ) , which granted the president the authority "to use all necessary and appropriate force against those ... [who] planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks" against the united states .

soon thereafter , president bush issued a military order formulating guidelines for the detention and treatment of foreign belligerents captured in the "war on terror" and establishing military commissions to try some detainees for violations of the law of war .

beginning in early 2002 , the united states began transferring suspected foreign belligerents captured in the "war on terror" to the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba for preventive detention and potential prosecution for any war crimes they may have committed .

in 2004 , the supreme court issued two key rulings concerning the executive's authority to detain persons in the "war on terror. .

in hamdi v. rumsfeld , a majority of the court found that the 2001 aumf permitted the preventive detention of enemy combatants captured during hostilities in afghanistan , including those who were u.s. citizens .

a divided court found that persons deemed "enemy combatants" have the right to challenge their detention before a judge or other "neutral decision - maker. .

the hamdi case concerned the rights of a u.s. citizen detained as an enemy combatant , and the court did not decide the extent to which this right also applied to noncitizens held at guantanamo and elsewhere .

however , on the same day that hamdi was decided , the court issued an opinion in the case of rasul v. bush , holding that the federal habeas corpus statute , 28 u.s.c .

ยง 2241 , provided federal courts with jurisdiction to consider habeas corpus petitions by or on behalf of persons detained at guantanamo .

the court's rulings in hamdi and rasul had two immediate consequences .

first , the department of defense ( dod ) established combatant status review tribunals ( csrts ) , an administrative process to determine whether a detainee at guantanamo was an "enemy combatant. .

second , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia began to hear the dozens of habeas cases filed on behalf of the detainees , with different judges reaching conflicting conclusions as to whether the detainees had any enforceable rights available other than the bare right to petition for habeas .

after the supreme court granted certiorari to hear a challenge by one of the detainees to his trial by military tribunal , congress passed the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) .

the dta requires uniform standards for interrogation of persons in the custody of the dod , and expressly bans cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment of detainees in the custody of any u.s. agency .

at the same time , however , it divested the courts of jurisdiction to hear challenges by those detained at guantanamo bay based on their treatment or living conditions .

the dta also eliminated the federal courts' statutory jurisdiction over habeas claims by aliens challenging their detention at guantanamo bay , but provided for limited appeals of status determinations made pursuant to the dod procedures for csrts , along with final decisions by military commissions .

however , in the 2006 case of hamdan v. rumsfeld , the supreme court interpreted the provision eliminating federal habeas jurisdiction as being inapplicable to cases that were pending at the time the dta was enacted , permitting it to review the validity of military commissions established pursuant to president bush's 2001 military order .

the court held that the military tribunals established by the president did not comply with the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) or the law of war which the ucmj incorporates , including the 1949 geneva conventions .

in response to the hamdan ruling , congress enacted the military commissions act of 2006 ( "mca" or "2006 mca" ) .

the act authorized the president to convene military commissions to try "unlawful alien combatants" for war crimes without complying with the parts of the ucmj the earlier system was said to violate , and it also established procedural requirements for the commissions .

finally , the mca expressly eliminated court jurisdiction over all pending and future causes of action by detainees , including habeas review , with the exception of the limited review process established under the dta .

the complete elimination of habeas corpus review by congress compelled the courts to address directly an issue they had avoided reaching in earlier cases: does the constitutional writ of habeas corpus extend to noncitizens held at guantanamo ? .

the constitution's suspension clause prohibits the suspension of habeas corpus except when public safety requires it in the case of invasion or surrender .

the mca did not purport to be a suspension of habeas , and the government did not make such a claim to the courts .

instead , the government argued that noncitizens detained at guantanamo are entitled to no constitutional protections , including the privilege of habeas corpus .

therefore , it was argued , denying these persons access to habeas review would not run afoul of the suspension clause .

in the 2008 case boumediene v. bush , the court rejected this argument in a 5-4 opinion , and ruled that the constitutional privilege of habeas extends to guantanamo detainees and cannot be extinguished by statute unless an adequate substitute is provided .

as a result of the boumediene decision , detainees currently held at guantanamo may petition for habeas review of their designation and detention as enemy combatants .

the judicial process established by the dta was effectively nullified by a d.c .

circuit's ruling in january 2009 interpreting the boumediene decision , although congress has not officially repealed it .

several legal issues remain unsettled , including the scope of habeas review available to detainees , the remedy available for those persons found to be unlawfully held by the united states , and the extent to which other constitutional provisions extend to noncitizens held at guantanamo and elsewhere .

some of these issues were expected to be addressed by the supreme court this term in an appeal of a d.c .

circuit panel ruling in the case of kiyemba v. obama , in which the appellate court held that federal habeas courts lack the authority to order the release of guantanamo detainees into the united states , even when those detainees are found to be unlawfully held and the government is unable to effectuate their release to a foreign country .

after the supreme court granted certiorari to review the case , several countries agreed to resettle the kiyemba petitioners .

in march 2010 , the supreme court vacated the appellate court's decision and remanded the case back to the circuit court for further consideration in light of these developments .

on january 22 , 2009 , president obama issued an executive order requiring that the guantanamo detention facility be closed as soon as practicable , and no later than a year from the date of the order .

the order further requires specified officials to review all guantanamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , be transferred or released to a third country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses .

during the review process , the secretary of defense was required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review were halted .

although the imposed deadline for closing the guantanamo detention facility was not met , the obama administration maintains that it intends to close the facility as expeditiously as possible .

the closure of the guantanamo detention facility and its resulting effects could have implications for legal challenges raised by detainees , particularly if detainees are brought to the united states , where they would arguably have a more clearly defined entitlement to additional constitutional protections .

in march 2009 , the obama administration announced a new definitional standard for the government's authority to detain terrorist suspects , which no longer employs the phrase "enemy combatant" to refer to perso ns who may be properly detained , although the new standard is largely similar in scope to the "enemy combatant" standard used earlier .

the obama administration standard would permit the detention of members of the taliban , al qaeda , and associated forces , along with persons who provide "substantial support" ( rather than merely "support" ) to such groups , regardless of whether these individuals were captured away from the battlefield in afghanistan .

the obama administration indicated that this definitional standard does "not rely on the president's authority as commander - in - chief independent of congress's specific authorization. .

the scope of the executive's detention authority has been subject to ongoing litigation and conflicting rulings .

in january 2010 , a d.c .

circuit panel held in the case of al - bihani v. obama that support for or membership in an aumf - targeted organization may be independently sufficient to justify military detention , without proof that the detainee committed any hostile act .

in discussing the scope of the executive's detention authority , the panel applied the standard that had been used by the bush administration rather than the slightly more limited standard applied by the obama administration , and disavowed the view that international law has relevance to the determination .

the significance of this policy change and the circuit court's ruling remains to be seen .

as of march 2010 , reviewing courts have ruled that at least 11 detainees are lawfully held pursuant to the aumf , while at least 33 have been held to be ( or were conceded by the government to be ) held without authorization .

also in january 2010 , the obama administration reportedly completed its assessment of the nearly 200 detainees remaining at guantanamo , determining that about 50 detainees will continue to be held without trial ; that around 35 detainees will be prosecuted in military commission or federal court ; and that suitable countries have been found to take the remaining detainees .

however , the transfer of 30 detainees of yemeni nationality back to yemen was stymied because an al qaeda affiliate in yemen is suspected to have been behind the christmas 2009 bombing attempt .

additionally , congress has balked at plans to bring detainees to the united states for continued , non - penal detention or for release .

this report provides an overview of the early judicial developments and the establishment of csrt procedures ; summarizes selected court cases related to the detentions and the use of military commissions ; and discusses the detainee treatment act , as amended by the military commissions act of 2006 and the military commissions act of 2009 , analyzing its effects on detainee - related litigation in federal court .

the report summarizes the supreme court's decision in boumediene invalidating congress's efforts to revoke the courts' habeas jurisdiction , and discusses some remaining issues and subsequent developments .

for discussion of legislation introduced in the 111 th congress concerning detainees , see crs report r40754 , guantanamo detention center: legislative activity in the 111 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

for legislation related to habeas corpus rights of detainees , see crs report r41011 , habeas corpus legislation in the 111 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the bush administration determined in february 2002 that taliban detainees are covered under the geneva conventions , while al qaeda detainees are not , but that none of the detainees qualifies for the status of prisoner of war ( pow ) .

the administration deemed all of them to be "unlawful enemy combatants," and claimed the right to detain them without trial or continue to hold them in preventive detention even if they are acquitted of criminal charges by a military tribunal .

fifteen of the detainees had been determined by the president to be subject to his military order ( "mo" ) of november 13 , 2001 , making them eligible for trial by military commission for war crimes offenses .

the supreme court , however , found that the procedural rules established by the department of defense to govern the military commissions were not established in accordance with the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

the following sections trace the judicial developments with respect to the detention of alleged enemy combatants .

while the supreme court clarified in rasul ( and later boumediene , discussed infra ) that detainees currently held at guantanamo have recourse to federal courts to challenge their detention , the extent to which they may enforce any rights they may have under the geneva conventions and other law continues to remain unclear .

prior to the enactment of the dta provisions eliminating habeas review , the justice department argued primarily that rasul v. bush merely decided the issue of jurisdiction , but that the 1950 supreme court decision in johnson v. eisentrager remained applicable to limit the relief to which the detainees may be entitled .

while more than one district judge from the d.c .

circuit agreed , others did not , holding for example that detainees have the right to the assistance of an attorney .

one judge found that a detainee has the right to be treated as a pow until a "competent tribunal" decides otherwise , but the appellate court reversed .

the following sections summarize the three most important decisions prior to the enactment of the 2006 mca , including the cases that eventually reached the supreme court as boumediene v. bush and hamdan v. rumsfeld .

the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit had ordered these cases dismissed for lack of jurisdiction on the basis of the mca , but the supreme court reversed in both its hamdan and boumediene decisions , returning the cases to the district court for consideration on the merits .

also discussed is a fourth circuit case involving an alien , al - marri , arrested in the united states and subsequently held in military custody as an enemy combatant .

the supreme court initially granted certiorari to review the appellate court's decision .

however , before the court could consider the merits of the case , the government requested that the court authorize al - marri's release from military custody and transfer to civilian authorities to face criminal charges .

the court granted the government's request , vacated the appellate court's earlier judgment , and transferred the case back to the lower court with orders to dismiss it as moot .

the dta , passed after the court's 2004 decision in rasul , requires uniform standards for interrogation of persons in the custody of the department of defense , and expressly bans cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment of detainees in the custody of any u.s. agency .

the prohibited treatment is defined as that which would violate the fifth , eighth , and fourteenth amendments to the u.s. constitution , as the senate has interpreted "cruel , inhuman , or degrading" treatment banned by the u.n. convention against torture .

the provision does not create a cause of action for detainees to ask a court for relief based on inconsistent treatment , and it divests the courts of jurisdiction to hear challenges by those detained at guantanamo bay based on their treatment or living conditions .

it also provides a legal defense to u.s. officers and agents who may be sued or prosecuted based on their treatment or interrogation of detainees .

this language appears to have been added as a compromise because the bush administration reportedly sought to have the central intelligence agency excepted from the prohibition on cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment on the grounds that the president needs "maximum flexibility in dealing with the global war on terrorism. .

the dta also includes a modified version of the "graham - levin amendment," which requires the defense department to submit to the armed services and judiciary committees the procedural rules for determining detainees' status .

the amendment neither authorizes nor requires a formal status determination , but it does require that certain congressional committees be notified 30 days prior to the implementation of any changes to the rules .

as initially adopted by the senate , the amendment would have required these procedural rules to preclude evidence determined by the board or tribunal to have been obtained by undue coercion , however , the conferees modified the language so that the tribunal or board must assess , "to the extent practicable ... whether any statement derived from or relating to such detainee was obtained as a result of coercion" and "the probative value , if any , of any such statement. .

the graham - levin amendment also eliminated the federal courts' statutory jurisdiction over habeas claims by aliens detained at guantanamo bay , but provided for limited appeals of status determinations made pursuant to the dod procedures for combatant status review tribunals ( csrts ) .

in june 2008 , the supreme court invalidated the provision that eliminated habeas corpus jurisdiction , but stated that the dta appellate process "remains intact," although it appears that the process is not an adequate substitute for habeas review .

 .

however , the d.c .

circuit held that the dta appellate procedure is no longer good law , leaving habeas petitions as the only means of seeking review of detention .

the dta also provided for an appeal to the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit of final sentences rendered by a military commission .

as initially enacted , the dta required the court to review capital cases or cases in which the alien was sentenced to death or to a term of imprisonment for 10 years or more , and made review over convictions with lesser penalties discretionary .

the scope of review was limited to considering whether the decision applied the correct standards consistent with military commission order no .

1 ( implementing president bush's military order ) and whether those standards were consistent with the constitution and laws of the united states , to the extent applicable .

after the court's decision in hamdan , the bush administration proposed legislation to congress , a version of which was enacted on october 17 , 2006 .

the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca or 2006 mca ) authorized the trial of certain detainees by military commission and prescribed detailed rules to govern their procedures .

the 2006 mca also amended the dta provisions regarding appellate review and habeas corpus jurisdiction .

in 2009 , congress enacted the military commissions act of 2009 ( 2009 mca ) as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ) .

the 2009 mca modified many of the rules for military commissions to make them more closely resemble those used in courts - martial proceedings , but made only minor modifications to existing laws concerning court jurisdiction to adjudicate claims raised by detainees .

shortly after the enactment of the 2006 mca , the government filed motions to dismiss all of the habeas petitions in the d.c .

circuit involving detainees at guantanamo bay and the petition of an alien then detained as an enemy combatant in a naval brig in south carolina .

the petitioners in boumediene were aliens detained at guantanamo who sought habeas review of their continued detention .

rather than pursuing an appeal of their designation as enemy combatants by csrts using the dta appeals process , the petitioners sought to have the district court decisions denying habeas review reversed on the basis that the 2006 mca's "court - stripping" provision was unconstitutional .

on appeal , the d.c .

circuit affirmed , holding that the 2006 mca stripped it and all other federal courts of jurisdiction to consider petitioners' habeas applications .

relying upon its earlier opinion in al odah v. united states and the 1950 supreme court case johnson v. eisentrager , in which the supreme court found that the constitutional writ of habeas was not available to enemy aliens imprisoned for war crimes in post - wwii germany , the d.c .

circuit held that the 2006 mca's elimination of habeas jurisdiction did not operate as an unconstitutional suspension of the writ , because aliens held by the united states in foreign territory do not have a constitutional right to habeas .

consequently , the court did not examine whether the dta provides an adequate substitution for habeas review .

the supreme court initially denied the petitioners' request for review , with three justices dissenting to the denial and two justices explaining the basis for their support .

in june 2007 , however , the court reversed its denial and granted certiorari to consider the consolidated cases of boumediene and al odah .

in a 5-4 opinion authored by justice kennedy , the court reversed the d.c .

circuit and held that petitioners had a constitutional right to habeas that was withdrawn by the 2006 mca in violation of the constitution's suspension clause .

on january 22 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13492 , requiring that the guantanamo detention facility be closed as soon as practicable , and no later than a year from the date of the order .

any persons who continue to be held at guantanamo at the time of closure are to be either transferred to a third country for continued detention or release , or transferred to another u.s. detention facility .

the order further requires specified officials to review all guantanamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , transferred or released to a third country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses .

reviewing authorities are required to identify and consider the legal , logistical , and security issues that would arise in the event that some detainees are transferred to the united states .

the order also requires reviewing authorities to assess the feasibility of prosecuting detainees in an article iii court .

during the review period , the secretary of defense was required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review were halted .

although the deadline for the closure of the guantanamo detention facility has not been met , the administration has stated that it remains committed to closing the facility as expeditiously as possible .

the administration's efforts to close the detention facility have been limited , in part , by congressional measures limiting the transfer of detainees into the united states .

in the first session of the 111 th congress , several appropriations and authorizations measures were enacted which effectively barred funds from being used to transfer any detainee into the united states for release or purposes other than prosecution , and restrict funds from being used to transfer detainees into the country to face prosecution prior to the submission of certain reports to congress .

the full implications of these actions upon ongoing litigation involving persons currently detained at guantanamo remain to be seen .

however , the closure of the guantanamo detention facility would raise a number of legal issues with respect to the individuals presently interned there , particularly if those detainees are transferred to the united states .

the nature and scope of constitutional protections owed to detainees within the united states may be different than those available to persons held at guantanamo or elsewhere .

this may have implications for the continued detention or prosecution of persons transferred to the united states .

although the scope of constitutional protections owed to guantanamo detainees remains a matter of legal dispute , it is clear that the procedural and substantive due process protections of the constitution apply to all persons within the united states , regardless of their citizenship .

accordingly , detainees transferred to the united states might be able to more successfully pursue legal challenges against aspects of their detention that allegedly infringe upon constitutional protections owed to them .

in march 2009 , the obama administration announced a new definitional standard for the government's authority to detain terrorist suspects , which does not use the phrase "enemy combatant" to refer to persons who may be properly detained .

under this new definition , the administration claims that: the president has the authority to detain persons that the president determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , and persons who harbored those responsible for those attacks .

the president also has the authority to detain persons who were part of , or substantially supported , taliban or al - qaida forces or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners , including any person who has committed a belligerent act , or has directly supported hostilities , in aid of such enemy armed forces .

this definitional standard is largely similar to that used by the bush administration to detain terrorist suspects as "enemy combatants. .

like the previous administration , the obama administration claims the power to militarily detain members of the taliban or al qaeda , regardless of whether such persons were captured away from the battlefield in afghanistan .

however , there are a few differences in the standard used by the bush and obama administrations .

most notably , whereas the bush administration claimed the authority to detain persons who supported al qaeda , the taliban , or associated forces , the standard announced by the obama administration expressly requires such support to be "substantial. .

while the obama administration claims that activities constituting "substantial support" will be developed in application to individual cases , it has stated that it would not cover "unwitting or insignificant" support .

the obama administration has stated that this definitional standard is based upon the authority provided by the aumf , as informed by the laws of war .

the administration has also claimed that this standard does "not rely on the president's authority as commander - in - chief independent of congress's specific authorization. .

the bush administration had previously argued that , separate from the authority provided by the aumf , the president has the independent authority as commander - in - chief to order the detention of terrorist suspects .

while the obama administration has not expressly rejected this claim , it appears that the administration will not rely upon the notion of inherent constitutional authority to serve as a legal basis for the detention of terrorist suspects .

the full implications of this change in language and intent remain to be seen .

one issue that is subject to debate is the executive's authority under the aumf and traditional law - of - war principles to detain members of al qaeda or the taliban who did not directly participate in battlefield hostilities .

the nature of activities constituting "substantial support" for the groups may also merit significant judicial attention .

the scope of the executive's detention authority under the aumf and the law of war has been subject to conflicting rulings in the d.c .

circuit .

in 2009 , several habeas courts reached different conclusions regarding the scope of the president's military detention authority .

a few district court judges held that the executive has authority to detain persons who were "part of" or "substantially supported" al qaeda , the taliban , or associated forces , so long as those terms are understood to include only those persons who were members of the enemy organizations' armed forces at the time of capture .

other district court judges held that that the executive has authority under the aumf and the law of war to detain persons who were "part of" the taliban , al qaeda , or associated forces , but lacks authority to detain non - members who provide "support" to such organizations ( though such support may be considered when determining whether a detainee was "part of" one of these groups ) .

in january 2010 , a three - judge panel of the d.c .

circuit court of appeals considered the scope of executive's detention authority in the case of al - bihani v. obama .

in an opinion supported in full by two members of the panel , the appellate court endorsed the definitional standard for the executive's detention authority that had initially been asserted by the bush administration ( a standard which was later somewhat circumscribed by the obama administration ) ; namely , that the president may detain those persons who were "part of or supporting taliban or al qaeda forces , or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners. .

while the panel concluded that either support for or membership in an aumf - targeted organization may be independently sufficient to justify detention , it declined "to explore the outer bounds of what constitutes sufficient support or indicia of membership to meet the detention standard. .

it did , however , note that this standard would , for example , permit the detention of a "civilian contractor" who "purposefully and materially supported" an aumf - targeted organization through "traditional food operations essential to a fighting force and the carrying of arms. .

notwithstanding the government's reliance on the law of war to interpret the scope of the aumf and seemingly in conflict with supreme court discussion of the issue , the panel rejected the idea that the international law of war has any relevance to the courts' interpretation of the scope of the detention power conferred by the aumf .

the standard endorsed by the panel will be controlling for the d.c .

circuit unless the decision is overturned either by the circuit court of appeals sitting en banc or the supreme court , or unless congress takes up judge brown's separate invitation to craft appropriate habeas standards for detainee cases .

the supreme court decision in boumediene holding that the dta violates the constitution's suspension clause ( article i , ยง 9 , cl .

2 ) leaves open a number of constitutional questions regarding the scope of the writ of habeas corpus and options open to congress to make rules for the detention of suspected terrorists .

the following sections provide a brief background of habeas corpus in the united states , outline some proposals for responding to the boumediene holding , and discuss relevant constitutional considerations .

the writ of habeas corpus ( ad subjiciendum ) , also known as the great writ , has its origin in fourteenth century england .

it provides the means for those detained by the government to ask a court to order their warden to explain the legal authority for their detention .

in the early days of the republic , its primary use was to challenge executive detention without trial or bail , or pursuant to a ruling by a court without jurisdiction , but the writ has expanded over the years to include a variety of collateral challenges to convictions or sentences based on alleged violations of fundamental constitutional rights .

the habeas statute provides jurisdiction to hear petitions by persons claiming that they are held "in custody in violation of the constitution or laws or treaties of the united states. .

a court reviewing a petition for habeas corpus does not determine the guilt or innocence of the petitioner ; rather , it tests the legality of the detention and the custodian's authority to detain .

if the detention is not supported by law , the detainee is to be released .

minor irregularities in trial procedures that do not amount to violations of fundamental constitutional rights are generally to be addressed on direct appeal .

article i , ยง 9 , cl .

2 , of the constitution provides: "the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it. .

given the emphasis the rasul court had placed on the distinction between the statutory and constitutional entitlement to habeas corpus , it might have seemed reasonable to suppose that congress retained the power to revoke by statute what it had earlier granted without offending either the court or the constitution , without regard to establishing a public safety justification .

however , as the boumediene case demonstrates , the special status accorded the writ by the suspension clause complicates matters .

the relevance of the distinction between a "statutory" and a "constitutional" privilege of habeas corpus is not entirely clear .

the federal courts' power to review petitions under habeas corpus has historically relied on statute , but it has been explained that the constitution obligates congress to provide "efficient means by which [the writ] should receive life and activity. .

while the court has stated that "at the absolute minimum , the suspension clause protects the writ 'as it existed in 1789,'" it has also presumed that "the suspension clause of the constitution refers to the writ as it exists today , rather than as it existed in 1789. .

the boumediene court declined to adopt a date of reference by which the constitutional scope of the writ is to be judged .

accordingly , it remains unclear whether statutory enhancements of habeas review can ever be rolled back without implicating the suspension clause .

the constitutionally mandated scope of the writ may turn on the same kinds of "objective factors and practical considerations" that the court stated would determine the territorial scope of the writ .

the executive's policy of detaining wartime captives and suspected terrorists at the guantanamo bay naval station has raised a host of novel legal questions regarding , among other matters , the relative powers of the president and congress to fight terrorism , as well as the power of the courts to review the actions of the political branches .

the dta was congress's first effort to impose limits on the president's conduct of what the bush administration termed the "global war on terror" and to prescribe a limited role for the courts .

the supreme court's decision striking the dta provision that attempted to eliminate the courts' habeas jurisdiction may be seen as an indication that the court will continue to play a role in determining the ultimate fate of the detainees at guantanamo .

however , the court did not foreclose all options available to congress to streamline habeas proceedings involving detainees at guantanamo or elsewhere in connection with terrorism .

instead , it indicated that the permissibility of such measures will be weighed in the context of relevant circumstances and exigencies .

as a general matter , the courts did not accept the bush administration's view that the president has inherent constitutional authority to detain those he suspects may be involved in international terrorism .

rather , the courts have looked to the language of the aumf and other legislation to determine the contours of presidential power .

the supreme court has interpreted the aumf with the assumption that congress intended for the president to pursue the conflict in accordance with traditional law - of - war principles , and has upheld the detention of a "narrow category" of persons who fit the traditional definition of "enemy belligerent" under the law of war .

other courts have been willing to accept a broader definition of enemy belligerency to permit the detention of individuals who were not captured in circumstances suggesting their direct participation in hostilities against the united states , but a plurality of the supreme court warned that a novel interpretation of the scope of the law of war might cause their understanding of permissible executive action to unravel .

consequently , congress may be called upon to consider legislation to support the full range of authority asserted by the executive branch in connection with the "war on terror. .

in the event the court finds that the detentions in question are fully supported by statutory authorization , whether on the basis of existing law or new enactments , the key issue is likely to be whether the detentions comport with due process of law under the constitution .

in the event that detainees currently held at guantanamo are transferred into the united states , such persons may receive more significant constitutional protections .

these protections may inform executive policy , legislative proposals , and judicial rulings concerning matters relating to detainees' treatment , continued detention , and access to federal courts .

