agency whistleblowers operate within a system of mixed messages .

on the one hand , thecode of ethics adopted by congress in 1958 directs all government employees to "expose corruptionwherever discovered. .

 ( 1 ) over the years , agency employees have received credit for revealing problems of defense costoverruns , unsafe nuclear power plant conditions , questionable drugs approved for marketing,contract illegalities and improprieties , and regulatory corruption .

 ( 2 ) on the other hand , exposingcorruption can result in their being fired , transferred , reprimanded , denied promotion , or harassed .

in 1978 , a senate panel found that the fear of reprisal "renders intra - agency communications a sham,and compromises not only the employee , management , and the code of ethics , but also theconstitutional function of congressional oversight itself. .

 ( 3 ) enacting statutory rights for whistleblowers and establishing new executive agencies toprotect those rights has not produced the protections that some expected .

as explained in this report,the office of special counsel , the merit systems protection board , and the federal circuit - - theagencies created by congress to safeguard the rights of whistle blowers - - have not in many casesprovided the anticipated protections to federal employees .

national security whistleblowers wereexempted from the civil service reform act of 1978 and the whistleblower protection act of 1989 .

some protections are available in statutes passed in recent years , including the intelligencecommunity whistleblower protection act of 1998 .

individual members and congressionalcommittees have attempted to provide long - term protections to whistleblowers , enabling them toprovide the kinds of agency information that congress wants without costs and injuries to theirgovernment careers .

the purpose of this report is to explore the statutory and political protections available tonational security whistleblowers .

first , an examination of the civil service reform act and thewhistleblower protection act will explain why national security whistleblowers were excluded fromthe protections provided in those statutes .

second , to the extent that those statutes are consideredmodels to protect national security whistleblowers , the experience of the office of special counsel,the merit systems protection board , and the federal circuit is relevant in evaluating protections fornational security whistleblowers .

whistleblower activity is often viewed as a struggle between the executive and legislativebranches .

presidents may decide to centralize control of agency information by requiring the agencyhead to approve the release of any information .

members of congress regularly express a need toobtain information from employees within the agency , without seeking the approval of the agencyhead .

this conflict between the branches is seen in the issuance of executive orders by presidentstheodore roosevelt and william howard taft in 1902 and 1909 and the resulting legislation - - thelloyd - lafollette act of 1912 - - adopted by congress to maintain access to agency information .

theconstitutionality of the lloyd - lafollette act continues to be challenged today by the justicedepartment .

both presidents theodore roosevelt and william howard taft threatened to fire agencyemployees who attempted to contact congress .

employees were ordered to communicate onlythrough the head of their agency .

congress responded by passing legislation intended to nullify thatpolicy and allow employees to contact lawmakers , committees , and legislative staff .

congress passed legislation in 1978 to abolish the civil service commission and create suchnew institutions as the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the merits systems protectionboard ( mspb ) , and the office of special counsel ( osc ) .

the statute was the first to establishprocedural protections for whistleblowers , but also recognized an exception for the national securityarea .

because of conflicting values in the legislation , however , whistleblowers never received theanticipated protections , and congress took note of that a decade later when it passed thewhistleblower protection act of 1989 .

 ( 19 ) this record is examined in subsequent sections on"whistleblower protections in practice" and "congressional action , 1986-88. .

as explained in thisreport , the statutory safeguards in the whistleblower protection act did not meet the expectationsof some lawmakers , agency employees , and private organizations .

in the same year that congress passed the civil service reform act , it completed action onlegislation to establish offices of inspectors general in twelve executive agencies .

more inspectorsgeneral would be created in subsequent statutes .

the purpose was to create independent offices "toconduct and supervise audits and investigations relating to programs and operations" in theseagencies .

 ( 41 ) theseoffices were expected "to prevent and detect fraud and abuse in , such programs and operations. .

 ( 42 ) inspectors general were authorized to receive and investigate complaints or informationreceived from agency employees concerning the "possible existence of an activity constituting aviolation of law , rules , or regulations , or mismanagement , gross waste of funds , abuse of authorityor a substantial and specific danger to the public health and safety. .

 ( 43 ) supervisors wereprohibited from taking or threatening to take "any action against any employee as a reprisal formaking a complaint or disclosing information to an inspector general , unless the complaint was madeor the information disclosed with the knowledge that it was false or with willful disregard for itstruth or falsity. .

 ( 44 ) in reporting the section on employee complaints , the senate committee on governmentalaffairs remarked: "because of the employee's position within the agency , employee complaints carrywith them a high likelihood of reliability. .

given the difficulty of "blowing the whistle" on one'ssupervisors or colleagues , "the situation may often be serious. .

the committee believed that "mostemployees would much prefer an effective channel inside the agency to pursue complaints ratherthan seeking recourse or publicity outside the agency .

this preference should be encouraged. .

 ( 45 ) the legislative history of the civil service reform act anticipated that federal agencywhistleblowers would report wrongdoing not only to their supervisors but to congress , the public,and the press .

in contrast , the inspectors general statute of 1978 authorized a set of procedures thatwere entirely in - house .

the igs were directed to keep congress "fully and currently informed aboutproblems and deficiencies relating to the administration of such programs and operations and thenecessity for and progress of corrective action. .

 ( 46 ) inspectors general would furnish semiannual reports to agencyheads , who would transmit the reports without change to appropriate committees and subcommitteesof congress .

 ( 47 ) .

under the civil service reform act , any employee or applicant for employment adverselyaffected or aggrieved by a final order or decision of the mspb could obtain judicial review in anyof the federal appellate courts .

 ( 59 ) in 1982 , congress created a new appellate court by consolidatingthe existing u.s. court of customs and patent appeals with the appellate division of the existingu.s .

court of claims .

congress gave the new u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuitexclusive jurisdiction over any final order or final decision of the mspb .

 ( 60 ) .

for a number of reasons , the whistleblower protections promised in the civil service reformact failed to materialize .

in signing the bill , president carter said that "it prevents discouraging orpunishing [federal employees] for the wrong reasons , for whistleblowing or for personal whim inviolation of basic employee rights. .

 ( 61 ) at the signing ceremony , representative morris udall , whomanaged the bill on the house side , cautioned that "reform has consequences that you don't likesometimes , but the best reforms aren't going to work unless people make them work. .

 ( 62 ) .

on february 20 and 21 , 1986 , a subcommittee of the house post office and civil servicecommittee held additional hearings on whistleblower protections .

the testimony showed a widegap between the perceptions of lawmakers and executive officials .

as chair of the subcommittee,representative schroeder spoke of a "general consensus" that the whistleblower protections in thecivil service reform act "must be changed if we are to treat federal employees fairly and providerelief for victims of prohibited personnel practices. .

 ( 84 ) special counsel o'connor testified against the need to pass abill , introduced in the house , designed to strengthen whistleblower protections: "the bill is flawedconceptually , as well , from inception , for it proceeds upon the false premise that proper lawenforcement systems now in effect do not work to protect bona fide whistleblowers .

the fact is that , now , the statutory protection works .

i oppose the bill. .

 ( 85 ) stuart e. schiffer , deputy assistant attorney general , alsotestified against the bill .

when asked whether he believed the existing statutory system wasadequate , he replied: "yes ; i do. .

asked again whether there was adequate protection forwhistleblowers , he again answered: "yes ; i do. .

 ( 86 ) .

the vetoed whistleblower bill was modified in 1989 and passed the senate on march 16 bya vote of 97 to zero .

 ( 109 ) the modified bill retained the language establishing that the"primary role" of the special counsel "is to protect employees , especially whistleblowers , fromprohibited personnel practices," and provided that the osc "shall act in the interests of employeeswho seek assistance" from the office .

the limitations on the president's power to remove the specialcounsel were retained , but no authority was granted to the special counsel to seek judicial reviewof an mspb decision .

the "clear and convincing evidence" test remained .

the bill modified the mt .

healthy testto state that , "in cases involving allegations of reprisal for whistleblowing , an individual must provethat whistleblowing was a contributing factor in the agency's decision to take the action. .

 ( 110 ) the burden is thenplaced on the agency to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the same personnel actionwould have been taken in the absence of the protected disclosure .

also , for the first time , the billgave whistleblowers the right to appeal their own cases to the mspb if the special counsel failedor refused to do so .

 ( 111 ) the house passed the bill under suspension of the rules .

 ( 112 ) in the whistleblower protection act ( wpa ) of 1989 , congress found that federal employeeswho make protected disclosures "serve the public interest by assisting in the elimination of fraud,waste , abuse , and unnecessary government expenditures. .

 ( 113 ) congress also foundthat protecting employees "who disclose government illegality , waste , and corruption is a major steptoward a more effective civil service. .

moreover , the wpa stated that congress , in passing the civilservice reform act of 1978 , "established the office of special counsel to protect whistleblowers"who make protected disclosures .

 ( 114 ) the wpa incorporates the exemptions for national securityinformation included in the 1978 statute .

 ( 115 ) in signing the wpa , president george h. w. bush said that"a true whistleblower is a public servant of the highest order.... [t]hese dedicated men and womenshould not be fired or rebuked or suffer financially for their honesty and good judgment. .

 ( 116 ) .

congress passed legislation in 1994 to amend the whistleblower protection act .

legislationwas needed to reauthorize the office of special counsel and to ensure that it functioned "as intended,to protect federal employee whistleblowers from on - the - job harassment , negative job ratings,unfavorable transfers , denial of promotions and other retaliation for their efforts to uncover wasteand mismanagement in their agencies. .

 ( 117 ) in reporting the legislation , the senate committee on governmental affairs expressedconcern "about the extent to which osc is aggressively acting to protect whistleblowers fromprohibited personnel practices. .

 ( 118 ) on the house side , the committee on post office and civilservice stated that "while the whistleblower protection act is the strongest free speech law thatexists on paper , it has been a counterproductive disaster in practice .

the wpa has created newreprisal victims at a far greater pace than it is protecting them. .

 ( 119 ) the house committeeconcluded that statutory mandates could easily be thwarted by a hostile agency climate: "there islittle question that agency leadership is a far stronger factor than statutory provisions to establish aworkplace environment of respect for the merit system. .

 ( 120 ) .

during debate on the wpa , representative barbara boxer said that members of congress"learned when we passed the military whistleblower protection act that without whistleblowers,frankly , we really could not do our job , because .

 .

 .

we need information and we need a free flowof information from federal employees , be they military or civilian. .

 ( 127 ) the militarywhistleblower protection act ( 10 u.s.c .

â§ 1034 ) is not a single statute but rather an accumulationof several .

in 1983 , president ronald reagan directed that all federal employees with access to classifiedinformation sign "nondisclosure agreements" or risk the loss of their security clearance .

 ( 138 ) congress , concernedabout the vagueness of some of the terms in the reagan order and the loss of access to information,passed legislation in 1987 to prohibit the use of appropriated funds to implement theadministration's nondisclosure policy .

 ( 139 ) the dispute was taken to court and in 1988 district courtjudge oliver gasch held that congress lacked constitutional authority to interfere , by statute , withnondisclosure agreements drafted by the executive branch to protect the secrecy of classifiedinformation .

 ( 140 ) judge gasch quoted from the supreme court's decision in egan , issued in early 1988: "theauthority to protect such [national security] information falls on the president as head of theexecutive branch and as commander in chief. .

 ( 141 ) .

on november 26 , 1996 , the office of legal counsel ( olc ) in the justice department issuedan eight - page opinion on " ( 1 ) the application of executive branch rules and practices on disclosureof classified information to members of congress , in light of relevant congressional enactments ; ( 2 ) the applicability of the whistleblower protection act ; and ( 3 ) the applicability of executive order12674. .

 ( 170 ) executive order 12674 , signed by president bush on april 12 , 1989 , established "principlesof ethical conduct for government officers and employees. .

the principles included: "employeesshall disclose waste , fraud , abuse and corruption to appropriate authorities. .

 ( 171 ) the executive orderdefines "employee" to mean "any officer or employee of an agency , including a special governmentemployee," ( 172 ) anddefines "agency" to mean "any executive agency as defined in 5 u.s.c .

105 , including any executivedepartment as defined in 5 u.s.c .

101 , government corporation as defined in 5 u.s.c .

103 , or anindependent establishment in the executive branch as defined in 5 u.s.c .

104 ( other than the generalaccounting office ) , and the united states postal service and postal rate commission. .

 ( 173 ) "appropriateauthorities" is not defined in the executive order .

olc's memorandum prompted congress to hold hearings and analyze the administration'sposition that the president exercises exclusive control over the disclosure of classified information,including disclosure to members of congress and its committees .

the senate intelligencecommittee asked crs to evaluate olc's statutory and constitutional conclusions , and that analysiswas published .

 ( 184 ) the committee also held two days of hearings .

 ( 185 ) the justice department continued to hold that bills draftedto assure congressional access to classified information , submitted to congress by intelligencecommunity employees without the permission of their supervisors , were unconstitutional .

in 2002 , the u.s. court of federal claims decided the case of richard barlow , who in thelate 1980s faced termination from the defense department and suspension of security clearancesfollowing disputes within the executive branch , and between the executive branch and congress,about pakistan's nuclear capabilities .

some central questions reportedly were whether executiveofficials had misled lawmakers , in secret briefings , regarding pakistan's activities , and whether thereagan administration had improperly certified to congress that pakistan did not have nuclearweapons .

 ( 201 ) after a number of investigations by the defense department and several by inspectorsgeneral and the general accounting office regarding retaliations against barlow's whistlebloweractivities , a bill was introduced ( s. 2274 ) to provide for the relief of barlow .

 ( 202 ) the private billincluded the sum of $1,100,000 to compensate him for losses incurred as a consequence of " ( 1 ) personnel actions taken by the department of defense affecting mr. barlow's employment at thedepartment ( including mr. barlow's top secret security clearance ) during the period of august 4,1989 , through february 27 , 1992 ; and ( 2 ) mr. barlow's separation from service with the departmentof defense on february 27 , 1992. .

 ( 203 ) on october 5 , 1998 , the senate referred the matter to thecourt of federal claims requesting that it report back findings of fact and conclusions "that aresufficient to inform the congress of the nature , extent , and character of the claim for compensationreferred to in such bill [s. 2274] as a legal or equitable claim against the united states ora gratuity. .

 ( 204 ) .

in 2000 , congress passed a bill that would have established criminal penalties for leakingclassified information .

fines and imprisonment for up to three years were included to punish anycurrent or former government employee who "knowingly and willfully discloses , or attempts todisclose," any classified information to a person not authorized to receive the information , "knowingthat the person is not authorized access to such classified information. .

 ( 220 ) criminal liability didnot apply to the disclosure of classified information to federal judges established under article iiior to any member or committee of congress .

during house debate on the bill reported from conference committee , several membersreferred to it as an "official secrets" law .

 ( 221 ) one member said it would intimidate whistleblowers .

 ( 222 ) another thoughtit"would silence whistleblowers in a way that has never before come before this body and which hasnever before been enacted. .

 ( 223 ) another disagreed: "i do not think that is true at all .

first ofall , whistle - blowers are protected under the current law .

secondly , whistle - blowers who have aconcern about whether information is properly classified or there is a concern about the agency thatthey are working for , can come to congress. .

 ( 224 ) similarly , another member regarded whistleblowers asprotected by the bill "[s]o long as they come forward with matters that are security matters aboutwhich they are concerned and they disclose them to people who are cleared to received suchinformation. .

 ( 225 ) this debate raised the possibility that leaking information to the press would put reportersat risk .

one member stated that "this [bill] does not pertain to the news media. .

 ( 226 ) another saw "nothing[in the bill] to prevent reporters from being hauled in before grand juries and being forced to revealtheir sources. .

 ( 227 ) chief executives of four of the largest news organizations ( cnn , the new york times , newspaperassociation of america , and the washington post ) wrote to president clinton , urging him to vetothe bill .

the radio - television news directors association also joined in this appeal to presidentclinton .

 ( 228 ) president clinton vetoed the bill on november 4 , 2000 .

among other points , he said that thebill "was passed without benefit of public hearings - - a particular concern given that it is the publicthat this law seeks ultimately to protect .

the administration shares the process burden since itsdeliberations lacked the thoroughness this provision warranted , which in turn led to a failure toapprise the congress of the concerns i am expressing today. .

 ( 229 ) .

legislation has been introduced in the house and the senate to make changes in thewhistleblower protection act .

s. 494 , called the federal employee protection ofdisclosures act , was introduced on march 2 , 2005 , and reported from the committee on homelandsecurity and governmental affairs on may 25 .

the purpose is "to clarify the disclosures ofinformation protection from prohibited personnel practices , require a statement in nondisclosurepolicies , forms , and agreements that such policies , forms , and agreements conform with certaindisclosure protections , provide certain authority for the special counsel , and for otherpurposes. .

 ( 230 ) in reporting the bill , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairsnoted that the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 "have brought renewed attention to those who discloseinformation regarding security lapses at our nation's airports , borders , law enforcement agencies , andnuclear facilities. .

it further states that the right of federal employees to be free from agencyretaliation "has been diminished as a result of a series of decisions of the federal circuit court ofappeals that have narrowly defined who qualifies as a whistleblower under the wpa and whatstatements are considered protected disclosures. .

 ( 231 ) the bill is designed to clarify that disclosures of classifiedinformation to appropriate committees of congress are protected , to codify the "anti - gag" provisionthat congress has placed in annual appropriations bills to protect agency employees who comeforward with disclosures of illegality , to authorize the osc to file amicus briefs in whistleblowercases , and to allow whistleblower cases to be heard by all federal appellate courts for a period of fiveyears .

 ( 232 ) the committee report also discusses a provision in the bill that relates to whistlebloweractions after 9 / 11 , when agency employees "in several high profile cases have come forward todisclose government waste , fraud , and abuse that posed a risk to national security," but then facedretaliatory action by having their security clearance removed .

the federal circuit had held that themspb lacks jurisdiction over an employee's claim that his security clearance was revoked inretaliation for whistleblowing .

former special counsel elaine kaplan testified in 2001 that revokinga security clearance "can be a basis for camouflaging retaliation. .

 ( 233 ) the senate bill makesit a prohibited personnel practice for a manager to suspend , revoke , or take other actions regardingan employee's security clearance or access to classified information in retaliation for whistleblowing .

further , the bill provides for expedited review of whistleblower cases by the osc , the mspb , andthe reviewing cases where a security clearance has been revoked or suspended .

 ( 234 ) the justice department regards this provision as an intrusion into the president's prerogativeto control national security information and those who have access to it .

the committee regardsexecutive branch authority over classified material as "not exclusive , and that congress properlyplays a role. .

 ( 235 ) thecommittee cites egan for support ( " unless congress has specifically provided otherwise , courtstraditionally have been reluctant to intrude upon the authority of the executive in military andnational security affairs" ) .

 ( 236 ) title 5 has included a provision ( section 2302 ( b ) ) that nothing in the subsection shall beconstrued to authorize the withholding of information from congress or the taking of any personnelaction against an agency employee who discloses information to congress .

the senate bill providesthat a whistleblower must limit the disclosure to a member of congress who is authorized to receivethe information or to a legislative staffer who holds the appropriate security clearance and isauthorized to receive the information .

 ( 237 ) h.r .

1317 , introduced on march 15 , 2005 , contains a number of provisionssimilar to s. 494 , including clarification of disclosures that are protected fromprohibited personnel practices and a statement to be placed in nondisclosure forms .

the house billdirects the comptroller general to conduct a study of security clearance revocations in whistleblowercases after 1996 .

h.r .

1317 was marked up on september 29 , 2005 , and ordered to bereported .

to perform its legislative and constitutional functions , congress depends on information ( domestic and national security ) available from the executive branch .

the supreme court remarkedin 1927 that a legislative body "cannot legislate wisely or effectively in the absence of informationrespecting the conditions which the legislation is intended to affect or change ; and where thelegislative body does not itself possess the requisite information - - which not infrequently is true - - recourse must be had to those who do possess it. .

 ( 238 ) congress needs information to pass legislation , oversee theadministration of programs , inform the public , and carry out its constitutional duties .

balancing this legislative need for information with the protection of sensitive nationalsecurity information remains a continuing policy issue .

congress has never accepted the theory thatthe president has exclusive , ultimate , and unimpeded authority over the collection , retention , anddissemination of national security information .

agency heads provide congress with information,but some members of congress have also expressed a need to receive information directly fromrank - and - file employees within an agency .

whistleblowers have helped uncover agencywrongdoing , illegalities , waste , and corruption .

the interest of congress in maintaining an openchannel with agency employees is demonstrated through such statutes as lloyd - lafollette , theappropriations riders on the nondisclosure policy , the military whistleblower protection act , andthe intelligence community whistleblower act .

congress also recognizes the need to protect national security information , especially thatrelated to sources and methods , from disclosure .

this awareness is reflected in legislation thatallows and encourages intelligence community employees to report issues of waste , fraud , ormismanagement to the intelligence committees of congress .

several organizations have been active with whistleblowing issues .

they testify beforecongressional committees , provide assistance with litigation , and offer other services .

some of theseorganizations cover whistleblowing in general .

others focus on national security whistleblowing .

from october 9 to october 12 , 2005 , in chincoteague , va. , the first annual national securitywhistleblowers conference was held .

it was sponsored by the national security whistleblowercoalition , the cavallo foundation , harriet crosby , the fertel foundation , the fund for constitutionalgovernment , and project on government oversight .

the purpose was to bring together nationalsecurity whistleblowers to learn from each other , to find collective support for their efforts , and todevelop strategies .

founded in 1977 , gap is a non - profit , public interest organization and law firm that receivesfunding from foundations , individuals , and legal fees .

it describes its mission as protecting thepublic interest by promoting government and corporate accountability through advancingoccupational free speech and ethical conduct , defending whistleblowers , and empowering citizenactivists .

it litigates whistleblower cases , publicizes whistleblower concerns , and develops policyand legal reforms for whistleblower laws .

much of its work has been in the area of nuclearoversight , food and drug safety , worker health and safety , international reform and nationalsecurity .

 ( 239 ) .

the coaliton is a nonpartisan organization dedicated to aiding national securitywhistleblowers .

its stated mission is to advocate governmental and legal reform , educate the publicconcerning whistleblowing activity , provide comfort and fellowship to national securitywhistleblowers subject to retaliation , and work with other public interest organizations to effect goalsdefined in the organization's mission statement .

its membership consists exclusively of current orformer federal employees or civilians working under contract to the united states who , to theirdetriment and personal risk , bring to light fraud , waste , and abuse in government operations andagencies related to national security .

 ( 240 ) .

the national whistleblower center is a non - profit , tax - exempt , educational , and advocacyorganization dedicated to helping whistleblowers .

since 1988 , it states it has used whistleblowers'disclosures to improve environmental protection , nuclear safety , and government and corporateaccountability .

the primary goal of the center is to ensure that disclosures about government orindustry actions that violated the law or harm the environment are fully heard , and that thewhistleblowers who risk their careers to expose wrongdoing are defended .

in addition to assistingwhistleblowers , the center lobbies congress on the need to protect whistleblowers and insists thatofficials be held fully accountable for their conduct .

the center maintains a national referral serviceand sponsors litigation .

 ( 241 ) .

pogo began in 1981 as an independent , non - profit organization that investigates andexposes corruption in order to achieve a more accountable federal government .

it operates on theprinciple that representation and accountability are fundamental to maintaining a strong andfunctioning democracy .

initially it was known as the project on military procurement .

it iscommitted to exposing waste , fraud and corruption in the following areas: defense , homelandsecurity , energy and environment , contract oversight , and open government .

pogo's "contractoversight investigations" examine the federal government's policies and relationships with grantrecipients as well as major companies that receive billions of dollars in contracts and subsidiesannually .

 ( 242 ) .

