as attention continues to focus on juvenile offenders , some question the way in which they are treated in the u.s. criminal justice system .

since the late 1960s , the juvenile justice system has undergone significant modifications as a result of united states supreme court decisions , changes in federal and state law and the growing perception that juveniles were increasingly involved in more serious and violent crimes .

as a result , federal and state juvenile justice systems have focused less on rehabilitation and more on punishment , which may have significant ramifications for juvenile offenders once they reach adulthood .

for example , recidivist statutes such as the armed career criminal act ( acca ) impose mandatory minimums based on prior convictions , including juvenile adjudications .

as such , adult criminal defendants are exposed to longer terms of imprisonment based on prior juvenile misconduct .

despite this shift in focus to one more closely resembling the adult criminal justice system , juvenile offenders are not generally afforded the full panoply of rights provided to adult criminal defendants .

the establishment of a juvenile court in cook county , illinois , in 1899 marked the first statewide implementation of a separate judicial framework whose sole concern was the problems and misconduct of children .

the juvenile court was designed to be more than a court for children .

the underlying theory behind a separate juvenile court system was that the state has a duty to assume a custodial and protective role over individuals who cannot act in their own best interest .

as such , the separate system for juvenile offenders was predicated on the notion of rehabilitation — not punishment , retribution , or incapacitation .

because the juvenile court focused on protection rather than punishment , the juvenile proceeding was conceptualized as a civil proceeding ( not a criminal one ) , with none of the trappings of an adversarial proceeding .

by the mid - 20 th century , questions arose regarding the fairness and efficacy of the juvenile justice system and its ability to effectively rehabilitate young offenders .

concerns that the differences between the adult and juvenile systems were illusory prompted the need to preserve the legal rights of children adjudicated in the juvenile justice system .

as such , state courts began to expand the legal rights of juvenile offenders .

the emerging focus on juveniles' rights in the state courts prompted intervention from the u.s. supreme court , which had traditionally deferred to the states .

beginning in the mid - 1960s , the court examined the due process rights of minors in four landmark cases: kent v. united states , in re gault , in re winship , and mckeiver v. pennsylvania .

through these cases , the court left an indelible mark on the juvenile justice system by restricting the discretion of juvenile court judges and enumerating the constitutional rights retained by juveniles during adjudication .

these decisions resulted in a hybrid juvenile justice system that renders some of the procedural rights afforded to adult criminal defendants .

some argue that this hybrid system blurs the historical distinction between the juvenile justice and adult criminal systems .

arguably , the absence of a jury trial requirement in adjudicatory proceedings presents a host of questions that may warrant a reexamination of the issue .

first , some are likely to argue that the increasingly punitive nature of cases adjudicated in the juvenile justice system calls into question the validity of the court's reasoning underlying its holding in mckeiver that juveniles are not entitled to the right to a jury trial .

when the court decided mckeiver , it did so to maintain the civil and rehabilitative nature of the juvenile justice system .

at the time of the decision , juvenile adjudication hearings were closed to the public , the system was informal , and the records of the juvenile adjudications were confidential and not relied on in criminal prosecutions .

currently , some juvenile adjudication hearings are open to the public , the system is more formal and adversarial , and juvenile adjudications are frequently used in criminal prosecutions for sentence enhancement .

from their perspective , the civil and rehabilitative nature of the juvenile justice system has shifted to a more punitive one which more closely resembles the adult criminal justice system .

central to the mckeiver ' s holding was the court's conclusion that juries were not essential to accurate fact - finding .

however , this premise may be called into question in light of the court's reemphasis on the importance of a jury .

in a series of cases , the u.s. supreme court has recognized and emphasized the important role that juries play in criminal proceedings .

in duncan v. louisiana , the u.s. supreme court held that the right to jury trial is fundamental and guaranteed by due process .

in williams v. florida , the court reaffirmed that the "purpose of the jury trial ... is to prevent oppression by the government. .

the u.s. supreme court recognized the superiority of group decision - making over individual judgments in ballew v. georgia , which defined the constitutional minimum number of jurors that a state must empanel in a criminal prosecution .

in ballew , the court , relying on empirical data , found that a jury composed of less than six members was less likely to foster effective group deliberation and more likely to lead to inaccurate fact - finding and incorrect application of the community's common sense to the facts .

in addition , the court concluded that a smaller panel could increase the risk of convicting an innocent person .

more recently , the court has stressed the constitutional necessity of juries , rather than judges , making factual determinations upon which sentences are based .

the court's reasoning in ballew and subsequent cases regarding fact - finding by juries during sentencing may call into question the court's conclusion in mckeiver that a jury would not improve the fact - finding ability and fairness of juvenile courts .

an argument can also be made that the absence of a jury trial in the adjudicatory process could lead to inequities in other criminal proceedings .

for example , recidivist statutes such as the armed career criminal act impose mandatory minimums based on prior convictions , which by definition include juvenile adjudications .

as such , adult criminal defendants are subjected to longer terms of imprisonment based on prior juvenile misconduct .

some state and lower federal courts have found that equating juvenile adjudications with a conviction as a predicate offense for the purposes of state recidivism statutes subverts the civil nature of the juvenile adjudication to an extent that makes it fundamentally unfair and , thus , violative of due process .

one way to remedy the perceived inequities in using non - jury juvenile adjudication as sentence enhancements , critics of the current system maintain , might be to grant juveniles a right to a jury trial during adjudicatory hearings .

