some 19 million americans use illicit drugs at least once per month , spending by most conservative estimates over $60 billion annually in a diverse and fragmented criminal market .

such drugs are to varying degrees injurious to the health , judgment , productivity and general well - being of their users .

additionally , the u.s. illicit drug market generates billions of dollars in profits .

such profits provide international drug trafficking organizations with the resources to evade and compete with law enforcement agencies , to penetrate legitimate economic structures , and , in some instances , to challenge the authority of national governments .

calculated in dollar value terms , at least four - fifths of all the illicit drugs consumed in the united states are of foreign origin , including virtually all the cocaine and heroin and most of the marijuana .

according to the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , the methamphetamine market is supplied predominantly from laboratories in both the united states and mexico while most of the hallucinogens and illegally marketed psychotherapeutic drugs and "designer" drugs are of domestic u.s. origin .

drugs are a lucrative business and a mainspring of global criminal activity .

knowledge is incomplete about the distribution of revenues from illicit drug sales , but foreign supply cartels exercise considerable control over wholesale distribution in the united states and illicit proceeds are often laundered and invested through foreign banks and financial institutions .

the federal anti - drug initiative has two major elements: ( 1 ) reduction of demand and ( 2 ) reduction of supply .

reduction of demand is sought through education to prevent dependence , through treatment to cure addiction and through measures to increase prices and risk of apprehension at the consumer level .

reduction of supply , which currently accounts for about 64.5% of the federal anti - drug control budget , is sought by programs aimed at destabilizing the operations of illicit drug cartels at all levels and severing their links to political power , and by seizing their products , businesses , and financial assets .

as most illicit drugs are imported , a major interdiction campaign is being conducted on the u.s. borders , at ports of entry , on the high seas , and along major foreign transshipment routes and at production sites .

an international program of source crop eradication is also being pursued .

approximately 24.6% of the requested federal drug control budget of $12.6 billion for fy2007 is for interdiction and 11.5% is for international assistance programs .

these ratios continue to remain relatively constant .

the major international components of federal policies for the reduction of illicit supply are discussed below .

on march 1 , 2006 , the state department released its annual international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) , a congressionally - mandated comprehensive assessment of the efforts of foreign nations to combat the illicit drug trade and drug related money laundering .

the primary stated goal of u.s. international drug policy is to reduce the supply of illicit narcotics flowing into the united states .

a second and supporting goal is to reduce the amount of illicit drugs cultivated , processed , and consumed worldwide .

u.s. international drug control policy is implemented by a multifaceted strategy that includes the following elements: eradication of narcotic crops ; interdiction and law enforcement activities in drug - producing and drug - transiting countries ; international cooperation ; sanctions / economic assistance ; and institutional development .

the u.s. state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) has the lead role in coordinating u.s. international drug intervention and suppression activities .

three major ongoing policy initiatives that are prominent components of u.s. international drug control efforts are described below .

they are: ( 1 ) plan colombia / the andean counterdrug initiative ; ( 2 ) programs to counter illicit poppy cultivation and opium production in afghanistan ; and ( 3 ) the drug certification process .

the direction of drug policy does not appear to be an immediate top foreign policy priority for the george w. bush administration .

to date , pressing concern over issues such as terrorism and homeland security appear to command more attention .

this does not mean that international drug policy has been neglected by the administration , or given a lower priority than by preceding administrations .

for example , in addition to fine - tuning the nation's annual national drug control strategy , the administration has crafted and published the nation's first - ever synthetic drug control strategy .

possible issues of concern to congress relating to international drug control policy and strategy implementation include the following: ( 1 ) can plan colombia and the andean counterdrug initiative as currently envisioned have a meaningful impact on reducing drug shipments to the united states and in reducing the current level of violence and instability in colombia ? .

to what degree can a counter - drug plan which does not aim to deal a decisive blow to insurgent operations in colombia be expected to meaningfully curb drug production and violence there ? .

 ( 2 ) how does u.s. involvement in anti - drug efforts in the andean nations affect other aspects of american foreign policy in the region , and in latin america generally ? .

does a concentration on drug - related issues obscure more fundamental issues of stability , governance , poverty , and democracy ( i.e. , to what degree are drugs a major cause , or result , of the internal problems of certain latin american countries ) ? .

might u.s. pursuit of drug control objectives conflict in certain ways with efforts to resolve colombia's ongoing civil conflict , for instance by alienating large rural constituencies in contested regions of the country ? .

 ( 3 ) in the case of colombia and other nations where insurgents are heavily involved in the drug trade , how can the united states ensure that u.s. military aid and equipment are in fact used to combat drug traffickers and cartels , rather than diverted for use against domestic political opposition or used as an instrument of human rights violations ? .

how great is the risk that such diversions could take place , and is the degree of risk worth the possible gains to be made against drug production and trafficking ? .

 ( 4 ) how extensive is drug - related corruption in the armed forces and police of the andean nations ? .

what impact might such corruption have on the effectiveness of u.s. training and assistance to these forces ? .

 ( 5 ) will the evolving strategy under the bush administration produce better results than previous strategies in reducing illicit drug use in the united states and in supporting u.s. narcotics and other foreign policy goals overseas ? .

is a proper balance of resources being devoted to domestic ( the demand side ) vs. foreign ( the supply side ) components of an overall national anti - drug strategy ? .

are efforts to reduce the foreign supply level futile while domestic u.s. demand remains high ? .

are efforts to reduce domestic demand fruitless as long as foreign supplies can enter the country with what some see as relative impunity ? .

 ( 6 ) to what extent will the administration's current priority in fighting terrorism affect implementation of antidrug policy ? .

has repositioning of equipment and resources to improve u.s. defenses against acts of terrorism , for example the shift of coast guard vessels from the eastern pacific and the caribbean to perform coastal patrols and port security functions , lowered defenses with respect to curbing drug flows ? .

on the other side of the issue , to what degree has committing anti - drug resources to support anti - terrorism objectives significantly enhanced , or could significantly enhance , the effectiveness of counterterrorism efforts ? .

 ( 7 ) to what extent should u.s. military assistance programs in colombia target groups that use narcotics operations to finance terrorist activities ( including leftist guerrillas and paramilitaries ) , as opposed to the narcotics trafficking infrastructure itself ? .

 ( 8 ) as links between terrorist organizations and criminal groups appear to be a growing phenomenon , how does one effectively use the law enforcement community — especially the drug law enforcement community — to target criminal facilitators who may be working both for drug organizations and terrorist groups ? .

through what mechanisms does one effectively share "targeting information" and how does one decide which agency / agencies take action ? .

 ( 9 ) are u.s. counterdrug policy and drug related foreign assistance over - focused on colombia and afghanistan and if so , how might policy focus and resource allocation be realigned ? .

 ( 10 ) how do , or should , anti - drug goals dovetail with anti - terrorism goals in afghanistan and what programs there , if any , are likely to best serve u.s. policy goals ? .

for example , should the u.s. continue to press for aerial crop eradication in afghanistan against the wishes of the local afghan leadership , even if this means alienating and losing their support for counterterror goals and objectives ? .

