in its 2005 opinion united states v. booker , the u.s. supreme court declared that the once - binding federal sentencing guidelines ( the guidelines ) set by the united states sentencing commission are now only advisory , in order to be compatible with the sixth amendment to the constitution .

until 2007 , the guidelines reflected a statutory scheme that made crack cocaine defendants subject to the same sentence as those defendants trafficking in 100 times more powder cocaine ; thus , the sentences for crack cocaine offenses were three to over six times longer than those for offenses involving equivalent amounts of powder cocaine .

in the immediate aftermath of booker , federal courts disagreed about whether the 100:1 ratio produces disparities that justify a sentence lower than that recommended by the guidelines .

the supreme court resolved that issue in its 2007 opinion kimbrough v. united states , by holding that a federal court may impose a sentence below that called for under the guidelines' then - existing 100:1 ratio , based on its conclusion that the ratio is greater than necessary or may foster unwarranted disparity .

the pre - booker era for federal sentencing began with the sentencing reform act of 1984 , which established a sentencing system under the united states sentencing commission's federal sentencing guidelines .

the previous system tailored sentences to the individual defendants .

judges were given broad ranges within which they could , at their discretion , sentence a defendant .

the sentence was supposed to be based on the defendant's character as much as his conduct .

thereafter , the discretion given to the judge was passed on to the parole commission to determine how much of the judge's sentence the defendant ultimately served .

under the guidelines , the judge's role at sentencing was more uniform and unvaried .

the judge could inquire into a number of factors , including the defendant's conduct and criminal history .

the judge then weighed each factor according to the sentencing commission's mandate and calculated an offense level for the defendant .

the judge had discretion to sentence the defendant but , with little ground for departure , only within the narrow sentencing range that the guidelines provided for each offense level .

the sentencing reform act also abolished the parole commission's role .

crack cocaine became prevalent in the mid - 1980s and received widespread media attention following the death of the university of maryland all - american basketball player , len bias , from the use of cocaine .

crack cocaine was portrayed as a violence - inducing , highly addictive plague of inner cities , and this notoriety led to the quick passage of a federal sentencing law concerning crack cocaine in 1986 .

this legislation created two mandatory sentencing ranges for drug offenses .

the lower bracket spanned periods of imprisonment ranging from a mandatory minimum of 5 years to a maximum of 40 years ; the higher bracket spanned periods ranging from a mandatory minimum of 10 years to a maximum of life .

congress prescribed the threshold quantities of both crack and powdered cocaine required to bring a particular offense within either bracket .

despite the chemical identity of crack and powder cocaine , congress set widely disparate threshold quantities for the two drugs , requiring 100 times more powder cocaine than crack cocaine to trigger inclusion in a particular range .

the rationale offered was that many considered crack much more addictive than powder cocaine , and they feared a wave of violent crimes spawned by drug users as well as the health threats to infants born to addicted mothers .

the sentencing commission also incorporated this ratio into the drug guidelines , although it later concluded that the 100:1 powder to crack ratio produces sentences that are greater than necessary to satisfy the purposes of punishment because it exaggerates the relative harmfulness of crack cocaine ; the majority of crack offenders have low drug quantities , short criminal histories , and no history of violence .

the sentencing commission also concluded that a ratio providing for sentences that are greater than necessary creates an unwarranted disparity , inappropriate uniformity , racial disparity , and disrespect for the law .

over the years , congress has had second thoughts about the disparity in drug sentences .

to achieve a more equitable balance , as part of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , congress enacted a safety valve provision , which provided an avenue for lowering mandatory minimum sentences in a limited category of drug cases .

during the same year , congress directed the sentencing commission to study the crack - to - powder ratio and submit recommendations relative to whether the ratio should be retained or modified .

the sentencing commission recommended revision of the 100:1 quantity ratio in 1995 , finding the ratio to be unjustified by the small differences in the two forms of cocaine .

congress rejected the recommendation of the sentencing commission and did not change the law .

two years later , the sentencing commission issued a follow - up report .

in this report , the commission reiterated its position that the 100:1 ratio was excessive .

it recommended that the 100:1 ratio be reduced to 5:1 by increasing the threshold quantities for offenses involving crack cocaine and decreasing the threshold quantities for offenses involving powder cocaine .

again , congress took no action and did not amend the law .

in 2001 , the senate judiciary committee asked the sentencing commission to revisit its position regarding the 100:1 ratio , and in the subsequent year , the sentencing commission issued its third report .

in this report , the commission again proposed narrowing the gap that separated crack cocaine offenses from powder cocaine because ( 1 ) the severe penalties for crack cocaine offenses seemed to fall mainly on low - level criminals and african americans , ( 2 ) the dangers posed by crack could be satisfactorily addressed through sentencing enhancements that would apply neutrally to all drug offenses , and ( 3 ) recent data suggested that the penalties were disproportionate to the harms associated with the two drugs .

unlike the previous report , the commission did not recommend a reduction in the powder cocaine threshold .

the commission did recommend elimination of the 5-year mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack cocaine .

congress considered the substance of the commission's 2002 report but took no action .

judges have long been critical of the automatic prison terms , commonly referred to as mandatory minimum sentences , which were enacted pursuant to the anti - drug abuse act of 1986 in part to stem the drug trade .

prior to the supreme court's decision in united states v. booker , the case law was generally cognizant of the seriousness in the sentencing disparities between crack and powder cocaine but regularly deferred to congress's policy judgments .

this undertaking led to a series of decisions that upheld the 100:1 ratio against a variety of challenges , which included the equal protection clause and the rule of lenity .

it was also decided that under the mandatory guidelines system that was popular before booker , neither the sentencing commission's criticism of the 100:1 ratio nor its unacknowledged 1995 proposal to eliminate the differential provided a valid basis for leniency in the sentencing of crack cocaine offenders .

in booker , the supreme court consolidated two lower court cases and considered them in tandem , united states v. fanfan and united states v. booker .

booker was arrested after officers found in his duffle bag 92.5 grams of crack cocaine .

he later gave a written statement to the police in which he admitted selling an additional 566 grams of crack cocaine .

a jury in the united states district court for the western district of wisconsin found booker guilty of two counts of possessing at least 50 grams of cocaine base with the intent to distribute it , in violation of 21 u.s.c .

§ 841 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) .

at sentencing , the judge found by a preponderance of the evidence that booker had distributed 566 grams in addition to the 92.5 grams that the jury found ; the judge also found that booker had obstructed justice .

in the absence of the judge's additional findings , booker would have only faced a maximum sentence of 262 months under the united states sentencing guidelines .

the judge , however sentenced booker to 360 months , based on the guidelines' treatment of the additional cocaine and the obstruction of justice .

the united states court of appeals for the seventh circuit affirmed the conviction but overturned the sentence .

narcotic agents arrested fanfan when they discovered 1.25 kilograms of cocaine and 281.6 grams of cocaine base in his vehicle .

a jury in the district of maine found that he possessed "500 or more grams" of cocaine with the intent to distribute , in violation of 21 u.s.c .

§ 846 .

at sentencing , the court determined that fanfan was the "ring leader of a significant drug conspiracy," which , combined with his criminal history , resulted in a sentence of 188 to 235 months under the guidelines .

however , four days before the june 28 , 2004 , sentencing hearing , the supreme court decided blakely v. washington , holding that as part of a state sentencing guideline system , a washington state judge could not find an aggravating fact authorizing a higher sentence than the state statutes otherwise permitted .

the sentencing judge in fanfan considered the effect that blakely may have on the federal sentencing guidelines and recalculated the guidelines based only on the possession of 500 grams and imposed the 78 month maximum for that range .

the supreme court granted certiorari in booker and fanfan in an effort to give some guidance to lower courts that had begun a variety of applications of the blakely decision to federal prisoners .

for example , in booker , the seventh circuit found that the federal sentencing guidelines violate the sixth amendment in some situations .

the fifth circuit , on the other hand , concluded that blakely did not apply to the guidelines because to do so would create a separate "offense" for each possible sentence for a particular crime .

the second circuit , without resolving the issue , certified questions to the supreme court regarding the application of blakely to federal sentences pursuant to the guidelines .

the supreme court issued a majority opinion in two parts .

the first part , written by justice stevens for a 5-4 majority ( justices scalia , souter , thomas , and ginsburg ) decided that the guidelines violate the sixth amendment and are thus unconstitutional because they require a judge to increase a sentence above the maximum guideline range if the judge finds facts to justify an increase .

they said a defendant's right to trial by jury is violated if a judge must impose a higher sentence than the sentence that the judge could have imposed based on the facts found by the jury .

pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( b ) , the guidelines were mandatory and thus create a statutory maximum for the purpose of apprendi v. new jersey , 530 u.s. 466 ( 2000 ) , which had condemned mandatory judicial fact - finding for purposes of imposing a sentence beyond the statutory maximum .

the court had applied apprendi 's reasoning to a state sentencing guideline system in blakely v. washington , and the rationale applied with equal force to the federal guideline system in booker .

under the then current administration of the guidelines , judges , rather than juries , were required to find sentence determining facts , and thus the practice was unconstitutional .

the second part , written by justice breyer for a different 5-4 majority ( justices rehnquist , o'connor , kennedy , and ginsburg ) remedies this defect by holding that the guidelines are advisory , thereby making it necessary for the courts to consider the guidelines along with other traditional factors when deciding on a sentence , and also finding that the appellant courts may review sentences for "reasonableness. .

driven by the court's first holding , it "excises" ( through severance and excision of two provisions ) 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( b ) ( 1 ) and § 3742 ( e ) from the sentencing reform act and declares the guidelines are now "advisory. .

pursuant to § 3553 ( a ) , district judges need only to "consider" the guideline range as one of many factors , including the need for the sentence to provide just punishment for the offense ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) , to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) , and to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities among similarly situated defendants ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) .

the sentencing reform act , absent the mandate of § 3553 ( b ) ( 1 ) , authorizes the judge to apply his own perceptions of just punishment , deterrence , and protection of the public , even when these differ from the perceptions of the united states sentencing commission .

the sentencing reform act continues to provide for appeals from sentencing decisions ( regardless of whether the trial judge sentences are within or outside of the guideline range ) based on an "unreasonableness" standard ( 18 u.s.c .

§§ 3553 ( a ) and 3742 ( e ) ( 3 ) ) .

after booker , the federal courts wrestled with whether they may or must impose sentences below the guidelines' ranges in crack cocaine cases in view of the united states sentencing commission's conclusions and recommendations , the facts and circumstances of the case , the history and characteristics of the defendant , and the command of 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( 6 ) to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparity .

typically , the federal courts follow a three - step sentencing procedure in which they determine " ( 1 ) the applicable advisory range under the sentencing guidelines ; ( 2 ) whether , pursuant to the sentencing commission's policy statements , any departures from the advisory guideline range clearly apply ; and ( 3 ) the appropriate sentence in light of the statutory factors to be considered in imposing a sentence. .

an appellate court held that the federal courts are not compelled to lower a sentence recommended by the guidelines based on the sentencing differential for crack cocaine versus powder cocaine .

on the other hand , in more than a few cases , the application of booker has led to lower sentences than those suggested by the 100:1 ratio ranges established in the guidelines .

in some cases , after considering the factors set forth in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) , the courts found a different ratio , either 20:1 or 10:1 , more compatible with the statutory command of 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) to weigh the need to avoid unwarranted disparities .

the appellate courts were not so inclined to ignore the 100:1 ratio reflected in the then - existing guidelines .

for instance , the first circuit held that the district court could not discard the guideline range and construct a new sentencing range , but could take into account , on a case - by - case basis , "the nature of the contraband and / or the severity of a projected guideline sentence. .

the first circuit described the disparity as a "problem that has tormented enlightened observers ever since congress promulgated the 100:1 ratio" and "share[d] the district court's concern about the fairness of maintaining the across - the - board sentencing gap associated with the 100:1 crack - to - powder ratio. .

but to recapitulate , said the first circuit , "we hold that the district court erred ... when it constructed a new sentencing range based on the categorical substitution of a 20:1 crack - to - powder ratio for the 100:1 embedded in the sentencing guidelines. .

a panel in the fourth circuit agreed: [t]he principal question ... is whether a district court in the post - booker world can vary from the advisory sentencing range under the guidelines by substituting its own crack cocaine / powder cocaine ratio for the 100:1 crack cocaine / powder cocaine ratio chosen by congress .

for the reasons stated below , we conclude a court cannot.... [the] sentencing court must identify the individual aspects of the defendant's case that fit within the factors listed in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) and in reliance on those findings , impose a non - guideline sentence that is reasonable ... in arriving at a reasonable sentence , the court simply must not rely on a factor that would result in a sentencing disparity that totally is at odds with the will of congress .

the fourth circuit decision formed the basis for its later unpublished opinion in kimbrough v. united states .

norfolk , va , police arrested derrick kimbrough after they came upon him in the midst of what appeared to be a curbside drug sale .

at the time , they discovered more than $1,900 in cash , 56 grams of crack cocaine , and more than 60 grams of powder cocaine in his car .

they also recovered a loaded hand gun for which kimbrough was holding a full magazine clip .

kimbrough subsequently pleaded guilty to federal charges for trafficking in more than 50 grams of crack , trafficking in cocaine powder , conspiracy to traffic in crack , and possession of a firearm during and in furtherance of a drug trafficking offense .

he faced mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment of 10 years on the crack trafficking charge and of 5 years on the gun charge .

the applicable sentencing guidelines called for a sentence of imprisonment in the range of 168 to 210 months on the drug charges with an additional 60 months on the gun charge ( to be served consecutive to the drug charges for a range of imprisonment of 228 to 270 months ) .

kimbrough's attorney apparently urged a departure from the guideline's recommended sentence based on the sentencing commission's dissatisfaction with the 100:1 ratio , kimbrough's military service , the absence of any prior felony conviction , his employment record , and the suggestion that federal involvement represented an instance of "sentence shopping" in what was otherwise a state case .

under the facts before it , the district court considered the sentence recommended by the guidelines "ridiculous. .

it sentenced kimbrough to the statutory minimum of 180 months in prison ( 10 years on the drug charges and 5 years on the gun charge ) .

it did so in part because of the sentencing disparity for crack and powder cocaine .

however , the fourth circuit court of appeals vacated and remanded the sentence , consistent with its holding in united states v. eura that "a sentence that is outside the guidelines range is per se unreasonable when it is based on a disagreement with the sentencing disparity for crack and powder offenses. .

on june 11 , 2007 , the supreme court agreed to consider whether the district court abused its discretion when it determined that in kimbrough's case the sentencing range recommended by the guidelines would be greater than necessary to serve the penological purposes described in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) and should not be controlling in light of the instruction in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) to consider the need to avoid unwarranted disparity among similarly situated defendants .

on december 10 , 2007 , the supreme court reversed the court of appeals in a 7-2 ruling .

writing for the majority , justice ginsburg held that although a district judge must respectfully consider the guidelines range as one factor ( among many ) in determining an appropriate sentence , the judge has discretion to depart from the guidelines based on the disparity between the guidelines' treatment of crack and powder cocaine offenses .

as the booker decision had made clear that the sentencing guidelines — which include the cocaine guidelines — are to be advisory only , the fourth circuit court of appeals had erred in holding the crack / powder disparity "effectively mandatory," the court explained .

furthermore , the supreme court concluded that the 180-month sentence imposed on kimbrough is reasonable given the particular circumstance of kimbrough's case and that the district judge did not abuse his discretion in finding that the crack / powder disparity is at odds with the objectives of sentencing set forth in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

in may 2007 , the united states sentencing commission submitted proposed amendments to the guidelines ( including those applicable in kimbrough ) that essentially did away with the 100:1 ratio for purposes of the guidelines ( except at the point at which the statutory mandatory minimums are triggered ) .

it also recommended that congress raise the thresholds for the statutory mandatory minimums for trafficking in crack , thereby eliminating the statutory 100:1 ratio .

in making the decision to amend the guidelines , the commission sought to "somewhat alleviate" the "urgent and compelling ... problems associated with the 100-to - 1 drug quantity ratio. .

the commission opined that the amendment was "only ... a partial remedy" and was "neither a permanent nor complete solution. .

in july 2007 , the commission proposed that the changes relating to what had been the 100:1 ratio in the guidelines be made retroactively applicable to previously sentenced crack cocaine offenders .

on november 1 , 2007 , the amendments to the guidelines including those relating to crack and the 100:1 ratio went into effect .

on december 11 , 2007 , the sentencing commission unanimously voted to apply the crack amendment retroactively .

as noted earlier , the controlled substances act makes trafficking in 5 to 50 grams of crack cocaine or 500 to 5,000 grams of cocaine powder punishable by imprisonment for not less than 5 years and not more than 40 years .

it makes trafficking more than 50 grams of crack or more than 5,000 grams of cocaine powder punishable by imprisonment for not less than 10 years and not more than life .

these sanctions , like most federal criminal penalties , are reflected in the sentencing guidelines .

the guidelines assign most federal crimes to an individual guideline which in turn assigns the offense an initial base sentencing level .

drug trafficking offenses , for example , have been assigned to section 2d1.1 , which sets the base offense level according to the amount of crack or powder cocaine involved in a particular case .

levels are then added or subtracted on the basis of any aggravating or mitigating factors presented in a particular defendant's case .

for example , a defendant's offense level may be decreased by two or four levels , if the offense involved a number of participants and the defendant's role in the offense was minor or minimal .

a defendant's final offense level and his criminal history ( criminal record ) govern the sentence recommended by the guidelines .

the guidelines assign sentencing ranges for each of the 43 possible final offense levels .

each of the 43 has a series of six escalating sentencing ranges to mirror the extent of the defendant's criminal history .

for example , if a defendant has no prior criminal record and his final sentencing level is 26 , the guidelines recommend that the sentencing court impose a term of imprisonment somewhere between 63 and 78 months ; at the other extreme , if a defendant has an extensive prior criminal record and his final sentencing level is the same 26 , the guidelines recommend a sentencing range of between 120 to 150 months .

the drug quantity table that is part of the drug sentencing guideline , u.s.s.g .

§ 2d1.1 ( c ) , assigns offenses to one of several steps with corresponding sentencing levels based on the kind and volume of the controlled substances involved in the offense .

for example , an offense involving 150 kilograms or more of powder cocaine is assigned a step ( 1 ) offense level of 38 , while an offense involving less than 25 grams is assigned a step ( 14 ) offense level of 12 .

prior to the amendments effective on november 1 , 2007 , each of the steps reflected a 100:1 ratio between crack and powder cocaine ; for instance , offenses involving either more than 150 kilograms of powder cocaine or more than 1.5 kilograms of crack cocaine were each assigned a step ( 1 ) offense level of 38 .

in order to reduce the prospect of a guideline result beneath the statutory minimums , the pre - amendment guidelines assigned the 5-year - minimum - triggering 5 grams ( crack ) / 500 grams ( powder ) offenses to u.s.s.g .

§ 2d1.1 ( c ) , step ( 7 ) , with an offense level of 26 which translated to a sentencing range of from 5 years and 3 months ( 63 months ) to 6 years and 6 months ( 78 months ) .

it made a similar assignment for the 10-year mandatory minimum offenses involving 50 grams of crack or 5,000 grams of powder cocaine: level 32 with a sentencing range for first offenders of from 10 years and 1 month ( 121 months ) to 12 years and 7 months ( 151 months ) .

the commission's amendments focused first on the assignment for crack offenses subject to a mandatory minimum .

the commission noted that its earlier assignment set the bottom of the two ranges higher than necessary to satisfy minimum sentencing requirements ( 5 years and 3 months in the case of 5 grams ; 10 years and 1 month in the case of 50 grams ) .

its amendments reassign those offenses to offense levels where the mandatory minimum fell within the middle of the ranges , that is , to offense level 24 ( 51 to 63 months for first offenders ) and offense level 30 ( 97 to 121 months for first offenders ) for 5- and 50-gram crack offenses , respectively .

they then provide a similar two - level reduction for crack offenses involving amounts above and beyond those that trigger the mandatory minimums .

the amendments , however , make no such changes in the offense levels to which powder cocaine offenses are assigned .

as a consequence , the 100:1 ratio has disappeared from the guidelines ( although the statutory 100:1 ratio in the quantities of powder cocaine and crack cocaine that trigger the mandatory minimum penalties still remains ) .

several bills have been introduced concerning cocaine sentencing ; to date , the congress has passed one into law: s. 1789 ( fair sentencing act of 2010 ) .

introduced by senator richard durbin , s. 1789 will , among other things , increase the threshold amount of crack cocaine necessary to trigger the mandatory minimum penalties to 28 grams ( from 5 grams for the current 5-year sentence ) and 280 grams ( from 50 grams for the current 10-year sentence ) .

this change will reduce the statutory 100:1 ratio to 18:1 .

the bill also eliminates the 5-year mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack cocaine .

the bill goes beyond crack cocaine sentencing issues by increasing criminal fine amounts available for major drug traffickers and also directing the u.s .

sentencing commission to amend the sentencing guidelines to ensure that the guidelines provide an additional penalty increase of at least two offense levels if the defendant used violence , made a credible threat to use violence , or directed the use of violence during a drug trafficking offense .

the sentencing commission is also required to study and submit to congress within five years a report concerning the impact of the changes in federal sentencing law made by the fair sentencing act of 2010 .

on march 17 , 2010 , the senate passed s. 1789 by unanimous consent .

on july 28 , 2010 , the house considered s. 1789 under suspension of the rules and passed it by voice vote .

president obama signed the bill into law on august 3 , 2010 ( p.l .

111-220 ) .

the congressional budget office has estimated that implementation of s. 1789 will generate $42 million in savings to the federal prison system over the 2011-2015 period .

representative roscoe bartlett introduced h.r .

18 ( powder - crack cocaine penalty equalization act of 2009 ) , which would equalize the triggering quantity for the mandatory minimum sentences for cocaine offenses at the crack cocaine levels ( 5 grams of powder cocaine would result in a 5-year sentence and 50 grams a 10-year sentence ) .

currently , it takes 100 times those quantities to trigger the 5- and 10-year mandatory minimum sentences for powder cocaine .

representative sheila jackson - lee introduced h.r .

265 ( drug sentencing reform and cocaine kingpin trafficking act of 2009 ) , which would eliminate the statutory 100:1 ratio in cocaine cases by raising the crack cocaine threshold to 500 grams and 5 kilograms for the 5- and 10-year mandatory minimums , respectively .

it would call upon the sentencing commission to reexamine the weight given aggravating and mitigating factors in drug trafficking cases .

it also would eliminate the 5-year mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack cocaine .

in addition , the bill would increase fines for significant drug trafficking offenses , authorize funding for prison - and jail - based drug treatment programs , and authorize increased resources for the departments of justice , treasury , and homeland security .

representative bobby scott introduced h.r .

1459 ( fairness in cocaine sentencing act of 2009 ) , which would amend the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act regarding cocaine penalties .

the bill would treat 50 grams of crack the same as 50 grams of other forms of cocaine , 5 grams of crack the same as 5 grams of other forms of cocaine , and would eliminate all mandatory minimum penalties relating to cocaine offenses .

the bill also would reestablish the possibility of probation , suspended sentence , or parole for cocaine offenders .

representative scott also has introduced h.r .

3245 ( fairness in cocaine sentencing act of 2009 ) , which would make fewer changes to the drug laws ; the bill would eliminate references to "cocaine base" from the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act ( meaning that these laws would treat all forms of cocaine the same for sentencing purposes ) and would eliminate the mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack cocaine .

representative maxine waters introduced h.r .

1466 ( major drug trafficking prosecution act of 2009 ) , which would , among other things , eliminate all mandatory minimum sentences for drug trafficking and possession offenses , and permit courts to place drug offenders on probation or suspend their sentences .

the bill also would require the attorney general to provide written approval before the commencement of a federal prosecution for an offense involving less than 500 grams of powder or crack cocaine .

representative charles rangel introduced h.r .

2178 ( crack - cocaine equitable sentencing act of 2009 ) , which would amend the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act to treat 50 grams of crack the same as 50 grams of other forms of cocaine ; 5 grams of crack the same as 5 grams of other forms of cocaine , and eliminate the 5-year mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack cocaine .

past congresses have considered legislation relating to cocaine sentencing ; some of these bills had called for a 1:1 drug quantity ratio between crack and powder cocaine , while other bills would have changed the statutory ratio to 20:1 .

