in recent years , as prices of prescription drugs have risen , many in congress have sponsoredlegislation to permit the importation of food and drug administration ( fda ) approved drugs fromless expensive foreign sources .

in the 109th congress , three pairs of bills have been introduced torepeal the existing import restrictions and provide for limited forms of importation of prescriptiondrugs .

current law and the bills all seek to balance the availability of imported prescription drugs - - both for commercial and personal use - - and the assurance that those imports would be safe andeffective .

an underlying goal is to reduce or restrain the growth of the financial burden thatprescription drugs place on u.s. consumers .

current law bars importation unless the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) certifies that imports are safe and offers cost savings to u.s. consumers .

congress reaffirmed thisrequirement , first established by the medicine equity and drug safety ( meds ) act of 2000 , mostrecently in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma , p.l.108-173 ) in december 2003 .

the three bill pairs each would eliminate this requirement and , instead,include other potential safeguards regarding drug safety and effectiveness .

they all would actprimarily by replacing or amending section 804 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , which had been initially added to the ffdca by the medicine equity and drug safety ( meds ) act of 2000 ; individual bills would amend other laws .

this report compares the provisions of three approaches to prescription drug importation ( represented by three senate and three house bills ) with provisions on the subject in currentlaw .

 ( 1 ) the three bill pairsare: the pharmaceutical market access act of 2005 : s. 109 ,introduced by senator vitter on january 24 , 2005 , and h.r .

328 , introduced byrepresentative gutknecht on january 25 , 2005 ; referred to in this report as the vitter - gutknechtbills .

no action has been taken .

the safe importation of medical products and other rx therapies actof 2005 , or the safe import act of 2005 : s. 184 , introduced by senator gregg onjanuary 26 , 2005 , and h.r .

753 , introduced by representative bradley on february10 , 2005 ; referred to in this report as the gregg - bradley bills .

no action has beentaken .

the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2005 : s. 334 , introduced by senator dorgan on february 9 , 2005 , and h.r .

700 , introduced the same day by representative emerson ; referred to in this report as thedorgan - emerson bills .

in july 2005 , senator dorgan successfully offered the drug importationprovisions as an amendment to the federal trade commission reauthorization bill ( s. 1392 ) ordered to be reported by the senate commerce , science and transportation committee .

 ( 2 ) the differences in approach across the bills fall into three areas: attempts to ensure thatimported drugs are safe and effective ; attempts to influence industry behavior so drugs are availablefor import by u.s. consumers at cost savings to current domestic prices ; and administrativearrangements .

impetus to amend current law goes beyond the concern with drug safety .

even were thesecretary to issue the certification necessary to begin the drug importation section in the ffdca,many analysts and members of congress anticipate manufacturer resistance .

the vitter - gutknechtand dorgan - emerson bills contain specific provisions designed to influence industry behavior ; thegregg - bradley bills do not .

the timing and funding of importation activities vary across current law and the proposedbills .

the following table arrays the prescription drug importation provisions of current law andthe three pairs of proposed bills , with the columns ordered chronologically based on the date ofenactment or introduction .

organized by topic , the rows do not directly follow the order ofprovisions in any of the compared documents .

table 1 .

comparison of prescription drug importation provisions in current law , s. 109 / h.r .

328,s .

184 / h.r .

753 , and s. 334 / h.r .

70 .

