looking at nctc data in the aggregate , one might reasonably conclude that terrorists are becoming less constrained and more indiscriminate in their targeting , thereby inflicting casualties on a broader range of potential targets and victims .

moreover , the state department's country reports on terrorism 2005 argues that the threat from small terrorist groups or lone terrorists is rising in frequency , as is the potential for these micro - actors to inflict deadly harm and costly economic damage .

this finding appears consistent with other research and analyses .

if the trend continues the immediate future is likely to bring "a larger number of smaller attacks , less meticulously planned , and local rather than transnational in scope. .

on the other hand , "an increasing number of such attacks could fail through lack of skill or equipment...." of growing concern is what many see as a trend by terrorists to launch near - simultaneous multiple attacks aimed at causing economic damage — such as attacks on transportation , tourism , and oil related targets and infrastructures .

for example , in february 2006 , saudi security forces thwarted a suicide attack at an oil processing facility in the eastern part of that nation .

an al qaeda affiliated website subsequently claimed responsibility .

a wave of arrests in the saudi arabia in late march 2006 reportedly thwarted a second refinery attack .

if terrorist acts are becoming more the product of localized micro - actors , it raises the question of whether united states anti - terror strategy and tactics should reflect a more international law - enforcement oriented approach .

such an approach was envisioned in the february 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism .

for example , the inclusion of the drug enforcement administration's office of national security intelligence as a member of the intelligence community will put in place new structures to share information on the ties between international terrorism and international drug trafficking .

increased sharing and cooperation between the law enforcement and the intelligence communities could well lead to disrupting some of the ties between terrorist and criminal groups , potentially "defunding" some terrorist activities .

overall , policymakers may consider expanding programs that support foreign law enforcement training and educational exchanges , joint / multilateral training exercises , the creation of bi - lateral or multilateral law enforcement task forces , staff exchanges of detailees among foreign and domestic law enforcement agencies , and expansion of so - called "rule of law" programs .

some observers call for more vigorous , focused , and better funded public diplomacy initiatives to counter terrorist efforts to generate popular support and gain recruits .

collection and analysis of data which may reveal trends over time might also be strengthened .

some might argue that it could serve united states and allied interests to see more data analyzed and exchanged on terrorist motivations , tactics , and organizations by a wide range of institutions in the public and private sector .

greater participation in this process by industry , governments , and academia might prove fruitful .

however , compiling and sharing the data on a timely basis may present yet another daunting challenge .

most agree that the evidence shows that terrorists are seeking to kill as many people as possible and concentrating on hitting economic targets such as support infrastructure and tourism — rather than seeking to achieve immediate political objectives such as gaining the release of prisoners .

if correct , this might argue for hardening targets , improving the technology and placement of detection equipment , and generally beefing - up the nation's ability to respond to large scale disasters — whether caused by acts of god or acts of terror .

crs report rs21937 , 9 / 11 terrorism: global economic costs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32759 , al qaeda: statements and evolving ideology , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33038 , al qaeda: profile and threat assessment , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30252 , intelligence and law enforcement: countering transnational threats to the u.s. , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22211 , islamist extremism in europe , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32816 , the national counterterrorism center: implementation challenges and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22373 , navy role in irregular warfare and counterterrorism: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31672 , terrorism in southeast asia , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report 97-960 .

terrorism , the media , and the government: perspectives .

trends , and options for policymakers , by raphael perl .

 ( archived: available from the author. ) .

crs report rl32758 , u.s. military operations in the global war on terrorism: afghanistan , africa , the philippines , and colombia , by [author name scrubbed] .

