more than 80 benefit programs provide cash and noncash aid that is directed primarily to persons with limited income .

these benefit programs cost approximately $583 billion in fy2004 , a record high .

this sum was up $34 billion ( 6.2% ) from the previous peak of fy2003 , and it equaled 5% of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

federal funds provided 73.2% of the total .

higher medical spending accounted for $26 billion of the net increase in fy2004 , and 55 cents out of every dollar spent on persons with limited income went for medical benefits .

federal low - income spending represented 18.6% of the federal budget , with 9% attributed to medical assistance .

see table 1 for an fy2002-fy2004 summary .

after adjustment for price inflation , 2004 spending on persons with limited income was up by approximately $21.5 billion ( 3.8% ) from that of 2003 , the previous peak .

real spending increases ( 2004 dollars ) were dominated by medical assistance ( up $19 billion ) .

other increases were in food benefits , $3.3 billion ; cash aid , $2.4 billion ; and housing , $0.6 billion .

spending in real terms dropped in the following areas: education benefits , by $2.3 billion ; jobs and training , by $0.9 billion ; services , by $0.6 billion ; and energy aid by $0.2 billion .

spending for "human capital" programs ( those providing education and employment and training activities ) accounted for 6.2% of all dollars spent on persons with limited income ( compared with 19.2% for cash assistance and 55.3% for medical aid ) .

this report consists of a catalog of 84 need - based programs .

for each program , the report provides the funding formula , eligibility requirements , and benefit levels .

at the end of the report , tables 14-21 provide expenditure data ( federal and state / local ) and recipient data for fy2002-fy2004 , program by program .

one program is new to this series of reports: the d.c. school choice incentive program .

in addition , two programs have been dropped because of the difficulty of obtaining reliable current data: general assistance ( medical component ) and general assistance ( nonmedical component ) ; spending for these programs was only from state and local sources , rather than federal .

most of these programs base eligibility on individual , household , or family income , but some use group or area income tests ( see table 7 ) , and a few offer help on the basis of presumed "need. .

most provide income "transfers. .

that is , they transfer income in the form of cash , goods , or services to persons who make no payment and render no service in return .

however , in the case of the job and training programs and some educational benefits , recipients must work or study for wages , training allowances , stipends , grants , or loans .

further , the tanf block grant program requires adults to commence work ( defined by the state ) after a period of enrollment , the food stamp program imposes work and training requirements , and public housing programs require recipients to engage in "self - sufficiency" activities or to perform community service .

finally , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) is available only to workers .

this report excludes income maintenance programs that are not income - tested , including social insurance and many veterans' benefits , and all but two tax - transfer programs .

thus , it excludes social security cash benefits , unemployment compensation , and medicare .

outlays for the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance programs ( social security cash benefit programs ) in fy2004 totaled $502 billion , financed primarily from payroll tax collections .

the report also excludes payments , even though financed with general revenues , that may be regarded as "deferred compensation," such as veterans' housing benefits and medical care for veterans with a service - connected disability .

the report includes two tax - transfer programs , the eitc for low - income workers with children and the child tax credit .

the eitc reduces the taxes of working families with gross income below specified limits and makes direct payments ( "refunds" ) to those whose income is below the tax threshold or whose tax liability is smaller than their credit .

before the 2001 tax law , the child tax credit was refundable only to some taxpayers with three or more children , but it now is refundable ( up to certain limits ) for those with earnings above $10,000 .

this report treats the direct payment component of these credits , but not the reduction in tax liability , as a welfare expenditure .

other tax benefits are excluded from the report because they are not refundable ( make no direct payments ) .

further , in most cases they impose no income test for eligibility .

examples of these other tax benefits are the deductibility of mortgage interest and property taxes on owner - occupied homes ( equivalent to outlays of $61.4 billion and $18.7 billion , respectively , in 2004 ) .

these tax transfers increase families' disposable income by reducing their tax liability , and are known as "tax expenditures. .

 ( the standard deduction and personal exemption in the income tax code also decrease families' taxable income. ) .

the dramatic change since 1978 in the composition of total spending for income - tested benefits is shown in figure 2 and in table 6 .

in fy1978 , spending for cash relief and medical aid was nearly equal .

each accounted for 29% of total welfare spending covered by this report .

thereafter , spending for medical benefits rapidly overtook cash aid , reaching 50% in fy1999 and topping 55% in 2004 .

depending on the program , the eligibility of noncitizens for major federal means - tested benefit programs — food stamps , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , medicaid , and section 8 housing assistance — varies with their immigration status , work history , date of entry , date of enrollment in a benefit program , age , and length of legal residence .

the basic outline of current noncitizen eligibility rules was established by the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , although prior laws for these programs had contained some limits on participation by noncitizens ( typically barring temporary or illegal residents ) .

this law sharply restricted welfare eligibility for noncitizens , although the limits it put in place have since been eased ( in 1997 , 1998 , and 2002 ) .

the basic rules now are as follows .

nonimmigrants ( those admitted temporarily for a limited purpose such as students , visitors , and temporary workers ) are ineligible for all major benefits , as are unauthorized ( "illegal" ) aliens who are in the u.s. in violation of immigration law and for whom no legal relief or recognition has been extended .

legal permanent residents with a substantial ( generally , 10-year ) work history documented by social security and those with a military connection ( legally present active duty military personnel , honorably discharged veterans , and their immediate families ) are eligible for all major benefits .

in the case of food stamps , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are eligible after five years lawful residence following entry .

however , this five - year ineligibility period does not apply to ( 1 ) persons lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 ( the date of enactment of the welfare reform law ) , and age 65+ at the time , ( 2 ) persons receiving government disability benefits , and ( 3 ) children under age 18 .

in the case of ssi , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are eligible only if they are ( 1 ) persons who were receiving ssi benefits as of august 22 , 1996 , or ( 2 ) individuals lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 , who are now disabled .

[ note: pre - 1996 ssi law barred eligibility for those with temporary or illegal status. .

in the case of tanf , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are ( 1 ) eligible , at state option , if lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 , and ( 2 ) for post - august - 1996 entrants , eligible , at state option , five years after entry .

in the case of medicaid , eligibility rules for legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are the same as for tanf , except that coverage is required for ssi recipients .

in the case of section 8 housing assistance , legal permanent residents are eligible ( with no time , work history , or age restrictions ) , as are noncitizens who were receiving benefits as of august 22 , 1996 .

[ note : pre - 1996 housing law barred eligibility for those with temporary or illegal status. .

in humanitarian cases — asylees , refugees , cuban / haitian entrants , parolees and conditional entrants , victims of abuse ( battery or cruelty by a family member ) , victims of trafficking in persons , and certain persons with similar status — individuals are ( 1 ) eligible for food stamps after entry or grant of status as an asylee , refugee , cuban / haitian entrant , or other humanitarian category , ( 2 ) eligible for ssi if they were ssi recipients as of august 22 , 1996 , or for seven years after entry or grant of status , ( 3 ) eligible for tanf for five years after entry or grant of status , and then eligible at state option , ( 4 ) eligible for medicaid for seven years after entry or grant of status , and then eligible at state option , and ( 5 ) eligible for section 8 housing assistance ( with no time limits ) .

the census bureau reports that 7.6 million families ( including 5.8 million with children ) in 2003 had total pre - tax money income — after counting any cash from the programs of tanf , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , and general assistance ( ga ) — that was below their poverty threshold .

the bureau found that the money income poverty rate among related children in families was 17.2% , the highest since 1998 ( 18.3% ) .

overall , 35.9 million persons were classified as poor on the basis of 2003 pre - tax money income ( compared with 31.1 million in 2000 , the year preceding the most recent economic recession ) .

of these persons , 68.0% were in households that received means - tested aid from at least one of eight programs ( tanf , ssi , ga , school lunch , food stamps , medicaid , subsidized housing , low - income home energy assistance ) .

by race and ethnicity , the following percentages of poor persons were in households that received pre - tax aid from one or more of the eight programs: non - hispanic whites , 55.2% ; blacks , 80.9% ; and persons of hispanic origin , 80.3% .

figure 3 depicts income - tested aid provided to families with children who were poor before receiving any cash aid from tanf , ga , or the eitc .

in 2003 , these families totaled 6.1 million ( compared with 5.1 million in 2000 ) : 3.7 million with a female householder and 2.4 million with a male householder ( chiefly two - parent families ) .

these numbers , based on crs estimates , include unrelated subfamilies ( the bureau excludes these subfamilies from its "family" counts ) .

as the chart shows , all but 9.3% of the female - headed families and 12.0% of the male - present families whose pre - tax , pre - welfare money income fell short of the poverty threshold received means - tested aid .

for male - present families , the eitc , which goes only to persons with earnings , was the dominant form of aid .

in all , 67.8% of male - present families who were poor before transfers received the eitc ( compared with 75.2% in 2000 ) ; for 23.8% the eitc was the only aid .

among female - headed families who were poor before transfers , 43.8% received the eitc ( compared with 59.6% in 2000 ) ; for 10.4% the eitc was the only aid .

various combinations of cash assistance ( tanf , ga , eitc ) and noncash aid — food stamps , housing subsidies , medicaid , or coverage under the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) — went to 27.1% of female - headed families and to 9.2% of male - present families .

more than 90% of the programs in this report have an explicit test of income .

the others base eligibility on area of residence , enrollment in another means - tested program , or other factors that presume need .

the explicit income tests are of five kinds: income ceiling related to ( 1 ) one of the federal government's official poverty measures ( federal poverty income guidelines or census bureau poverty thresholds ) ; ( 2 ) state or area median income ; ( 3 ) the lower living standard income level of the bureau of labor statistics ; ( 4 ) an absolute dollar standard ; ( 5 ) a level deemed to indicate "need. .

table 7 classifies the programs in this report by type of income test .

tables 8-11 present , respectively , census bureau poverty thresholds for 2004 , federal poverty income guidelines for 2005 , income eligibility limits for subsidized meals ( july 2005-july 2006 ) , and lower living standard income levels , effective in july 2005 .

note: this entry describes use of tanf block grant funds for cash aid .

federal plus state expenditures in fy2004 for tanf cash aid were estimated at $10.4 billion ( excluding administrative costs ) .

for tanf child care , tanf work programs and activities , and tanf services , see separate entries in this report .

note: this entry describes the program of general assistance ( ga ) to indians operated by the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) .

tribes , however , may use the bia funds to design their own ga programs , changing eligibility rules and benefit levels , provided they pay any net cost increase , use any savings for tribal needs , and receive bia approval of their plan .

tribes may administer their redesigned plan themselves or request bia to do so .

note: these programs were inadvertently omitted from editions of this report prior to the 2003 edition .

program outlays for fy1996 through fy2002 were added to historical tables beginning with the 2003 edition .

note: p.l .

100-242 [section 401 ( d ) ( 1 ) ] terminated authority to make additional section 235 commitments , effective october 1 , 1989 .

note: the federal trio programs consist of six programs authorized by title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended: upward bound , student support services , talent search , educational opportunity centers , ronald e. mcnair postbaccalaureate achievement , and staff development .

the first three were the original "trio" programs .

the staff development activities provide short - term training for trio program staff ; they are not described below .

fy2004 appropriations were $833 million .

note: this program was known as the state student incentive grant ( ssig ) program until october 1 , 1998 , when it was revised and renamed by p.l .

105-244 .

note: this program was formerly called ellender fellowships ( title x , part g of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ) .

close up fellowships now are authorized by title i , part e , of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act ( p.l .

107-10 ) .

this entry summarizes ellender fellowships and close up fellowships rules under both laws .

note: no part of the original tanf block grant was earmarked for work programs , but in 1997 , congress added a two - year $3 billion program of welfare - to - work ( wtw ) grants to help states meet tanf work requirements .

the energy conservation and production act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-385 ) , as amended , provides 100% federal funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons through grants administered by the department of energy ( doe ) .

administrative costs may not exceed 10% of grant funds .

weatherization funds are allocated among the states on the basis of factors that include number of heating degree days and cooling degree days , number of low - income owner - occupied and renter - occupied dwellings , percentage of total residential energy used for space heating and space cooling .

although states are not required to provide matching funds , state and local funds often supplement federal amounts .

appropriations totaled $227 million in fy2004 .

states and other grantees design and administer their own programs under general federal guidelines .

the law makes eligible all "low - income" households and offers alternate definitions of this term .

states are permitted to give doe weatherization assistance ( a ) to households whose combined income falls at or below 125% of the federal poverty income guidelines , a ceiling equal in the 48 contiguous states to $23,563 for a family of four in 2004 ( at state option , the ceiling can be lifted to 150% of the poverty guideline , if the state has adopted that income limit for liheap ) and ( b ) to families with a member who received cash welfare payments during the previous 12 months from tanf , ssi , or state assistance programs .

legislation allows a maximum average expenditure , adjusted annually for price inflation , per dwelling unit for weatherization materials , labor , and related matters ( such as transportation of materials and workers ; maintenance , operation and insurance of vehicles ; maintenance of tools and equipment ; purchase or lease of tools , equipment and vehicles ; employment of on - site supervisors ; and storage of weatherization materials ) .

doe reports that this program weatherized more than 94,000 homes in fy2004 and 5.4 million over the 28-year history of the program .

the low - income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) usually spends more funds on weatherization assistance than the doe program .

for information about liheap weatherization assistance , see program no .

83 .

note: for more information , see crs issue brief ib10020 , energy efficiency: budget , oil conservation , and electricity conservation issues .

for a doe summary , see http: / / www.eere.energy.gov / buildings / weatherization / about.html .

