the food and drug administration ( fda ) has approved for adult use many drugs that have been tested for adults but not for children .

yet clinicians often prescribe adult - approved drugs for children , a practice known as off - label prescribing , ( 1 ) because most drugs have not been tested in children , and ( 2 ) because clinicians presume that the safety and effectiveness demonstrated with adults generally means that the drugs are also safe and effective for children .

however , research shows , as described later in this report and in table 1 , that this is not always true .

children may need higher or lower doses than adults , may experience effects on their growth and development , and may not respond to drugs approved for adults .

congress passed the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca ) of 2002 and the pediatric research equity act ( prea ) of 2003 to encourage drug manufacturers to develop and label drugs for pediatric use .

bpca offers manufacturers incentives to conduct pediatric - specific research .

prea requires certain pediatric use information in products' labeling .

the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) reauthorized and strengthened the programs' authorizing legislation .

the fdaaa authority for these two programs is set to end on october 1 , 2012 , unless congress reauthorizes the efforts .

this report describes how and why congress developed these initiatives .

specifically , the report describes why research on a drug's pharmacokinetics , safety , and effectiveness in children might be necessary ; presents why the marketplace has not provided sufficient incentives to manufacturers of drugs approved for adult use to study their effects in children ; describes how bpca provides extended market exclusivity in return for fda - requested studies on pediatric use , and how prea requires studies of drugs' safety and effectiveness when used by children ( appendix b analyzes how bpca and prea evolved from fda's administrative earlier efforts ) ; analyzes the impact bpca and prea have had on pediatric drug research ; and discusses issues , some of which congress considered leading up to fdaaa , that may form the basis of oversight and evaluative activities along with reauthorization efforts in 2012 .

a drug cannot be marketed in the united states without fda approval .

a manufacturer's application to fda must include an "indication for use" section that describes what the drug does as well as the clinical condition and population for which the manufacturer has done the testing and for which it seeks approval for sale .

to approve a drug , fda must determine that the manufacturer has sufficiently demonstrated the drug's safety and effectiveness for the intended indication and population specified in the application .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) allows a manufacturer to promote or advertise a drug only for uses listed in the fda - approved labeling — and the labeling may list only those claims for which fda has reviewed and accepted safety and effectiveness evidence .

once fda approves a drug , a licensed physician may — except in highly regulated circumstances — prescribe it without restriction .

when a clinician prescribes a drug to an individual whose demographic or medical characteristics differ from those indicated in a drug's fda - approved labeling , that is called off - label use , which is considered accepted medical practice .

most prescriptions that physicians write for children fall into the category of off - label use .

in these instances , because fda has not been presented with data relating to the drugs' use in children , no labeling information is included to address indications , dosage , or warnings related to use in children .

faced with an ill child , a clinician must decide whether the drug might help .

the doctor must also decide what dose and how often the drug should be taken , all to best balance the drug's intended effect with its anticipated and unanticipated side effects .

such clinicians face an obstacle: children are not miniature adults .

at different ages , a body may handle a given amount of an administered drug differently , resulting in varying bioavailability .

this occurs , in part , because the rate at which the body eliminates a drug ( after which the drug is no longer present ) varies , among other things , according to changes in the maturation and development of organs .

clearance ( elimination from the body ) can be quicker or slower in children , depending on the age of child , the organs involved , and body surface area .

fda scientists have described how drugs act differently in children , noting the kinds of unsatisfactory results that can occur when drugs are prescribed without the pediatric - specific information .

these results include unnecessary exposure to ineffective drugs ; ineffective dosing of an effective drug ; overdosing of an effective drug ; undefined unique pediatric adverse events ; and effects on growth and behavior .

table 1 includes examples of drugs for which research has identified different responses between children and adults .

such examples illustrate why some in congress believe in the value of conducting studies in children of a drug's pharmacokinetics — the uptake , distribution , binding , elimination , and biotransformation rates within the body .

such studies can help determine whether children need larger or smaller doses than adults .

they can also establish whether doses should differ among children of different ages .

clinicians could use pediatric - specific information in the fda - approved labeling of drugs to help them decide which , if any , drug to use ; in what amount ; and by what route to administer the drug .

furthermore , well - designed , - conducted , and - disseminated studies in children can reveal information about potential adverse events , thereby allowing clinicians and patients' family members to make better decisions .

most drugs — 65% - 80% — have not been tested in children .

manufacturers face many obstacles — economic , mechanical , ethical , and legal — that make them reluctant to conduct these tests .

the market for any individual drug's pediatric indications is generally small , resulting in a relative economic disincentive for manufacturers to commit resources to pediatric testing compared to drugs for adults .

because young children cannot swallow tablets , a manufacturer might have a mechanical hurdle in developing a different formulation ( such as a liquid ) .

the existing ethical and legal requirements encountered in recruiting adult participants for clinical trials may present even greater obstacles when researchers recruit children .

specifically , both the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and fda have issued regulations concerning the protection of human subjects and direct particular attention to the inclusion and protection of vulnerable subjects such as children ( see textbox ) .

recruiting pediatric study subjects can be difficult because many parents do not want their children in experiments .

also , drug manufacturers face liability concerns that include not only injury but difficult - to - calculate lifetime compensation , made even more difficult regarding a child whose earning potential has not yet been established .

congress has offered incentives to manufacturers for pediatric research for two main reasons .

first , doctors prescribe drugs approved for adults despite insufficient pediatric - use studies .

second , enough members of congress have believed that , despite the difficulty in conducting such studies , children could be better served once the research was done .

although congress has designed other laws ( such as those affecting drug development , safety and effectiveness efforts , and general health care and consumer protection ) to promote or protect the health of the entire population ( including children ) , the best pharmaceuticals for children act and the pediatric research equity act ( both sections of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ) authorize programs focused specifically on pediatric drug research .

congress first enacted bpca and prea in late 2002 and early 2003 , respectively .

in 2007 , congress authorized their continuation for another five years .

when presenting information about the pediatric research provisions in law , more than one fda representative has referred to "the carrot and the stick. .

bpca offers a carrot — extending market exclusivity in return for specific studies on pediatric use — and prea provides a stick — requiring studies of a drug's safety and effectiveness when used by children .

this section describes bpca and prea and compares them on key dimensions .

bpca sunsets on october 1 , 2012 , and current law authorizes prea only as long as bpca is in effect .

as congress considers a 2012 reauthorization , issues may emerge that were contentious in the 2007 reauthorization discussions .

those include the relationship between the two laws , cost , measuring the impact of the programs , labeling , and enforcement .

this section reviews each .

congress has repeatedly acted to encourage research into the unique effects of fda - regulated drugs on children — with both "carrots" of financial incentive and "sticks" of required action .

it has also required that drug labeling reflect the findings of pediatric research , whether positive , negative , or inconclusive .

and , most recently , it has given fda broader authority to enforce these requirements .

with each step of legislative and regulatory action over the years , congress and fda have tried to balance often conflicting goals: drug development to address needs unique to children ; tools to encourage drug manufacturers to test drugs for use in children , despite the expense , opportunity costs , and liability risk ; protection of children as subjects of clinical research ; public access to up - to - date and unbiased information on drug safety and effectiveness ; and prioritizing agency activities in light of available resources .

concerns remain , though , about many of the issues discussed during the 2007 reauthorizations — as well as issues presented in the last section of this report .

such issues may surface when reauthorizations are due in 2012 or in the broader context of congressional interest in drug safety and effectiveness .

appendix a .

acronyms appendix b .

current law evolved from earlier attempts before bpca 2002 and prea 2003 , fda attempted to spur pediatric drug research through administrative action .

table b - 1 shows the administrative and statutory efforts to encourage pediatric drug research .

the following discussion highlights selected fda - specific rules and statutes that relate to discussions in this report .

rule on drug labeling: 1979 in a 1979 rule on drug labeling ( 21 c.f.r .

part 201 ) , fda established a "pediatric use" subsection .

the rule required that labeling include pediatric dosage information for a drug with a specific pediatric indication ( approved use of the drug ) .

it also required that statements regarding pediatric use for indications approved for adults be based on "substantial evidence derived from adequate and well - controlled studies" or that the labeling include the statement , "safety and effectiveness in children have not been established. .

despite the 1979 rule , most prescription drug labels continued to lack adequate pediatric use information .

the requirement for adequate and well - controlled studies deterred many manufacturers who , apparently , did not understand that the rule included a waiver option .

fda , therefore , issued another rule in 1994 .

revised rule: 1994 the revised rule attempted to make clear that the "adequate and well - controlled studies" language did not require that manufacturers conduct clinical trials in children .

the new rule described how fda would determine whether the evidence was substantial and adequate .

if , for example , clinicians would use the drug to treat a different condition in children than its fda - approved use in adults , fda would require trials in children .

however , if the drug would be used in children for the same condition for which fda had approved its use in adults , the labeling statement regarding effectiveness could be based on adult trials alone .

in such instances , fda might also require pediatric study - based data on pharmacokinetics or relevant safety measures .

the 1994 rule continued the 1979 requirement that manufacturers include statements regarding uses for which there was no substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness .

it added a requirement that labels include information about known specific hazards from the active or inactive ingredients .

food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 three years later , congress provided another approach to increasing pediatric labeling .

fdama ( p.l .

105-115 ) , incorporating the provisions introduced as the better pharmaceuticals for children act , created a section 505a ( 21 u.s.c .

355a ) in the ffdca: pediatric studies of drugs .

it provided drug manufacturers with an incentive to conduct pediatric use studies on their patented products .

if a manufacturer completed a pediatric study according to fda's written request , which included design , size , and other specifications , fda would extend its market exclusivity for that product for six months .

the law required that the secretary publish an annual list of fda - approved drugs for which additional pediatric information might produce health benefits .

fdama also required that the secretary prepare a report examining whether the new law enhanced pediatric use information , whether the incentive was adequate , and what the program's economic impact was on taxpayers and consumers .

pediatric rule: proposed 1997 , finalized 1998 , effective 1999-2002 also in 1997 , fda issued a proposed regulation that came to be called the pediatric rule .

the pediatric rule mandated that manufacturers submit pediatric testing data at the time of all new drug applications to fda .

the rule went into effect in 1999 , prompting a lawsuit against fda by the competitive enterprise institute and the association of american physicians and surgeons .

the plaintiffs claimed that the agency was acting outside its authority in considering off - label uses of approved drugs .

in october 2002 , a federal court declared the pediatric rule invalid , noting that its finding related not to the rule's policy value but to fda's statutory authority in promulgating it: the pediatric rule may well be a better policy tool than the one enacted by congress ( which encourages testing for pediatric use , but does not require it ) ... .

it might reflect the most thoughtful , reasoned , balanced solution to a vexing public health problem .

the issue here is not the rule's wisdom... .

the issue is the rule's statutory authority , and it is this that the court finds wanting .

