in the past half century , the federal government has run annual deficits in all but six years .

the fy2009 federal deficit swelled to $1.414 trillion , or nearly 10% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , as the economic recession depressed federal revenues and as financial interventions and "automatic stabilizer" income support programs increased federal spending .

the size of recent deficits has added to longstanding concerns regarding the federal government's long - term fiscal condition .

nonetheless , deficit finance can serve as an important policy tool .

this report discusses how deficit finance can help governments manage their economies and how large and persistent deficits can lead to severe economic problems .

public finance theory suggests three reasons for deficit financing by government .

first , governments can prevent sudden changes in taxes by borrowing .

second , debt finance gives governments a powerful macroeconomic policy tool .

third , debt finance can redistribute resources among generations .

government borrowing can shift revenues and expenses into different time periods more easily or more cheaply than households , which allows governments to use deficits to make taxpayers better off by smoothing tax levels .

the federal government can spread the cost of major capital investments over many years by issuing debt in the form of bonds or treasury bills .

deficit finance can spread an especially large cost such as a major war over several generations , or even centuries , and enables governments to keep taxes steady during temporary economic downturns , thus smoothing consumption for households .

government debt that nears unsustainable levels , however , can inject turmoil into an economy , and governments may go bankrupt if they fail to repay what they borrow .

increased government spending financed by borrowing can stimulate economic activity , giving government a fiscal policy tool to counteract recessions .

a countercyclical fiscal policy , in which taxes are cut or spending is increased , can dampen economic fluctuations and limit the depth of economic downturns .

pro - cyclical fiscal policy , in which taxes are raised or spending is cut during recessions , tends to amplify economic fluctuations .

during economic downturns , government revenues fall and expenditures rise as more people become eligible for unemployment insurance and income support programs , causing deficits to increase or surpluses to shrink .

these programs are known as "automatic stabilizers" because deficit spending then provides a countercyclical stimulus to economic activity in the short run without the need for new legislative action .

finally , deficit finance can transfer the benefits of future economic growth to current generations .

continuing real economic growth would allow future generations to experience higher standards of living than previous generations .

deficit finance provides a means of transferring some of those gains to current generations by shifting some costs onto future generations .

if deficits are large or if future economic growth is slow , then deficit finance could lead to a deterioration of living standards over time .

the federal government's response to the recent recession may reflect the aims discussed above .

the government cut some taxes and increased spending to stimulate the economy , while issuing new debt at an accelerated pace .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; h.r .

1 , p.l .

111-5 ) funded programs that are projected to provide $814 billion to stimulate the economy with financial assistance , loans provided to financial firms , and increased government spending including aid given to states .

certain supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) benefits were cut by p.l .

111-226 ( h.r .

1546 ) , which is projected to reduce arra spending in future years .

in 2008 , tax cuts and income tax refunds under president bush also provided economic stimulus and increased personal consumption expenditures .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ; p.l .

110-343 ) , injected capital into key financial markets as part of the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ) .

the "cash for clunkers" program ( p.l .

111-47 ) was created to generate auto sales and improve fuel efficiency .

some argue that the program helped the automobile manufacturers general motors and chrysler remain viable concerns , encouraged greater sales of cars made in the united states , and prevented larger increases in unemployment .

arra extended a first - time home - buyer tax credit that provides up to an $8,000 credit to first - time home buyers for sales occurring between january 1 , 2009 , and april 30 , 2010 .

while these programs stimulated home and auto sales , many suspect that they were more effective in shifting the timing of sales rather than affecting the overall volume of sales .

helping households smooth income , according to standard public finance theory , may justify short - run deficits .

if governments were required to balance their budgets in each fiscal year , so that current spending were constrained by available cash reserves and incoming revenues , then negative economic shocks would require spending cuts or tax increases .

public spending tends to rise during recessions due to the effect of automatic stabilizers , while revenues fall .

thus , such strict balanced - budget requirements would force governments to run a pro - cyclical fiscal policy , which could either strain household budgets via tax increases or force painful cuts in public programs .

governments can also smooth income by maintaining "rainy day" funds or sinking funds .

economists have studied balanced - budget requirements in state governments , as well as budgetary restrictions used by other national governments .

all states except vermont have balanced - budget requirements , though the strictness of those requirements varies .

many studies have found that the strictness of the balanced - budget requirement affects fiscal performance .

inman and bohn found that tight balanced - budget rules cause states to reduce deficits by cutting spending , whereas softer constraints have little short - term effect .

other researchers found that balanced - budget rules force governments to adjust spending and taxes sharply during economic downturns .

fiscal crises may put strains on states and their citizens , but may also force policy makers to face tough fiscal decisions that would otherwise be avoided .

balanced - budget rules also appear to hold down taxes and spending , at least in the short run .

over the longer term , both spending and taxes adjust , although state and local governments with tight budget - balance measures appear to spend less per capita than those with less stringent requirements .

state budget - balance rules may also complicate broader macroeconomic stabilization efforts .

one study found that reductions in state spending in 2008-2009 essentially offset federal stimulus spending .

thus , according to that analysis , while federal spending prevented a steeper decline in economic activity , it did little to counteract a fall in private sector demand .

keynesian economic theories , which call for governments to engage in active demand management through fiscal policy , had enormous influence in post - world war ii economic policy .

governments , according to keynesian theories , can influence economic activity through policies that affect investment and savings ( is ) and liquidity and the money supply ( lm ) .

fiscal policy can influence investment and savings through government consumption and taxation .

monetary policy can affect the money supply and short - term interest rates , which can encourage investment .

the is - lm model , which describes the effects of fiscal and monetary policies , remains a widely used applied macroeconomics policy tool , even as academic research has focused on more mathematically sophisticated modeling approaches .

when interest rates fall to low levels during an economic downturn , banks can become reluctant to lend when perceived lending risks outweigh anticipated gains , while fewer firms and consumers demand new loans .

in such a situation , known as a liquidity trap , a monetary authority such as the federal reserve can do little to expand the money supply .

thus , while the monetary authority can cut short - term interest rates to nearly zero — or even to zero — lower interest rates or other monetary policy initiatives may do little to encourage new consumer spending or business investment .

some monetary policy rules of thumb might in a severe recession indicate that short - term nominal interest rates should be negative .

but a monetary authority cannot induce negative nominal interest rates because firms and households guarantee themselves a zero nominal return by simply holding cash .

when a central bank faces a zero lower bound ( zlb ) on interest rates , fiscal policy tools such as increased government spending or tax cuts , which increase deficits , may be a necessary complement to monetary policy .

some recent research suggests that fiscal stimulus is more effective when the zero lower bound applies .

in better economic times , government spending becomes a less effective means of stimulating economic activity and can elbow out private consumption and investment or worsen trade deficits .

when the economy is not below its potential , fiscal policy expansions are likely to lead to higher inflation or a displacement of private consumption and investment .

when fiscal policy becomes less effective , though , monetary policy can be more effective in either encouraging or restraining economic activity .

in the 1970s , keynesian theories began to face intense intellectual challenges .

the modern debate over keynesian demand management and fiscal policy eventually precipitated into a division between the so - called "salt - water" and "fresh - water" schools of thought .

salt - water macroeconomics is often associated with the coast - proximate departments of economics at berkeley , harvard , mit , ucla , and yale , while fresh - water macroeconomics is often associated with the lake - proximate universities of chicago , minnesota , and rochester .

these differences in views about the proper role of macroeconomic policy have become more prominent during the recent economic recession .

the political business cycle literature provides a theory of economic fluctuations based on politicians' desire to maximize their chances of reelection .

early versions of political business cycle models presumed politicians could fool myopic voters by pumping up government spending before elections .

more sophisticated versions assume voters are rational and not myopic , but are unable to distinguish between sustainable prosperity based on policy and administrative competence from temporary prosperity based on deficit spending .

drazen reviewed the literature and found strong evidence that voters react to economic conditions , but weak evidence that macroeconomic policy is manipulated to sway elections .

the alternation of partisan control of government may explain a persistent tendency towards deficit spending .

several articles in the economics of politics literature , such as alesina and tabellini or persson and svensson , contend the government of the day can constrain its successors' choices by running budget deficits .

if a successor government has different spending priorities , the current government may be tempted to influence future fiscal policies by using debt to change the incentives and constraints facing future decision makers .

such policies are highly unlikely to be as economically efficient as a more consistent fiscal policy .

some argue that budget enforcement legislation , such as pay - as - you - go requirements and discretionary budget caps , may help provide political underpinnings to a more consistent fiscal policy .

some budget analysts contend that mechanisms created by the 1990 budget enforcement act ( p.l .

101-508 ) led to more sustainable fiscal policies .

european union fiscal rules on public deficits and debt - to - gdp ratios , however , may not have led to sustainable fiscal policies in some countries .

while the recent economic recession and past policy choices have led to large deficits in fy2008 and fy2009 , the divergence between government revenues and expenditures is projected to grow .

the "fiscal gap," the estimated magnitude of revenue increases or spending decreases necessary to stabilize the ratio of public debt to gdp over a given time horizon , is one measure of that divergence .

according to cbo extended baseline projections , the "fiscal gap" between government revenues and spending over the next 25 years may be as high as 2.1% of gdp or a total of an additional $7.1 trillion in debt over the next decade .

cbo's alternative fiscal scenario , which many analysts believe gives a more realistic approximation of future policy , puts the 25-year fiscal gap even higher at 5.4% of gdp .

over longer horizons , the fiscal gap is projected to become wider still .

the cbo extended baseline projects the 75-year fiscal gap at 3.2% of gdp , while the alternative scenario puts it at 8.1% of gdp .

the growing fiscal gap signals that younger and unborn generations may bear larger fiscal burdens , which could hinder their ability to achieve a higher standard of living than their parents .

without significant changes in fiscal policy , future generations will face the need to adjust tax rates , or government spending levels , or both , in major ways in order to avoid default .

some economists disagree on the effects of government's ability to smooth economic recessions .

the ability of governments to run deficits can help avoid short - term fiscal crises caused by adverse economic shocks .

long - term deficits can be used to allow older generations to enjoy some of the anticipated fruits of future economic growth .

a government can sustain a debt indefinitely , so long as the size of the debt relative to the size of the economy does not grow without bound .

maintaining a large debt requires large interest payments and can retard economic growth .

thus deficits can serve as a useful tool of economic management in the short run , but also can cause substantial economic damage to the economy over the long term .

