starting in 2006 , commercial migratory beekeepers along the east coast of the united states began reporting sharp declines in their honey bee colonies .

because of the severity and unusual circumstances of these colony declines , scientists named this phenomenon colony collapse disorder ( ccd ) .

current reports indicate that beekeepers in most states have been affected .

overall , the number of managed honey bee colonies dropped an estimated 35.8% and 31.8% in the winters of 2007 / 2008 and 2006 / 2007 , respectively .

preliminary loss estimates for the 2008 / 2009 winter are reported at 28.6% .

to date , the precise reasons for colony losses are not yet known .

this report provides an overview of the importance of honey bee pollination to u.s. agricultural production , especially specialty crops .

it describes the extent and symptoms of ccd and how it differs from previous honey bee colony losses , describing some of the reasons why scientists believe honey bee colonies are being affected by ccd .

finally , the report discusses policy options and actions that congress has taken to address this issue .

honey bees ( apis mellifera ) are the most economically valuable pollinators of agricultural crops worldwide and are the only bee species kept commercially in the united states .

in the united states , bee pollination of agricultural crops is said to account for about one - third of the u.s. diet , and to contribute to the production of a wide range of high - value fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , forage crops , some field crops , and other specialty crops .

the monetary value of honey bees as commercial pollinators in the united states is estimated at about $15 billion annually ( table 1 ) .

some studies report the estimated value of honey bee pollination at as much as $20 billion annually .

this estimated value is measured according to the additional value of production attributable to honey bees , in terms of the value of the increased yield and quality achieved from honey bee pollination , including the indirect benefits of bee pollination required for seed production of some crops .

about one - third of the estimated value of commercial honey bee pollination is in alfalfa production , mostly for alfalfa hay .

another nearly 10% of the value of honey bee pollination is for apples , followed by 6% - 7% of the value each for almonds , citrus , cotton , and soybeans .

overall , pollinator - dependent crops are reported to make up an estimated 23% of total u.s. agricultural production in 2006 , up from an estimated 14% in the 1960s .

a number of agricultural crops are almost totally ( 90% - 100% ) dependent on honey bee pollination , including almonds , apples , avocados , blueberries , cranberries , cherries , kiwi fruit , macadamia nuts , asparagus , broccoli , carrots , cauliflower , celery , cucumbers , onions , legume seeds , pumpkins , squash , and sunflowers .

other specialty crops also rely on honey bee pollination , but to a lesser degree .

these crops include apricot , citrus ( oranges , lemons , limes , grapefruit , tangerines , etc .

 ) , peaches , pears , nectarines , plums , grapes , brambleberries , strawberries , olives , melon ( cantaloupe , watermelon , and honeydew ) , peanuts , cotton , soybeans , and sugarbeets .

in the united states , most pollination services are provided by commercial migratory beekeepers who travel from state to state and provide pollination services to crop producers .

these operations are able to supply a large number of bee colonies during the critical phase of a crop's bloom cycle , when honey bees pollinate a crop as they fly from flower to flower collecting nectar and pollen , which they carry back to the nest .

data from the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) 2007 census indicate that there were about 28,000 operations with 2.9 million bee colonies in the united states .

the majority of these , more than 2 million bee colonies , are reported to belong to commercial migratory beekeepers .

the dakotas accounted for a combined 27% of all bee colonies .

another one - fifth of all colonies are in california ( about 14% ) and florida ( 7% ) .

montana , minnesota , idaho , and texas accounted for 4% - 5% each of all colonies nationwide .

other states with a large number of bee colonies were michigan , oregon , georgia , nebraska , new york , washington , wisconsin , and wyoming , with about 2% each .

although these operations also produce honey for commercial sale , it is their value as crop pollinators that provides the greatest economic impact in the production of food and feed crops .

it is estimated that , each year , more than 2 million bee colonies are rented for u.s. crop pollination .

available limited information indicates that the greatest number of honey bee colony rentals are for apple and almond production , followed by clover seed , cherries , and pears .

about one - half of the nation's honey bee colonies ( an estimated 1.3 million colonies ) are used to pollinate california's current 550,000 acres of almond trees , and this need is projected to grow to 1.5 million colonies by 2010 .

both locally and globally , there are concerns that growth in the availability of honey bee stocks is not keeping pace with growing agricultural demands for pollination services .

rental fees collected by commercial beekeepers for pollination services may vary by crop type , and often tend to be lower for some seed crops and higher for berry and tree crops .

in recent years , pollination fees paid by crop producers have increased .

for example , fees paid by california's almond industry have risen from a reported $35 per colony in the late 1990s to about $75 per colony in 2005 .

more recent estimates of fees for pollinating almond trees are even higher , at $150 per colony or more .

among the reasons for higher pollination fees are expanding almond acreage and relatively high honey prices , but also fewer available honey bees for pollination due , in part , to colony declines and bee mortalities .

starting in the last three months of 2006 , a seemingly new phenomenon began to occur based on reports of an "alarming" number of bee colony losses and die - off along the east coast .

by the end of 2006 , beekeepers on the west coast also began to report "unprecedented" losses .

available estimates indicate that beekeepers in 35 states have been affected ( figure 1 ) .

because of the severity and lack of precedent , scientists coined a new term , colony collapse disorder ( ccd ) , for this phenomenon .

much of the current research on ccd is being conducted by scientists at usda's agriculture research service ( beltsville bee laboratory ) , pennsylvania state university , the university of montana , and the pennsylvania and florida departments of agriculture , among others .

many of these researchers also participate in the ccd working group , which includes bee alert inc. , the florida and pennsylvania departments of agriculture , pennsylvania state university , and usda .

up - to - date information is regularly posted to the website of the mid - atlantic apiculture research and extension consortium ( maarec ) , which represents beekeeping associations in new jersey , maryland , delaware , pennsylvania , and west virginia .

during the 110 th congress there were three house subcommittee hearings on honey bee colony declines and concerns about ccd .

the house subcommittee on horticulture and organic agriculture held two hearings: one in march 2007 and a second in june 2008 .

the subcommittee on fisheries , wildlife , and oceans of the house committee on natural resources held a hearing in june 2007 on the role of pollinators in ecosystem health , which also addressed concerns about bee colony declines .

in the senate , in april 2008 , chairwoman barbara boxer and other members of the senate environment and public works committee hosted a briefing on pollinators and their role in agricultural security .

policy options discussed at these congressional hearings and briefings focused on the need for increased federal funding for multi - disciplinary research and monitoring to document changes in pollination reserves , as well as additional technical support and assistance for beekeepers .

additional research funding would help support usda's research efforts and those at its laboratories located in arizona , louisiana , maryland , texas , and utah .

other recommended options included expanding crop insurance to include beekeepers and honey producers ; providing a one - time payment for incurred losses ; improving existing usda conservation programs to better prevent habitat loss and sustain wildlife populations ; emphasizing the importance of pollinator diversity and sustaining wild and native pollinator species ; developing or improving existing federal and state best management practices for beekeepers ; improving regulatory enforcement to prevent misuse of agricultural chemicals ; and continuing the current marketing loan program for honey .

in may 2008 , congress enacted the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) , which , among other things , provided additional funding for research and conservation programs addressing honey bees and pollinators .

the law reflects provisions that were included in both the house - and senate - passed versions of the farm bill , which addressed honey bees and pollinators as part of their conservation , specialty crop , research , and miscellaneous title provisions .

the conservation title of the 2008 farm bill included language that broadly encourages habitat development and protection among the administrative requirements for native and managed pollinators under usda's conservation programs ( section 2708 ) , and ensures that usda's conservation technical assistance includes standards that account for native and managed pollinators ( section 2706 ) .

these provisions could broaden the focus of usda's farm conservation programs to include pollinator habitats and habitat improvement among their goals , as well as require usda to review its conservation practice standards with respect to managed and native pollinators .

the research title of the 2008 farm bill identified pollinator protection among its so - called high - priority research and extension areas ( section 7204 ) .

it provided for research and extension grants ( 1 ) to survey and collect data on bee colony production and health ; ( 2 ) to investigate pollinator biology , immunology , ecology , genomics , and bioinformatics ; ( 3 ) to conduct research on various factors that may be contributing to or associated with colony collapse disorder and other serious threats to the health of honey bees and other pollinators , including parasites and pathogens of pollinators , and the sublethal effects of insecticides , herbicides , and fungicides on honey bees and native and managed pollinators ; ( 4 ) to develop mitigative and preventative measures to improve native and managed pollinator health ; and ( 5 ) to promote the health of honey bees and native pollinators through habitat conservation and best management practices .

for this provision , the 2008 farm bill authorized appropriations for grants at $10 million annually for fy2008-fy2012 .

the research provisions also directed usda to increase its capacity and infrastructure to address colony collapse disorder and other long - term threats to pollinator health ( including hiring additional personnel ) and to conduct research on colony collapse disorder and other pollinator issues at usda's facilities .

annual appropriations were authorized at $7.25 million ( fy2008-fy2012 ) , with another $2.75 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) for honey bee pest and pathogen surveillance .

the 2008 farm bill also directed usda to submit an annual report to congress on its response to ccd , indicating that the report should investigate the cause ( s ) of honey bee colony collapse and recommend appropriate strategies to reduce colony loss .

other provisions in the 2008 farm bill supported pollinators through the bill's crop insurance and other disaster assistance provisions .

one such provision identifies honey farms as possible beneficiaries of the bill's supplemental agricultural disaster assistance ( section 12033 ) ; another provision provides contracts for additional policies and studies to carry out research and development regarding insurance policies that cover loss of bees ( section 12023 ) .

since enactment of the farm bill , usda has created the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) .

this program , administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) , provides disaster assistance for honey bee producers .

the elap provides emergency relief to producers of livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish to aid in the reduction of losses because of disease , adverse weather , or other conditions , such as blizzards and wildfires .

eligible honey bee producers — those who incur physical losses of honey bees and honey bee hives because of colony collapse disorder — must provide documentation , and / or a certification that the loss of honey bees was due to ccd , from one or more of the following: registered entomologist ; cooperative extension specialist ; and / or land grant university .

additional information on this program is available at usda's website and at state county fsa offices .

the 2008 farm bill also contained provisions that generally support honey production .

these include , for example , provisions pertaining to the national honey board ( section 10401-10402 ) ; provisions covering rates for marketing assistance loans for certain commodities , including honey ( section 1202 ) ; and provisions covering certain nutrition title provisions ( such as section 4231 ) .

usda released its initial action plan for addressing ccd in july 2007 .

usda's action plan focuses on improving coordination and redirecting existing resources and research for mitigation and prevention , including education and outreach , as well as expanding research and diagnostic resources to prevent future losses , working with the land grant universities .

it also coordinates activities across three usda agencies: the agricultural research service ( ars ) , the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , and the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) .

usda's focus on expanded research is consistent with the approach taken in the most recently introduced congressional bills and with recommendations by the american honey producers association and the american beekeeping federation .

under the plan , usda would ( 1 ) conduct surveys and collect data on bee health ; ( 2 ) analyze bee samples for pests , disease - causing pathogens , pesticide exposure , and other factors ; ( 3 ) conduct controlled experiments to identify factors affecting bee health , including potential causes of colony collapses ; and ( 4 ) develop best management practices and guidelines to improve general bee health and reduce susceptibility to colony collapses and other disorders among both honey bees and non - apis bees .

aspects of usda's action plan were presented at a hearing before the subcommittee on fisheries , wildlife , and oceans of the house committee on natural resources in june 2007 .

in june 2009 , usda published its 2007-2008 progress report on ongoing and intended future research efforts related to honeybees and ccd , following on the action items in its action plan .

as outlined in usda's progress report , prior study of the numerous possible causes for ccd has led researchers to further examine the hypothesis that ccd may be "a syndrome caused by many different factors , working in combination or synergistically. .

accordingly , future study will "focus increasingly on combinations and synergistic effects of factors in causing ccd. .

the progress report provides detailed information on the status of ongoing research under each of the four elements of usda's action plan , including survey and ( sample ) data collection , analysis of existing samples , research to identify factors affecting honey bee health , and mitigative and preventive measures .

the progress report is available at usda's ccd website at http: / / www.ars.usda.gov / is / br / ccd / ccd_progressreport.pdf .

funding for honey bee and ccd research at usda's ars has increased , following enactment of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) and also fy2009 and fy2010 appropriations ( p.l .

111-8 and p.l .

111-80 , respectively ) , which , among other things , provide additional funding for research and conservation programs addressing honey bees and pollinators .

total ars funding for honey bee and ccd research has been as follows: fy2007 — $7,675,000 fy2008 — $7,798,000 fy2009 — $8,290,000 fy2010 — $9,790,000 ( includes $1.5 million increase for ccd research ) ars also has an "area - wide project on bee health," which consists of temporary funding of $670,000 in fy2008 and will continue for at least four additional years at approximately $1 million per year .

additional funding is available to usda's nifa , and includes combined research on honey bees , funding specific to ccd and bee health , and funding for various research labs and grants .

recently , emerging issues grants were awarded to penn state university and the university of georgia to study the effects of pesticides , pathogens , and miticides on pollinator populations .

