within the past year increased discussion has occurred about rates and patterns of land conversion in the northern plains , particularly conversion from native grass or rangeland into crop production .

this discussion is driven by two concerns: ( 1 ) that this type of land conversion is becoming more widespread in the dakotas and in the northern plains generally , and ( 2 ) that land conversion is reducing the amount of land available for both wildlife habitat and grazing .

these concerns are expressed most strongly by advocates of wildlife protection and enhancement .

those concerned fear that landowners in the region will continue to convert grasslands to crop production , especially to corn production , as long as commodity market prices remain high .

this report examines these concerns , focusing on the available evidence , which is limited , about rates and patterns of land conversion .

it also presents additional questions on policy options that would respond to these concerns , most likely in the context of the 2007 farm bill .

the issue of increased land conversion activity in the northern plains over the past year , with a particular focus on central south dakota , has been brought to the attention of congress through field hearings and constituent correspondence .

constituents who object to visual indications that more land is being converted to crop production view the continuing pressure to convert land in the future , and at a rapid rate , as the larger issue .

on the other hand , agricultural production is market driven .

landowners are responding to higher market prices by converting grassland into crop production .

rising corn prices and the emergence of national policies that encourage additional production of crops as a domestic source of energy have created additional incentives for landowners to convert to crop production .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) currently estimates that 90.5 million acres nationwide will be planted in corn during the 2007 crop year .

these acres will come from several sources , including land that had been planted to other crops and idled land that will be returned to production ; some portion of the expansion may occur in grassland that is converted to crop production , though exactly how much remains to be seen .

many forces that may be encouraging the conversion of land in the northern plains have intensified recently .

the recent push for renewable energy from biofuels and rising market prices for corn since august 2006 , as a growing portion of this crop is used as a bioenergy feedstock , appear to be providing economic incentives to convert land .

conversion also may be facilitated by advances in biotechnology that have led to the availability of herbicide resistant crop varieties , and the promise of drought - resistant varieties in the near future .

some assert that the availability of federal farm commodity support programs is providing farmers with additional incentives to convert land from native grass into commodity crops , protecting them from full financial loss if a crop should fail .

this is discussed more under "" issues for congress ," below .

those concerned about conversion maintain that the major undesirable results that accompany land conversion in the northern plains are ( 1 ) native old - growth grasslands being disrupted or destroyed ; ( 2 ) wildlife and nesting habitat being lost ; and ( 3 ) land rental rates and sale prices increasing rapidly .

some landowners and producers would likely counter that this increase in production is resulting in ( 1 )  increased economic activity in rural communities ; ( 2 ) lower federal spending resulting from high commodity prices ; and ( 3 ) meeting the demand for a renewable domestic fuel supply .

this report does not analyze these possible impacts , primarily because they are so recent that few data are available .

questions concerning changing land use , the amount of acreage involved , and where the change is located have focused either on the northern plains generally , or more specifically on parts of south dakota where conversions appear to be concentrated .

significant conversions also may be occurring in other areas of the country .

however , this report discusses only conversions in the northern plains .

data are limited , mainly because not enough time has passed to document these very recent trends in periodic surveys .

however , anecdotal evidence from numerous sources suggests grassland conversion to cropland is being observed more frequently in the northern plains than in previous years .

the actual amount of grassland converted to cropland ( also referred to as "busting out" land ) in the northern plains is difficult to ascertain .

following are summaries of three data sets that evaluate land use activities and changes at a state or regional scale .

each offers varying vantage points on this topic from different time frames , locations , and data collection and compilation techniques .

this section discusses three policy issues and their potential impact on land conversion rates and patterns: ( 1 ) the influence of commodity programs ; ( 2 ) expiring conservation reserve program contracts ; and ( 3 ) the effect of conservation compliance ( sodbuster and the administration's proposed sodsaver ) .

while several data sources point to continuing rates of growth in land conversion of grassland to cropland in the northern plains , these sources have limitations , leaving basic questions only partially answered .

these questions include exactly where the conversions are occurring ; why they are occurring ; and at what rate they are occurring .

some are concerned about the future pattern of land conversion in this region , what environmental impact these changes will have , and what changes in public policy might slow , halt , or reverse this process .

speculation varies , based on assumptions about many factors , including future market prices for commodities ( eg , continued high commodity prices ) , technological advances ( eg , new processes for producing bioenergy and genetic modifications that allow high - value crops to be planted in new areas ) , and commodity policies ( eg , the availability of crop insurance ) .

the following questions are intended to help shape and inform future discussions of conversion .

general conversion questions: what types of land are being converted to cropland ? .

are conversions limited to the northern plains , or are they occurring elsewhere as well ? .

are the driving forces behind conversion generally the same by location , and how will those forces affect rates and locations of conversion in the future ? .

other agricultural users: is land conversion raising grazing land rental prices ? .

what changes are associated with conversion that can be distinguished from more general trends in land rental rates for the remaining grazing land and for cropland ? .

wildlife and hunting: is conversion having an adverse effect on wildlife and thereby diminishing hunting opportunities for upland game birds ? .

is the quantity or quality of hunting opportunities being reduced by conversion rates and patterns , or by rising rental rates ? .

would any adverse effects on wildlife be reversible if the cropland in the northern plains is returned to grasslands ; if so , how rapidly ? .

technology: what roles are technological advances , including genetic modifications to plants and altered agronomic practices , playing in encouraging some of the conversion to cropland ? .

technological change continues to improve productivity from year to year ; how does the potential for increased production affect rates and patterns of conversion , if at all ? .

sustainability: the northern plains have a history of frequent drought that increases as one moves from east to west .

what are the effects of conversion on soil moisture ? .

what sustainable production techniques , such as longer cropping cycles , are possible with grassland conversion in the region ? .

how do concerns about dealing with dry conditions affect economic incentives to convert grassland to cropland ? .

economics: how would various farm bill proposals alter the marginal value of converting land from grass to crops ? .

can changes in policies and programs alter the point at which a landowner decides that it is more profitable , worth the effort, and worth the risk to make the conversion economically feasible , given current market conditions ? .

what are the fiscal implications of providing crop insurance and / or disaster payments to marginally cropped land ? .

how would making converted grasslands ineligible for crop insurance or ineligible for all commodity program benefits affect landowner decisions ? .

will converted lands be more susceptible to catastrophic losses and lead to greater public pressure for disaster assistance ? .

conservation compliance and proposed changes: currently , sodbuster allows landowners to convert grassland considered to be highly erodible to cropland without any loss of available benefits , if it is farmed following a conservation plan .

do the current conservation compliance requirements slow conversion ? .

are the current sodbuster requirements being enforced , and if so , are they providing disincentives to convert land ? .

the administration's proposed sodsaver would give some producers in the northern plans fewer options when making decisions , and the loss of those options could ( theoretically ) reduce the value of their land .

what effect , if any , would this proposed policy change have on the rate or pattern of land converted , and on the land market , in this region ? .

