as the economy of the people's republic of china ( prc ) has boomed in the past decade , raising living standards for many of its citizens , incidents of social protest also have risen dramatically .

economic development has brought about or exacerbated a host of economic , social , and political problems , including income inequality , environmental pollution , official corruption , and ambiguous property rights , which in turn have fueled grievances .

to a large extent , the prc government at various levels has been unable or unwilling to mitigate social anger .

social unrest in china affects ongoing u.s. policies promoting human rights and democracy in china and broader considerations about engagement with the prc .

in the short run , social unrest raises many human rights concerns toward china among many u.s. policy - makers .

in the medium term , ongoing u.s. efforts to promote civil society and the rule of law in the prc could help people and institutions in china to develop legal understanding and procedures for expressing and resolving social grievances .

in the longer run , social unrest may adversely affect the business climate for foreign investment , the pace of economic reforms ( including compliance with wto commitments ) , political stability in the prc , and chinese foreign policy .

some analysts argue that the challenges of addressing grievances and controlling protests will encourage beijing to seek a stable international environment in which it can focus on domestic economic growth and social stability .

others argue that social unrest may cause beijing to adopt a more hostile international posture .

social unrest could also undermine the power of the chinese communist party , although current indicators do not point to a significant loss of political control .

policy options for congress include monitoring the situation , increasing assistance for local democracy , civil society , and rule - of - law programs in china , supporting a free press and independent judiciary , or pressing the chinese government to respect the rights of protestors and release jailed activists .

according to chinese communist party sources , social unrest grew by nearly 50% from early 2004 through 2005 , culminating in a particularly violent episode in december 2005 .

china's public security ministry reportedly declared that there were 87,000 cases of "public order disturbance" — including protests , demonstrations , picketing , and group petitioning — in 2005 compared to 74,000 reported cases in 2004 .

in 2003 , the prc government reportedly cited more than 58,000 "major incidents of social unrest" involving an estimated 3 million to 10 million persons , of which 700 , or less than 2% , involved clashes with police , while a hong kong - based labor rights group estimated that the number of labor demonstrations reached 300,000 that year .

the december 2005 clash between villagers and people's armed police ( pap ) in dongzhou village ( shanwei city ) , southeastern guangdong province , in which 3-20 villagers were killed , became a symbol of the depth of anger of those with grievances and the unpredictability of the outcomes of social disputes .

while social unrest has not placed china in imminent danger of widespread political upheaval , it has caused alarm among the communist party leadership and influenced the policy direction of the national government .

economic reforms and growth in china , which took off in the early 1990s , have given rise to a middle class of an estimated 100 million persons as well as a "two - tier" society of haves and have - nots .

many of china's state - owned enterprises ( soes ) , once the principal source of urban employment , have been disbanded , restructured , or privatized , leading to millions of layoffs .

egregious labor abuses have long been reported in the special economic zones ( sezs ) , where foreign - invested companies produce chinese goods for export .

urban development has displaced homes and farmland and created environmental degradation in the countryside .

growing numbers of laid - off soe workers , workers in the sezs , peasants and urban residents who have lost their farmland or homes , and others have engaged in mass protests , some of them violent , often after having exhausted legal channels for resolving grievances .

the poor in china lack not only economic but also political resources .

workers are not allowed to form unions independent of the state - controlled all china federation of trade unions ( acftu ) .

most reported protests , triggered by official unresponsiveness , corruption , violation of citizens' rights and laws , or repressive tactics by authorities , began peacefully .

popular protests also have been further fueled by a growing awareness and understanding of legal rights .

the prc government's efforts to address social unrest have been hampered by tensions between the central and local governments , institutional weaknesses , inconsistent policies , and the inability or unwillingness to undertake fundamental political reforms .

the central government has acknowledged that the grievances of many citizens have been legitimate , and occasionally has corrected local policies that have violated the law or punished local officials for employing excessively violent tactics against protesters .

however , the state has reserved the authority to arbitrarily determine which protest activities are acceptable .

it has not developed adequate institutions that protect human rights , cede political power to social groups , ensure judicial independence , and resolve social conflict .

many small demonstrations have been tolerated , but marching , organizing , and talking to reporters have brought harassment and repression by government authorities .

at the end of 2005 , the central government pledged a number of additional reforms aimed at rural unrest , including better management of land use , strengthening the legal system , protecting farmers' land , raising rural incomes , increasing social spending on health care and education , and abolishing the national tax on farmers .

however , these policies will likely be resisted by local officials whose power remains unchecked and who are desperate to attract investment and prone to corruption .

the prc government , at the national and local levels , has applied a carrot and stick approach , or a combination of appeasement and scare tactics , toward controlling restive social groups .

experts have noted a pattern whereby government authorities allow demonstrations to grow , and even publicly sympathize with protesters , while taking time to identify group leaders .

arrests of activists often take place only after some efforts have been made to mollify aggrieved individuals by meeting some of their demands .

according to reports , public security agents typically use both torture and rewards to extract expressions of wrongdoing or guilt and to pit activists and neighbors against each other .

scare tactics — the use of arbitrary detention and the employ of untrained security agents ( "hired thugs" ) to beat up protest leaders — help to quell further protest activity .

when demonstrations get out of hand , the government strictly controls reporting of them , although in many cases , news leaks through the internet .

news of events in dongzhou spread , despite a blackout on media coverage , through the use of disguised language on the internet , smaller bulletin board sites , and access to english and overseas chinese websites .

according to some analysts , chinese leaders diverge on how to respond to protest activities: one government view regards peaceful demonstrations as a legitimate way to express grievances and emphasizes developing institutions for protecting rights and resolving disputes .

in march 2006 , premier wen jiabao made some conciliatory remarks following the annual national people's congress session regarding the protection of the property rights of farmers .

another view , often associated with president hu jintao , stresses fortifying police forces and cracking down hard on large public demonstrations .

according to some experts , the escalation and vehemence of protests in the past year have convinced some top leaders to take a tougher line , particularly in light of the "color revolutions" that have taken place in post - communist countries .

the december 2005 dongzhou case gave rise to varied government responses .

two weeks after the incident , an editorial in the official english weekly , beijing review , quoted intellectuals in china and hong kong who criticized police methods , prc government policy toward social discontent , and official corruption .

nearly three months later , the guangdong governor suggested that the police commander "made mistakes," most protesters were "innocent," and a few local officials were "corrupt. .

however , he also stated that the shooting was "caused by a small group of criminals. .

the local government promised to "improve social services" for villagers but did not offer any concessions on the disputed construction of the new power plant .

some analysts argue that the prc government's common response to mass demonstrations , which is to appease protesters , punish organizers , and do little about underlying causes — also known as "buying stability" — encourages civil disobedience as the only effective means of winning redress .

many demonstrators in china now express the following mantra: "causing a big disturbance gets you a big solution ; a little disturbance gets you a little solution ; and no disturbance gets you no solution. .

premier wen's remarks in march 2006 regarding the need to protect the "democratic rights" of farmers reportedly bolstered the spirits of many rural protesters .

u.s. efforts to promote the rights or well - being of demonstrators and protesters in china include verbal pressure directed at the central government , sanctions , and piecemeal approaches at the local level .

at the government - to - government level , policy options include pressing the prc government to respect the constitutional rights of protesters and to release rights activists from prison .

on december 15 , 2005 , a bi - partisan group of u.s. congressional leaders submitted a letter to the prc ambassador to the united states , zhou wenzhong , expressing "deep concern" over the shooting incident in dongzhou .

h.con.res .

365 , introduced on march 28 , 2006 , and s.con.res .

88 , introduced on april 7 , 2006 , would urge the prc government to allow civil rights attorney gao zhisheng to continue practicing law and remove all legal and political obstacles for lawyers attempting to defend criminal cases in china .

chinese authorities suspended gao's license after he provided legal assistance for village demonstrators in taishi , guangdong province , falun gong practitioners , house church worshipers , and others .

in addition , the united states bars u.s. exports of crime control and detection instruments and equipment , some of which could be used in the suppression of protests .

the prc government fiercely objects to "foreign interference in china's domestic affairs" and often uses perceived foreign influence as a pretense to repress protest movements with greater severity .

however , the united states , through the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor , continues to fund programs in china related to local elections and the rule of law , including legal education , legal aid , and labor rights .

other options at the local level include promoting the enforcement of corporate codes of conduct in factories that supply u.s. companies and retailers and funding the development of u.s. technologies that enable prc citizens to fully access the internet and censored websites such as the voice of america and radio free asia .

h.r .

4780 , introduced on february 16 , 2006 , would promote freedom of internet expression around the world and particularly in china .

as part of its recommendations to the president and the congress in 2005 , the congressional - executive commission on china urged the united states government to encourage the prc to take further steps to address the causes of social unrest .

these steps include ensuring that village elections are free from government interference , giving chinese citizens the power to enforce constitutional protections , making the judiciary independent , and removing restrictions on the news media and non - governmental organizations .

