the operation of an airport involves many activities that can affect the environment .

in addition to potential impacts to local air and water quality , aircraft noise levels may affect property values or the quality of life of residents in nearby communities .

certain activities or projects to address airport environmental impacts may qualify for federal funding .

for example , in its fy2008 budget , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) requested $354 million to meet the agency's "environmental stewardship" goals .

among other uses , those funds may be spent on projects to abate airport noise impacts ( eg , soundproofing of residential homes , purchases of noise barriers and monitors , and relocation of persons or businesses ) ; to minimize water quality impacts ( eg , funding of projects that would control the discharge of deicing chemicals ) ; and to reduce airport - controllable air emissions ( eg , purchases of alternative fuel vehicles ) .

funds also are authorized for research into new aircraft technology that would reduce noise and air emissions .

funding authorization for faa programs set forth in vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108 - 176 , hereinafter referred to as "vision 100" ) expired at the end of fy2007 .

on february 14 , 2007 , the faa's reauthorization proposal , entitled the next generation air transportation system financing reform act of 2007 ( h.r .

1356 and s. 1076 , hereinafter referred to as "the faa proposal" ) , was introduced by request .

subsequently , reauthorization proposals have been passed by the house ( h.r .

2881 , the faa reauthorization act of 2007 ) and reported by the senate ( s. 1300 ; s.rept .

110 - 144 , the aviation investment and modernization act of 2007 ) .

each bill includes environment - related provisions that would fund projects intended to minimize environmental impacts or help airports comply with regulatory obligations ; fund research , such as new technology that would produce quieter , more fuel - efficient aircraft ; and amend existing environmental regulatory requirements .

to illustrate why airports may need these funds and how they could potentially utilize them , this report provides an overview of the main environmental impacts associated with airport operations: noise , water quality , and air quality .

also discussed are the environmental review requirements of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321-4347 ) and an overview of environmental provisions in proposed legislation to reauthorize faa programs .

this report does not discuss the national or international environmental impacts of aviation in general .

therefore , a discussion of the aviation industry's potential contribution to global warming is not discussed .

however , information about this issue is included in the "for additional information" section below .

in the next 15 years , air travel is projected to grow significantly .

as a result , airport development and expansion projects will likely become increasingly important .

a potential challenge to the completion of these projects is community concern regarding airport environmental impacts .

airport operations involve a range of activities that affect the environment , including the operation of aircraft ; the operation of airport and passenger vehicles , and airport ground service equipment ( gse ) ; cleaning and maintenance of aircraft , gse , and motor vehicles ; deicing and anti - icing of aircraft and airfields ; fueling and fuel storage of aircraft and vehicles ; airport facility operations and maintenance ; and construction .

the environmental impacts of these activities may intensify if an airport is undergoing expansion .

in some cases , before a state or local agency will allow an airport to move forward with an expansion project , the airport authority must agree to implement certain environmental mitigation projects .

community concern regarding environmental impacts has caused projects to be delayed or cancelled .

all airports , regardless of size or location , are regulated to some degree under local , state , tribal , or federal environmental requirements .

many of the environmental regulatory requirements applicable to noise , water , and air quality have been in effect for years — airport managers are accustomed to their compliance requirements .

however , the anticipated growth in air travel has heightened the significance and complexity of some environmental regulatory issues .

also , several new requirements are expected to result in potentially significant changes to airport operations ( in terms of procedural changes and potential investment in infrastructure ) .

the most significant issues include continuing community concern about noise , changes to environmental protection agency ( epa ) regulations applicable to aircraft and airfield deicing operations , changes to epa regulations applicable to oil spill prevention planning , and state and local agency directives to monitor and control air pollution , particularly toxic air pollutants .

each of these issues is discussed below within the context of requirements applicable to noise , water quality , and air quality issues .

primarily , the issues discussed in this report involve activities that are unique to airport operations ( eg , deicing and aircraft noise ) .

environmental compliance requirements commonly applicable to all industrial operations ( eg , waste management , pesticide use , chemical use reporting ) are not discussed in this report .

if an airport project receives federal funding or requires some federal decision ( eg , permit or approval ) , an environmental review of that project is required before it can move forward .

the term "environmental review" is used broadly , but usually refers to the requirement that a federal agency review or consider the environmental impacts of its actions pursuant to the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§ 4321 et seq ) .

a review under nepa results in one of the following: preparation of an environmental assessment ( ea ) if the significance of environmental impacts is uncertain , followed by the issuance of a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) if the impacts are not found to be significant .

preparation of an environmental impact statement ( eis ) if it is certain that a project's environmental impacts are significant .

a determination that a project is categorically excluded from the requirement to prepare an eis or an ea , if it has no significant environmental impact .

as the proponent of the airport project or improvement , the airport authority is responsible for identifying all environmental issues that must be addressed in the nepa documentation .

part of that effort includes analyzing all reasonable alternatives that would meet a project's purpose and need .

for projects requiring an eis , the faa documents the final project decision by issuing a public record of decision ( rod ) .

in addition to documenting the final decision , the rod documents any mitigation efforts that the airport operator is required to implement as a condition for moving the project forward .

the mitigation actions may be stipulated be provisions of local , state , tribal or federal requirements .

although the rod may specify mitigation measures , mitigation is not required under nepa .

nepa specifies a process that the agency must complete to analyze a project's environmental impacts , but it does not dictate the outcome .

that is , nepa does not require an airport to chose the project alternative with the least environmental impacts .

however , within the context of the nepa process , the environmental review may identify environmental compliance requirements that would dictate a certain outcome ( eg , it may identify clean water act requirements that specify that the least environmentally harmful alternative be selected ) .

further , the rod may specify mitigation measures that an airport authority agreed to implement as a condition of gaining local agency or community acceptance of a project — not necessarily a measure required by local , state , tribal , or federal law .

to streamline the nepa process , vision 100 directed the faa to develop an "expedited , coordinated environmental review process" applicable to the aviation project review process for airport capacity enhancement projects at congested airports , aviation safety projects , and aviation security projects .

the coordinated process provides that any environmental review , analysis , opinion , permit , license , or approval issued or made by a federal agency or airport sponsor for such a project must be completed within a time period established by the secretary of transportation , in cooperation with the agencies that participate in the process .

the coordinated process may be delineated in a memorandum of understanding between the secretary and the heads of other federal and state agencies who participate in the process .

further , the act authorizes the faa to define the scope and content of a project's eis and requires all participating agencies to be bound by the purpose and need and project alternatives analysis determined by the secretary of transportation .

on april 28 , 2006 , faa issued order 5050.4b , national environmental policy act ( nepa ) implementing instructions for airport actions .

the order delineates the agency's new nepa policies and procedures , including the streamlining requirements specified in vision 100 .

to address issues associated with air quality , water quality , and community noise impacts , and to assist airport operators with complying with local , state , and federal requirements related to those impacts , the faa proposal and the bills under consideration in the senate ( s. 1300 ) and passed in the house ( h.r .

2881 ) include similar proposals that would provide funding for research into technology or processes that would reduce noise , air emissions , water quality impacts , and energy use ; provide grants for programs or projects intended to mitigate or minimize regulated environmental impacts ; and provide grants or specify regulatory procedures to assist airports in complying with environmental requirements .

s. 1300 and h.r .

2881 also include provisions that would establish certain requirements to reduce noise .

h.r .

2881 includes two unique provisions .

the first ( § 509 ) would require faa , to the maximum extent possible , implement "sustainable practices" in the construction and major renovation of air traffic control facilities in order to reduce energy use and improve environmental performance at those facilities .

finally , each proposal includes provisions seeking to modify the air tour management program , a program designed to regulate commercial air tours over national park units primarily in an effort to mitigate noise and other adverse impacts .

these provisions seek to narrow the scope of this program to park service units where noise or other adverse impacts from air tours have been identified or could become a more substantial issue .

the second ( § 512 ) specifies the sense of the congress with respect to the european union ( eu ) directive extending the eu's emission trading proposal to international civil aviation .

the bill specifies that , by not working through the international civil aviation organization in a consensus - based fashion , the eu directive is inconsistent with the convention on international civil aviation , and that it is antithetical to building international cooperation to address greenhouse gas emissions from aircraft .

federal aviation administration , workshop on the impacts of aviation on climate: a report of findings and recommendations , august 2006 , at http: / / www.faa.gov / regulations_policies / policy_guidance / envir_policy / .

general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) , aviation and the environment: airport operations and future growth present environmental challenges , gao / rced - 00-153 , august 2000 .

general accounting office , report to the subcommittee on aviation , house committee on transportation and infrastructure , aviation infrastructure: challenges related to building runways and actions to address them , gao - 03-164 , january 2003 .

minnesota pollution control agency , "minneapolis / st .

paul international airport environmental activities and the mpca," at http: / / www.pca.state.mn.us / hot / airport.html .

 ( for general information about the environmental compliance process at a specific airport. ) .

national academy of sciences , national research council , committee on aeronautics research and technology for environmental compatibility , for greener skies: reducing environmental impacts of aviation , 2002 , at http: / / books.nap.edu / openbook.php ? .

record_id= 1 0353&page=r1 .

partnership for air transportation noise and emissions reduction ( partner ) , massachusetts institute of technology , report to the united states congress , aviation and the environment: a national vision statement , framework for goals and recommended actions , december 2004 , at http: / / web.mit.edu / aeroastro / partner / reports / congrept_aviation_envirn.pdf .

transportation research board , "special report 272 — airport research needs: cooperative solutions," 2003 , http: / / www.trb.org / news / blurb_detail.asp ? .

id= 1266 .

crs report rl33891 , airport improvement program: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32707 , avoiding gridlock in the skies: issues and options for addressing growth in air traffic , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl33920 , federal aviation administration reauthorization: an overview of selected provisions in proposed legislation , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

