close to 75 million people in 39 states face some risk from earthquakes .

earthquake hazards are greatest in the western united states , particularly in california , but also in alaska , washington , oregon , and hawaii .

earthquake hazards are also prominent in the rocky mountain region and the new madrid seismic zone ( a portion of the central united states ) , as well as in portions of the eastern seaboard , particularly south carolina .

under the national earthquake hazards reduction program ( nehrp ) , the federal government supports efforts to assess and monitor earthquake hazards and risk in the united states .

given the potentially huge costs associated with a large , damaging earthquake in the united states , an ongoing issue for congress is whether the federally supported earthquake programs are appropriate for the earthquake risk .

this report discusses: earthquake hazards and risk in the united states , federal programs that support earthquake monitoring , the u.s. capability to detect earthquakes and issue notifications and warnings , and federally supported research to improve the fundamental scientific understanding of earthquakes with a goal of reducing u.s. vulnerability .

portions of all 50 states and the district of columbia are vulnerable to earthquake hazards , although risks vary greatly across the country and within individual states .

 ( see , for example , the box below describing the august 23 , 2011 , magnitude 5.8 earthquake in virginia. ) .

seismic hazards are greatest in the western united states , particularly in california , washington , oregon , and alaska and hawaii .

alaska is the most earthquake - prone state , experiencing a magnitude 7 earthquake almost every year and a magnitude 8 earthquake every 14 years on average .

 ( see box below for a description of earthquake magnitude. ) .

because of its low population and infrastructure density , alaska has a relatively low risk for large economic losses from an earthquake .

in contrast , california has more citizens and infrastructure at risk than any other state because of the state's frequent seismic activity combined with its large population .

congress authorized the usgs to monitor seismic activity in the united states in the 1990 law modifying nehrp ( p.l .

101-614 ) .

the usgs operates a nationwide network of seismographic stations called the advanced national seismic system ( anss ) , which includes the national strong - motion project ( nsmp ) .

globally , the usgs and the incorporated research institutions for seismology ( iris ) operate 140 seismic stations of the global seismic network ( gsn ) in more than 80 countries .

the gsn provides worldwide coverage of earthquakes , including reporting and research .

unlike other natural hazards , such as hurricanes , where predicting the location and timing of landfall is becoming increasingly accurate , the scientific understanding of earthquakes does not yet allow for precise earthquake prediction .

instead , notification and warning typically involves communicating the location and magnitude of an earthquake as soon as possible after the event to emergency response providers and others who need the information .

some probabilistic earthquake forecasts are now available that give , for example , a 24-hour probability of earthquake aftershocks for a particular region , such as california .

these forecasts are not predictions , and are currently intended to increase public awareness of the seismic hazard , improve emergency response , and increase scientific understanding of the short - term hazard .

in the california example , a time - dependent map is created and updated every hour by a system that considers all earthquakes , large and small , detected by the california integrated seismic network , and calculates a probability that each earthquake will be followed by an aftershock that can cause strong shaking .

the probabilities are calculated from known behavior of aftershocks and the possible shaking pattern based on historical data .

when a destructive earthquake occurs in the united states or other countries , the first reports of its location , or epicenter , and magnitude originate either from the neic or from the regional seismic networks that are part of anss .

other organizations , such as universities , consortia , and individual seismologists may also contribute information about the earthquake after the event .

products such as shakemap ( described below ) are assembled as rapidly as possible to assist in emergency response and damage estimation following a destructive earthquake .

a precise relationship between earthquake mitigation measures , nehrp and other federal earthquake - related activities , such as earthquake research , and reduced losses from an actual earthquake may never be possible .

however , as more accurate seismic hazard maps evolve , as understanding of the relationship between ground motion and building safety improves , and as new tools for issuing warnings and alerts such as shakemap and pager are devised , trends denoting the effectiveness of mitigation strategies and earthquake research and other activities may emerge more clearly .

without an ability to precisely predict earthquakes , congress is likely to face an ongoing challenge in determining the most effective federal approach to increasing the nation's resilience to low - probability but high - impact major earthquakes .

