medicare is a federal program that covers medical services for qualified beneficiaries .

established in 1965 as title xviii of the social security act to provide health insurance to individuals aged 65 and older , medicare has been expanded to include qualified disabled individuals under the age of 65 , persons with end stage renal disease ( esrd ) and persons with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als , or lou gehrig's disease ) .

medicare now consists of four parts ( a - d ) that cover hospitalizations , physician services , prescription drugs , skilled nursing facility care , home health visits , hospice care , and other treatments .

when medicare was created in 1965 , it was the primary payer for all beneficiaries except those receiving coverage through workers' compensation programs .

when medicare acts as the primary payer , it assumes responsibility for a beneficiary's medical bills , up to designated medicare program limits .

if an enrollee has other insurance , the beneficiary , physician , or other supplier can bill that insurance only after medicare is billed to fill in possible gaps in medicare coverage .

medicare is always primary to medicaid , the joint federal - state health insurance program for qualifying low - income and certain disabled beneficiaries .

medicaid pays only after medicare and group health plans have paid .

beginning with the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-499 ; obra ) , congress created the medicare secondary payer ( msp ) program , which spells out specific conditions under which other insurers are required to pay first and medicare is responsible for qualified , secondary payments .

msp is designed to ensure that certain insurers make contractually required payments , reduce medicare expenditures , and extend the life of the medicare trust fund .

the 1980 obra made medicare a secondary payer for medical claims involving non - group health insurance such as liability and no - fault insurance .

in 1981 , congress expanded msp to cover certain medicare beneficiaries in employer - sponsored group health plans .

msp was further refined in the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act ( p.l .

97-248 ; tefra ) of 1982 and other statutes .

 ( see appendix a . ) .

in general , medicare is now the secondary payer for an item or service when payment has been made , or can reasonably be expected to be made , by responsible third - party payers .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

medicare also does not cover services paid for by another government entity , such as the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

msp sometimes is confused with medicare supplement , or medigap , insurance policies , but the two are different .

msp spells out instances where private insurance is primary and medicare coverage is secondary .

medigap policies , by contrast , are private policies that provide supplemental coverage for individuals who rely on medicare as their primary payer .

in certain cases where medicare is the secondary payer but primary payment is delayed , medicare may step in to pay claims , thereby ensuring that beneficiaries do not have a break in coverage .

examples of such so - called conditional payments include cases where medical liability claims are contested in court or where employer plans are slow to make payment .

for example , in a case where a medicare beneficiary is hit by a car , the driver's insurance may be responsible for covering medical bills related to the accident , but payment could be delayed by legal proceedings .

in such a case , medicare can pay outstanding claims until a legal settlement is reached .

medicare is entitled to recover its conditional payments once a beneficiary has received a settlement , judgment , or other award .

msp laws and regulations have reduced medicare spending by an average of about $8 billion a year in recent years , including about $50 billion in savings from fy2006 through fy2012 .

 ( see table 5 . ) .

as congress has expanded the scope of msp , however , businesses and insurers have told lawmakers that the resulting paperwork requirements are onerous and that hhs has been slow to provide a final accounting of conditional payments that must be reimbursed , leading to delays in settling some liability cases .

the american bar association has urged congress to pass legislation to simplify the process for dealing with msp claims for future medical bills in workers' compensation cases .

hhs has responded by increasing the number of workers processing claims and settlements , reorganizing operations , and creating standardized procedures for resolving smaller claims and some workers' compensation cases .

in june 2012 , hhs issued a proposed rulemaking to further expedite processing of certain msp settlements .

on december 19 , 2012 , the house approved h.r .

1845 , the medicare ivig access act .

title ii of the legislation ( the smart act ) creates a new process for resolving msp conditional payment claims to speed up resolution of liability , no - fault and similar cases .

the senate passed h.r .

1845 by unanimous consent on december 28 , 2012 , and president obama signed the measure into law on january 10 , 2013 ( p.l .

112-242 ) .

the law requires hhs to create a password - protected website that beneficiaries and their representatives can access to view information on conditional payments relating to a potential settlement , judgment , or award .

the law makes additional changes to the msp statute and current hhs procedures , including data reporting requirements , appeal rights , use of social security numbers , and statutes of limitations .

 ( see appendix b . ) .

medicare is the primary payer for medicare beneficiaries who are retired , even if they have retiree health insurance coverage through a former employer .

medicare is the secondary payer for certain beneficiaries who are still working ( often referred to as the working aged ) and who are eligible for group health insurance through an employer .

table 2 outlines the main instances when medicare is the primary or secondary payer for those covered by group insurance policies .

items and services furnished by federal providers , a federal agency , or under a federal law or contract are excluded from medicare coverage .

 ( see table 4 . ) .

this includes u.s. military hospitals , the department of veterans affairs ( with some exceptions ) , and research grants , among others .

this exclusion from medicare coverage does not include health benefits offered to employees of federal entities , rural health clinic services , federally qualified health centers , and other exemptions that may be specified by the secretary of hhs .

the federal - state medicaid program , which covers services for low - income and some disabled elderly beneficiaries , is always secondary to medicare .

cms works through outside contractors to coordinate payment of medicare benefits with other types of insurance .

the process is designed to identify insurers and other entities that are primary to medicare ; to collect necessary information to prevent mistaken or unnecessary payment of medicare benefits ; and to recoup medicare payments , including conditional payments , in cases where other insurance is found to be primary .

prior to 2014 , cms used a coordination of benefits contractor ( cobc ) and a medicare secondary payer recovery contractor ( msprc ) to oversee msp payments .

lawmakers , hhs officials , and business executives raised concerns about the efficiency of the system , with several studies , including reviews by the hhs ombudsman , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and the senate homeland security & governmental affairs subcommittee on contracting oversight , identifying issues in the administration of the msp program .

in february 2014 , cms merged the cobc and msprc into a new entity known as the benefits coordination & recovery center ( bcrc ) .

the bcrc and government agencies review information from a variety of sources , including beneficiary questionnaires , social security and internal revenue service ( irs ) databases , and mandatory industry reports .

in addition to the general data reporting requirements , section 111 of the medicare , medicaid and schip extension act of 2007 , ( p.l .

110-173 , mmsea ) requires responsible reporting entities ( rre ) that include group health plans and what cms calls non - group health plans such as liability , no - fault , and workers' compensation insurers , to provide information regarding health insurance status of employees , as well as judgments , payments , or settlements involving medicare beneficiaries .

the information is used prospectively to determine whether medicare is a primary or a secondary payer and retrospectively to collect reimbursement for erroneous payments and conditional payments .

the 2007 requirements were phased in gradually , in response to concerns from businesses and insurers about the possible burden of the law .

the smart act ( p.l .

112-242 ) makes additional changes to section 111 that are intended to speed up the process for estimating conditional payments that must be reimbursed .

 ( see appendix b . ) .

the smart act also eases some requirements that businesses found onerous .

for example , rres that did not comply with the section 111 reporting requirements were subject to mandatory fines of $1,000 per day per violation .

the smart act provides that failure to report a claim under section 111 may carry with it a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day per claim .

when medicare is the secondary payer , a health care provider must first submit a claim to a beneficiary's primary payer , who processes the claim according to terms of the coverage contract .

if the primary payer does not pay the full charges for the service , medicare secondary payments may be made if the service is covered by medicare .

in no case can the actual amount paid by medicare exceed the amount it would pay as primary payer .

any primary payments from a third - party payer for medicare - covered services are credited toward the beneficiary's medicare part a and part b deductibles and , if applicable , coinsurance amounts .

however , if the primary payment is less than the deductible , the beneficiary may be responsible for paying his / her unmet medicare deductibles and coinsurance amounts .

the medicare secondary payment amount is subject to certain limits .

for some services , such as inpatient hospital care , the combined payment by the primary payer and medicare cannot exceed medicare's recognized payment amount ( without regard to beneficiary cost - sharing charges ) .

as one example of how medicare would decide its secondary payment amount for inpatient hospital services , assume that an individual received inpatient hospital services costing $6,800 .

the primary payer paid $4,360 for the medicare - covered services .

no part of the inpatient hospital deductible ( $1,183 for 2013 ) had previously been met .

medicare's gross payment amount , without regard to the deductible , is $4,700 .

as the secondary payer , medicare would pay the lowest of medicare's gross payment amount , without regard to deductible , minus the primary payer's payment — $4,700-$4,360 = $340 ; medicare's gross payment amount minus the medicare inpatient deductible — $4,700-$1,183 = $3,517 ; the hospital charge minus the primary payer's payment — $6,800-$4,360 = $2,440 ; the hospital charge minus the medicare inpatient deductible — $6,800-$1,183 = $5,617 .

in this case , medicare would pay $340 .

the combined payment made by the primary payer and medicare is $4,700 .

the beneficiary has no liability for medicare - covered services , since the primary payer's payment satisfied the $1,183 inpatient deductible .

if medicare's payment amount had been lower than the primary payer's amount , it would not have made a secondary payment .

in other cases , such as physicians' services , the medicare secondary payment amount cannot exceed the lowest of the calculation of the following three options .

for example , assume that a physician charges $175 for a service ; the primary payer's allowable charge is $150 , of which it pays 80% , or $120 ; and medicare's recognized payment amount for the service is $125 , of which it pays 80% , or $100 .

the options are described below: actual provider charge minus the primary payer's allowable charge , adjusted for copayment: $175-$120 = $55 ; medicare's payment amount , adjusted for copayment: .80 x $125 = $100 ; primary payer's allowable charge of $150 is compared to the medicare recognized payment amount of $125 , and the higher of the two ( which in this case is the primary payer's charge of $150 ) minus the primary payer's payment of $120: 150-$120 = $30 .

because medicare's secondary payment is based on the lowest of these three options , medicare would pay $30 .

in some cases , medicare may pay first for a medical claim , and then the bcrc may receive notification or otherwise determine that medicare was actually the secondary payer .

in other instances , medicare will make conditional payments for medical treatment even when it is the recognized secondary payer .

examples include cases when ( 1 ) medicare could reasonably expect payment to be made under a workers' compensation or no - fault insurance claim , but medicare determines the payment will not be paid or will not be made promptly ( within 120 days ) ; ( 2 ) a beneficiary's employer - sponsored plan denies a properly filed claim , in some cases ; or ( 3 ) a properly filed claim is not made due to physical or mental incapacity of the beneficiary .

medicare can also make payments in cases where medicare benefits have been claimed for an injury that allegedly was caused by another person .

medicare will not make conditional payments under the following conditions: ( 1 ) a third - party payer plan alleges that it is secondary to medicare ; ( 2 ) a plan limits payment when the individual is entitled to medicare ; ( 3 ) a plan provides covered services for younger employees and spouses , but not for employees and spouses who are 65 and older ; ( 4 ) a proper claim is not filed , or is not filed in a timely manner , for any reason other than the physical or mental incapacity of the beneficiary ; or ( 5 ) a group health plan fails to furnish needed information to cms to determine whether or not an employer plan is primary to medicare .

medicare must be repaid for conditional payments by the primary payer or anyone who has received the primary payment , if it is demonstrated that another payer , such as a liability insurer , had a responsibility to make a payment .

repayment is expected when a beneficiary receives a settlement or other payment .

in addition to reimbursing cms for past , conditional payments , individuals must protect medicare's interest with respect to future medical bills if they have received , reasonably anticipate receiving , or should have reasonably anticipated receiving , medicare - covered items and services for a medical condition after the date of a settlement or payment based on that condition .

cms suggests , though msp law does not require , that individuals who receive workers' compensation settlements that include payments for future medical expenses create set - aside accounts .

the accounts allocate a share of a settlement to cover future medical bills , thus ensuring that medicare does not pay for services related to a disability or illness that triggered a settlement ( and where workers' compensation or liability insurance would otherwise be primary ) .

set - aside accounts are becoming more common in other liability settlements as well .

cms does not review workers' compensation settlements for current medicare beneficiaries when an award is less than $25,000 in total payments .

however , cms cautions that this threshold is not considered a safe harbor for such accounts and that individuals remain obliged to protect medicare's interests .

cms generally reviews workers' compensation set - asides in cases where an individual is within 30 months of becoming eligible for medicare and the payment over the life of the settlement is more than $250,000 .

for example , a person who is age 63 and is awarded a settlement equal to $25,000 per year to cover medical payments would qualify for review of a set - aside account , based on the fact that he or she would be eligible for medicare at age 65 ( within 30 months ) and would have a life expectancy of more than 10 years ( exceeding the $250,000 threshold ) .

in reviewing the adequacy of set - aside accounts , the workers compensation review contractor ( wcrc ) considers a number of factors including the severity of the underlying illness , life expectancy , and the cost of expected medical procedures .

once a set - aside account has been approved , medicare will not pay for items or services related to the injury or illness until the account has been exhausted .

 ( medicare will cover other , unrelated medical services. ) .

set - aside accounts are not mandatory , and individuals can use other means to ensure that medicare's interests regarding future medical bills are protected .

however , the aba and other lawyers and beneficiaries say that even though the set - asides are not required , they are the best way to receive assurance from cms that medicare's interests have been met and that medicare will not withhold payment for future medical services .

the aba and other businesses and attorneys have criticized cms for not developing formal regulations to guide the set - aside process , instead relying on more informal guidance documents .

in june 2012 cms issued a proposed rulemaking that would provide new options for set - aside accounts .

 ( see " expedited set - aside accounts ." ) .

in addition , lawmakers have introduced legislation to impose formal requirements for handling set - aside accounts , which would remain voluntary .

 ( see " issues for congress ." ) .

the number of workers' compensation set - aside accounts submitted to the wcrc has risen since the section 111 reporting requirements took effect .

the average time for processing an account rose from 22 days in april 2010 to 95 days in september 2011 , according to the gao , though the wcrc has since made progress in clearing up its backlog .

according to cms , msp laws and regulations reduced medicare spending by about $50 billion from fy2006 through fy2012 .

the largest savings came from situations where group health plans acted as primary payers , leaving medicare in the secondary position .

cms is processing a growing volume of claims regarding liability , no - fault , and workers' compensation cases .

cms's annual msp report shows total msp savings of more than $8 billion for fy2011 , increasing from $6 billion in fy2006 .

payments are expected to reach about $8 billion in fy2012 as well .

as shown in table 5 , about half of total savings each year came in cases where group health plans were the primary payers for the working aged and the working disabled .

workers' compensation payments have been the fastest growing part of msp payments .

cms payments to contractors have also increased since the section 111 payments took effect .

according to the gao , payments to the cms contractors were $21 million higher in fy2011 than in fy2008 .

during this time the workload for the cobc rose 176% , the msprc by 102% , and the wcrc by 42% .

while overall savings to medicare appear to have increased , it could take years to determine final dollar amounts given the lag time between filing claims and collecting payments , according to the gao .

during the past several decades , congress has expanded the scope of the msp program in order to ensure that other insurers make contractually required payments , reduce medicare expenditures , and extend the life of the medicare trust fund .

the changes have succeeded in increasing the volume and dollar amount of msp payments reported to cms , but have also resulted in a backlog for msp contractors and created a backlash among businesses , insurers , and attorneys concerned about the time and expense of reporting , delay in cms response and potential fines .

congress in the 2012 smart act addressed some of these issues , by creating a centralized website for conditional claim information and setting tighter timelines for cms action .

 ( see appendix b . ) .

the smart act did not address other issues related to msp that have raised concerns among beneficiaries and industry officials , such as the process for creating set - aside accounts to cover future medical bills .

now that the smart act is law , there could be a new focus on legislation setting out a formal process for creating and reviewing workers' compensation set - aside accounts .

legislation introduced in the 113 th congress , h.r .

1982 , would impose thresholds for review of set - aside accounts ( which would remain voluntary ) ; impose timelines for review , as well as an appeals process ; and allow beneficiaries to set aside a set percentage of certain settlements , or make direct payments to medicare , to cover future medical bills .

in addition , congress will be overseeing implementation of the smart act .

the congressional budget office has estimated that the smart act will result in modest budget savings to medicare .

it remains unclear , whether cms will be able to comply with the law's timelines for calculating and issuing final conditional payments .

during house debate on the measure , lawmakers noted that congress did not provide cms with additional funding to create the required website , or to implement other features of the measure .

appendix a .

selected msp legislation appendix b .

smart act section by section summary of the statute during the 112 th congress , lawmakers approved additional changes to the process for resolving outstanding msp conditional payments .

title ii of p.l .

112-242 , signed into law on january 10 , 2013 , is entitled "strengthening medicare secondary payer rules" ( also known as the smart act ) .

the act's provisions make substantive and procedural changes to the msp statute and current cms procedures , including provisions relating to medicare conditional payments , mmsea section 111 reporting requirements , appeal rights , use of social security numbers , and statutes of limitations .

the new provisions apply to what cms calls non - group health plans such as workers' compensation , no - fault , and liability insurance ( including self - insurance ) plans , but not to employer group health plans .

section 201 of p.l .

112-242 directs cms to make a password - protected website available to medicare beneficiaries , authorized representatives , and "applicable plans" with information on the items and services claimed that relate to a specific injury or incident that forms the basis of a potential settlement , judgment , award , or other payment .

cms must update the conditional payment information ( including provider or supplier name ( s ) , diagnosis codes , date of service , and conditional payment amounts ) on the website in as timely a manner as possible , but not later than 15 days after the date medicare pays a claim .

cms is also required to provide a "timely process" for medicare beneficiaries / claimants and their authorized representatives to resolve discrepancies in downloaded statements of conditional payments from the website .

no administrative or judicial review of this dispute resolution process is provided ; however , beneficiaries would still be able to exercise formal administrative or judicial appeals to contest final conditional payment demands from cms .

a medicare beneficiary or applicable plan may notify cms at any time beginning 120 days before the reasonably expected date of a settlement , judgment , award , or other payment that a payment is reasonably expected and the expected date of payment .

medicare then has a 65-day response period ( 95 days in some circumstances ) in which to post conditional payments on the website .

after the response period , during a prescribed "protected period," a medicare beneficiary / claimant or applicable plan may download a "statement of reimbursement amount" that will constitute the final conditional payment amount recoverable by cms , if certain conditions are met .

regulations implementing the website and dispute resolution requirements of section 201 must be promulgated within nine months of enactment of this statute .

this section also requires the secretary to promulgate regulations ( no specified deadline ) establishing a right of appeal and an appeal process for non - group health plans and their attorneys , agents , or third - party administrators to appeal medicare final conditional payment determinations for which cms seeks to recover from such plans .

an applicable plan must provide notice to medicare beneficiaries of its intent to appeal .

under current msp law , only medicare beneficiaries can file an administrative appeal or federal court action to challenge medicare conditional payment demand amounts .

section 202 requires the secretary of hhs to annually calculate and publish a single threshold amount below which msp re - payment and section 111 of mmsea reporting obligations will not apply .

the threshold amount will apply to settlements , judgments , awards , or other payments arising from liability insurance ( including self - insurance ) , and for alleged physical trauma - based incidents ( excluding alleged ingestion , implantation , or exposure cases ) , and will apply to years beginning with 2014 .

section 203 changes current law under which responsible reporting entities ( rres ) that fail to report certain information regarding medicare claimants to cms "shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of $1,000 for each day of non - compliance with respect to each claimant" to provide that an rre "may" be subject to a fine "of up to" $1,000 per day .

in addition , the secretary must publish a notice within sixty days of enactment soliciting proposals "for the specification of practices for which sanctions will and will not be imposed … including not imposing sanctions for good faith efforts to identify a beneficiary ..." after consideration of submitted proposals the secretary is directed to publish proposed safe harbor practices , and thereafter issue final regulations .

section 204 requires that , no later than 18 months after the date of enactment , the secretary shall modify the reporting requirements for non - group health plans so that such plans are permitted , but not required , to report to cms the social security numbers or health insurance claim numbers of medicare beneficiaries .

the deadline for implementing this modification may be extended by the secretary upon notice to congress that compliance with current deadline would threaten patient privacy or the integrity of the secondary payer program .

section 205 requires that cms file suit for recovery of medicare conditional payments in the non - group health plan context within three years after the date cms receives notice of a settlement , judgment , award , or other payment under section 111 of mmsea .

this provision applies to actions brought and penalties sought on or after 6 months after the date of the enactment of this act .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that the smart act will reduce federal outlays by $45 million from fy2013 to 2022 .

according to the cbo , the bill would allow some liability and other legal settlements to take place more quickly .

at the same time , some settlements might be less than they would have been under previous law because of the tighter timeframe for estimating conditional payments .

interim final rule on conditional payment web portal under section 201 of the smart act on september 20 , 2013 , the secretary promulgated an interim final rule ( ifr ) with a comment period specifying the process and timeline for expanding the current msp web portal .

these regulations became effective on november 19 , 2013 .

highlights of this rule include the following: beneficiaries will continue to have access to details of their claims related to their pending settlements through cms' web portal .

cms intends to implement a multifactor authentication process that will be used for access to the web portal .

when that security feature is implemented , no later than january 1 , 2016 , all authorized parties , including the beneficiary's attorney or other authorized representative or applicable plan , will be able to view claim - specific data via the web portal .

 ( 42 c.f.r .

§411.39 ( b ) . ) .

in order to obtain a final conditional payment amount through the web portal , the beneficiary , his or her attorney or other representative , or an applicable plan is required to provide initial notice of pending liability insurance , no - fault insurance , and workers' compensation settlements , judgments , awards , or other payment to the appropriate medicare contractor .

after receiving such notification , medicare will have 65 days to post its initial claims compilation on the web portal .

cms' response may be extended by 30 days under certain circumstances .

at any time after medicare posts its initial claims compilation , the beneficiary may notify cms once , and only once , through the web portal that he or she is within 120 days of settlement of the claim .

based on these timelines , under the rule , initial notification to the medicare contractor must be provided at least 185 days prior to an expected settlement .

 ( 42 c.f.r .

§411.39 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( i ) . ) .

a beneficiary , or his or her attorney , or other representative may address discrepancies by disputing a claim , once and only once , if he or she believes that improper claims have been included in the claims compilation .

the dispute will be resolved within 11 business days of notice of the dispute and any required supporting documentation .

the beneficiary maintains his or her traditional appeal rights regarding cms' msp recovery determination , once cms issues its final demand .

 ( 42 c.f.r .

§411.39 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( iv ) . ) .

after disputes have been resolved and the beneficiary , his or her attorney or other representative has executed a final "claims refresh" and has obtained confirmation that refresh has been performed ( within 5 business days after the claims refresh request is initiated ) , he or she may download a time and date stamped final conditional payment summary through the web portal .

this form will constitute the final conditional payment amount if settlement is reached within 3 days of the date on the conditional payment summary form .

within 30 days of securing the settlement , the beneficiary or his or her attorney or other representative must submit through the web portal settlement information specified by the secretary , or else the final conditional payment amount will expire .

once the settlement information is received , a pro rata reduction will be applied to the final conditional payment amount and a final msp recovery demand letter will be issued .

 ( 42 c.f.r .

§411.39 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( vi ) . ) .

the rule specifies that obligations with respect to possible future medical items and services are not included in the final conditional payment amounts obtained through the web portal .

 ( 42 c.f.r .

§411.39 ( d ) . ) .

appeals process the smart act required cms to write rules establishing the right of an applicable plan , an attorney , agent , or a third - party administrator acting on behalf of an applicable plan , to appeal a cms determination on msp payments .

cms on december 27 , 2013 , published a proposed regulation laying out an administrative appeals process for liability insurers , no - fault insurers , and workers' compensation laws or plans when medicare pursues a msp recovery claim directly from the insurer .

the appeals provisions of the proposed regulations are designed to address the situation whereby a medicare beneficiary has formal rights and a process to appeal a msp recovery demand , but insurers do not .

imposition of section 111 penalties cms on december 11 , 2013 , published an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking seeking input from the industry and others on how to define specific situations when civil monetary penalties would , or would not , be imposed on insurers for failure to report section 111 msp situations to the federal government .

specifically , cms said in its notice of rulemaking that it is interested in recommendations to define ''noncompliance'' in the context of current law , which allows financial penalties ''... for each day of noncompliance with respect to each claimant ...'' cms in the notice also solicited proposals for determining the dollar amount of any penalty that could be levied on insurers for noncompliance , and how cms might devise a means to determine what actions by an insurer could constitute ''good faith effort ( s ) '' to identify a medicare beneficiary for the purposes of the mandatory reporting requirements .

