as congress weighs comprehensive immigration reform legislation that would likely include strengthened enforcement measures , a significant expansion of guest workers , and perhaps include increased levels of permanent immigration , some question whether the department of homeland security ( dhs ) can handle the increased immigration workload .

in response to growing concerns that the immigration responsibilities and other important duties of dhs were not functioning effectively , dhs secretary michael chertoff announced the second stage review ( 2sr ) to base work on priorities driven by risk .

"strengthen[ing] border security and interior enforcement and reform[ing] immigration processes" is on the six - point agenda driving secretary chertoff's plans to improve dhs management .

currently , three agencies in dhs have important immigration functions: customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , and u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) .

in 2004 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reported that many of the management problems that plagued the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) have carried over to the three dhs immigration agencies .

late in 2004 , the heritage foundation released a report that reached the following conclusion: " ... in consolidating responsibility for border , immigration , and transportation security , dhs actually increased the number of involved agencies to eight and created additional problems that now need solving. .

there are at least three elements to consider when assessing dhs effectiveness in immigration policy: ( 1 ) the immigration laws and regulations , ( 2 ) the management and administration of the agencies charged with implementation of the immigration laws and regulations , and ( 3 ) the funding resources and staffing to carry out these laws and regulations .

as figure 1 illustrates , these three elements drive the effectiveness of immigration policy .

over the years , congress has considered all three elements to address perceived , as well as reported , problems in immigration policy .

this report focuses on the management and administration element .

it analyzes the division of immigration responsibilities in dhs and sets the stage for the current debate over how these functions are organized .

the report opens with a brief history of the federal responsibility for immigration and the legislative debate that led to the transfer of most immigration functions to dhs .

it follows with an organizational chart depicting current immigration functions in dhs .

the major immigration duties of the various dhs agencies are summarized and secretary chertoff's "second stage review" is explained .

an analysis of available immigration workload data offers some perspectives on the work of the three agencies over time .

the report concludes with a summary of key concerns , overarching views , and emerging policy questions .

when secretary chertoff took office in 2005 , he requested a 90-day intensive review of dhs operations .

the results of this study , which he announced in july 2005 , became known as the second stage review ( 2sr ) .

the 2sr produced a reorganization of the department as well as new policy initiatives .

several of the policy initiatives that secretary chertoff offered are targeted to immigration concerns .

among other things , chertoff emphasized a new approach to securing our borders through additional personnel , new technologies , infrastructure investments , and interior enforcement — coupled with efforts to reduce the demand for illegal border migration by channeling migrants seeking work into regulated legal channels ; and restructuring the current immigration process to enhance security and improve customer service .

in reorganizing dhs , the secretary proposed the abolishment of the directorate of bts but retained the three distinct immigration agencies ( cbp , ice and uscis ) , despite calls from some to merge ice and cbp .

all of the policy coordination functions initially performed by the directorate of bts are now to be assumed by a new directorate of policy , which coordinates policies , regulations , and other initiatives on a dhs - wide basis .

broad support for the establishment of a department - wide policy function had been coalescing for months .

in january 2005 , the chair of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , senator susan collins , concluded that "there seemed to be unanimity on the need for an under secretary for policy. .

presumably , this directorate of policy will be responsible for establishing crosscutting immigration policy as well as departmental policy on disaster management and relief ; coastal , port and transportation security ; and related homeland security matters .

as secretary chertoff explained , "seven primary operational components will have a direct line to the secretary" as a result of 2sr .

now cbp , ice and uscis are on an organizational par with the u.s. coast guard , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the secret service , and the transportation security administration .

as figure 4 depicts , the heads of all seven units report directly to the dhs secretary .

it is not yet clear where the new directorate of policy will intersect with these seven primary operational components .

the 2sr organizational structure became effective in october 2005 .

immigration policy is often assessed in terms of numbers of people — whether it be the number of people who become legal permanent residents , the number of people forcibly removed , or the number of people arrested for hiring illegal aliens .

for many years , the ins collected data measuring its workload , known as the performance analysis system ( pas ) .

the dhs office of immigration statistics publishes eight summary measures of these data in monthly statistical reports and in the fiscal year end statistical report .

this section of the report is based on the pas data currently available , in most instances fy1997-fy2005 .

the pas data offer limited measures of immigration workload , some of which may reflect the allocation of staff and resources and others of which may more simply capture the "demand" for certain immigration benefits .

for example , the number of naturalization petitions filed in a given year are largely influenced by demographic , social , and political factors that are external to dhs .

border patrol apprehensions , on the other hand , are shaped by dhs resources and staffing as well as the social , political , and economic factors that drive actual incidence of aliens crossing illegally into the united states .

generally , the workload in adjudication of benefits and services results from external factors , and the workload in enforcement results from a combination of resources , staffing , and external factors .

the following analysis of the pas data — even though performance is part of the name — does not fully capture dhs performance in carrying out its immigration duties .

these data do , however , provide useful snapshots of immigration workload .

the analysis of the pas data hint that dhs is making some progress in managing the immigration caseload , but that the data need further study .

notably , uscis has evidenced a reduction in pending cases ; however , this trend may be as much the result of a lessening in the "demand" for certain immigration benefits as it is of improvements in managing caseload .

similarly , the drop in cbp inspections more likely reflects international travel trends that are shaped more by economic and social phenomena than by cbp policies .

these workload trend lines reveal only a narrow perspective on dhs handling of immigration functions .

qualitative analyses , organizational evaluations , and even anecdotal reports help to flesh out our understanding of this complex system .

this report closes with highlights of specific concerns , a synthesis of overarching issues , and a set of policy questions under consideration .

of the several areas of specific concern , none has been more prominent than the problem of integration between ice and cbp .

during a hearing of the house committee on homeland security in march 2005 , representative christopher cox , then - chairman of that committee , offered the following in his opening statement: [q]uestions remain about whether dhs has organized itself and is managing its immigration enforcement and border security resources in the most efficient , sensible , and effective manner .

anecdotal evidence suggests that the division of customs and immigration inspectors from their related investigative colleagues may be building administrative walls , and hampering cooperation and information sharing , between ice and cbp in critical mission areas .

some observers also have suggested that the distinction between the 'interior enforcement' activities of ice and the 'border security' functions of cbp are artificial constructs that contribute to needless administrative overlaps , programmatic turf battles , mission gaps , and sometimes dangerous operational conflicts .

the media often center on anecdotal criticisms by stakeholders .

one recent article reported that [t]he official said one of the biggest problems is ice and cbp have separate legal offices , which sometimes hand down differing legal interpretations .

disputes also have arisen when ice wants to parole an illegal immigrant in order to pursue investigative leads , but cbp objects , the official added .

advocates of stronger immigration enforcement argue that former customs agents at ice do not fully understand immigration laws and are more interested in performing investigations than enforcing immigration rules .

cable network news shows frequently feature problems along the u.s. border in regular segments .

surveys of public opinion indicate a particular concern with illegal immigration , and a recent survey reported that 61% of respondents disapprove of the administration's handling of illegal immigration .

in addition to the concerns over the integration of ice and cbp and their roles in abating illegal immigration , there is a reported lack of coordination between uscis and ice in the area of fraud and national security investigations .

uscis established the office of fraud detection and national security to work with the appropriate law enforcement entities to handle national security and criminal "hits" on aliens and to identify systemic fraud in the application process .

many of these duties were formerly performed by the ins enforcement arm that is now part of ice .

the gao has reported that "the difficulty between uscis and ice investigations regarding benefit fraud is not new.... as a result , some uscis field officials told us that ice would not pursue single cases of benefit fraud .

ice field officials who spoke on this issue cited a lack of investigative resources as to why they could not respond in the manner uscis wanted. .

moreover , uscis appears to have problems of its own .

the dhs inspector general found problems in the background checks for which uscis is now responsible .

among other findings , the report concluded that uscis's security checks are overly reliant on the integrity of names and documents that applicants submit and that "uscis has not developed a measurable , risk - based plan to define how uscis will improve the scope of security checks. .

it further stated that "uscis's management controls are not comprehensive enough to provide assurance that background checks are correctly completed. .

pending caseloads and processing backlogs continue to plague uscis .

gao concluded that it is unlikely that uscis will completely eliminate the backlog of pending adjudications by the deadline of 2006 .

despite progress in cutting the backlog of pending cases from 3.8 million in january 2004 to 1.2 million in june 2005 , gao speculates that uscis may have difficulty eliminating its backlog for two complex application types that constitute nearly three - quarters of the backlog .

the dispersal of immigration functions across three agencies within dhs means that no one person is responsible for immigration policy and operations in a clear chain of command .

the assistant secretary of ice , the commissioner of cbp , and the director of uscis all serve on a parity under the secretary of dhs .

of these , only the director of uscis has responsibilities that are exclusively immigration .

while the secretary of dhs is the lead cabinet officer on immigration issues , he shares substantial immigration policymaking roles with the attorney general , who oversees the eoir immigration judges and the board of immigration appeals , and the secretary of state , who oversees the bureaus of consular affairs and of population , refugees , and migration .

does this disaggregation of immigration operations sharpen the focus to perform the disparate functions and prompt a sense of responsibility across a broader set of managers — increasing the stakeholders and improving administration of immigration law and policies ? .

or does the dispersal of immigration functions muddy the chain of command and foster competition among priorities — leading to turf battles and thwarting the development of a comprehensive immigration policy ? .

thus far , independent assessments of the functioning of immigration in dhs have centered on problems rather than successes .

these identified problems have ranged from uscis processing of background checks and adjudication of benefits , ice worksite enforcement efforts and information technology systems , and cooperation between cbp and ice on the u.s. - visit system .

indeed , the gao has concluded that many of the management problems that plagued the former ins remain with the dhs organizational structure .

the paucity of evaluations that describe successes resulting from the current organization of immigration functions does not necessarily mean that the restructuring is failing .

by their very nature , inspector general reports tend only to focus on areas that need improvement .

it is possible that some of these problems may be the result of inadequacies in the immigration laws or the funding resources rather than the management of the agencies .

the underlying question remains whether a sufficient length of time has elapsed to assess dhs's efficacy in managing immigration policy .

as congress considers whether comprehensive immigration reform is needed and whether the current configuration of immigration functions in dhs would effectively implement such reform , a series of questions about dhs management emerges .

while not an exhaustive set , the selected questions below express a few of the key organizational issues .

is communication and coordination among cbp , ice , and uscis facile and efficient ? .

by what agency and at what level should legal opinions on immigration law and policy be made ? .

should uscis have a formal enforcement arm to investigate benefit fraud and other adjudications - related violations ? .

should immigration enforcement functions in cbp and ice be merged into one agency ? .

if immigration enforcement functions are merged together , should that agency resemble the statutory framework established by hsa ( bureau of border security ) or a super - agency of u.s. customs and immigration enforcement ? .

would any substantial reorganization of immigration functions — no matter how optimal — be too disruptive to be prudent at this time ? .

ultimately , these questions are addressed in the broader policy making context .

congress weighs at least three elements ( i.e. , the immigration laws and regulations , the funding resources and staffing , and the management and administration ) as it seeks to achieve an efficacious immigration policy .

appendix a .

other federal departments with immigration - related responsibilities department of state visa issuances the department of state's bureau of consular affairs is the agency responsible for issuing visas .

dhs is responsible for formulating regulations on visa issuances and may assign staff to consular posts abroad to advise , review , and conduct investigations .

as discussed earlier , uscis is charged with approving immigrant petitions , a prerequisite for obtaining a visa to become a legal permanent resident .

the documentary requirements for visas are stated in §222 of the ina , with some discretion for further specifications or exceptions by regulation , most notably the visa waiver program .

all aliens seeking visas — prospective immigrants and nonimmigrants — must undergo admissibility reviews performed by dos consular officers abroad .

these reviews are intended to ensure that they are not ineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility , which include criminal , national security , health , and indigence grounds as well as past violations of immigration law .

as a result , all aliens arriving with visas have had background checks .

for the past several years , moreover , consular affairs has been issuing machine - readable visas .

as of october 2004 , all visas issued by the united states use biometric identifiers ( eg , finger scans ) in addition to the photograph that has been collected for some time .

the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) argued that targeting travel is at least as powerful a weapon against terrorists as targeting their money .

the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the united states combine terrorist travel intelligence , operations , and law enforcement in a strategy to intercept terrorists , find terrorist travel facilitators , and constrain terrorist mobility .

p.l .

108-458 establishes a visa and passport security program within the bureau of diplomatic security at dos to target and disrupt individuals and organizations at home and in foreign countries that are involved in the fraudulent production , distribution , or use of visas , passports , and other documents used to gain entry to the united states .

refugees and migration the bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) has primary responsibility for formulating policies on population , refugees , and migration , and for administering the united states international refugee assistance and admissions programs .

prm monitors u.s. contributions to international and nongovernmental organizations that assist and protect refugees abroad .

it oversees admissions of refugees to the united states for permanent resettlement in coordination with dhs and the u.s. department of health and human services .

prm also plays an important role in setting u.s. migration policy .

according to its official statements , prm works closely with dhs , the department of labor , the international organization on migration ( iom ) , the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , and other relevant international organizations to advance u.s. migration policy goals .

"one of the bureau's key strategies for advancing effective and humane migration policies is to support and participate in regional migration dialogues , such as the regional conference on migration. .

department of justice immigration courts the role of the executive office of immigration review ( eoir ) is to administer and interpret federal immigration laws and regulations through the immigration court proceedings , appellate reviews , and administrative hearings in individual cases .

there are three main components to eoir: the board of immigration appeals , the office of the chief immigration judge , and the office of the chief administrative hearing officer .

these judges and courts decide cases of eligibility , inadmissibility , deportation or removal , asylum appeals , and requests for relief from deportation .

complaints are brought by the dhs , the office of special counsel for immigration - related unfair employment practices , or private individuals , as prescribed by statute .

at various points over the years , legislation had been introduced to create statutory authority for eoir within doj .

title xi of hsa provided statutory authority for eoir and located it in doj .

the placement of eoir sparked some interest during the debate over hsa , and the decision to keep these duties in doj enables the attorney general to retain a very important role in interpreting immigration law and policy .

immigration - related employment discrimination doj's office of the special counsel for immigration - related unfair employment practices investigates and prosecutes charges of immigration - related employment discrimination .

in 1986 , congress prohibited discrimination on the basis of legal alien status or national origin in hiring , firing , and recruitment or referral for a fee in §102 of the immigration reform and control act .

the special counsel for immigration - related unfair employment practices also offers grants for public education programs on the rights afforded potential victims of employment discrimination and the responsibilities of employers under the anti - discrimination provisions of the ina .

attorney general since the codification of the ina in 1952 , the law placed the administrative authority to interpret , implement , enforce , and adjudicate immigration law almost exclusively with the attorney general .

with the transfer of nearly all immigration functions to dhs , however , §103 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the ina has been amended twice to clarify the respective authorities newly obtained by the secretary of homeland security and retained by the attorney general .

while the law now places primary responsibility for enforcing and administering immigration law in the united states with the secretary of homeland security , it still apparently allows the attorney general to retain a significant amount of authority to enforce , administer , and interpret immigration law .

much of this authority derives from his role overseeing eoir .

department of health and human services communicable diseases the centers for disease control ( cdc ) in the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) take the lead in protection against foreign nationals arriving with communicable diseases .

a medical examination is required of all aliens seeking to come as legal permanent residents ( lprs ) and refugees , and may be required of any alien seeking a nonimmigrant visa or admission at the port of entry .

an immigration inspection includes a determination of whether the alien is inadmissible due to a health - related condition .

the diseases that trigger inadmissibility in the ina are acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( aids ) and those communicable diseases of public health significance as determined by the secretary of hhs .

refugee resettlement and unaccompanied minors the office of refugee resettlement is within the administration for children and families in hhs .

since its establishment by the 1980 refugee act , this hhs refugee resettlement program administers an initial transitional assistance program for temporarily dependent refugees and cuban / haitian entrants .

the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) makes victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons eligible for federally funded or administered benefits and services to the same extent as refugees .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) also transferred the responsibility for the care and custody of unaccompanied alien children to the hhs office of refugee resettlement .

department of labor labor certification the division of foreign labor certification in the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for ensuring that foreign workers do not displace or adversely affect working conditions of u.s. workers .

dol handles the labor certifications for permanent employment - based immigrants , temporary agricultural workers , and temporary nonagricultural workers as well as the simpler process of labor attestations for temporary professional workers .

the u.s. employer , rather than the prospective worker who is foreign , is responsible for completing the foreign labor certification process .

currently , foreign labor certification is one of the "national activities" within the employment and training administration .

worker protections dol's wage and hour division is responsible for administering and enforcing worker protections provided in several temporary foreign worker visa categories .

the wage and hour division's primary duties include the minimum wage , overtime , and child labor provisions of the fair labor standards act ; the family and medical leave act ; the migrant and seasonal agricultural worker protection act ; and the prevailing wage requirements of the davis - bacon act and the service contract act .

appendix b. excerpt from becoming an american: immigration and immigrant policy the executive summary of the u.s. commission on immigration reform's 1997 report to congress offered the following recommendation to restructure ins: the commission considered a range of ways to reorganize roles and responsibilities , including proposals to establish a cabinet - level department of immigration affairs .

after examining the full range of options , the commission concludes that a clear division of responsibility among existing federal agencies , with appropriate consolidation of functions , will improve management of the federal immigration system .

as discussed below , the commission recommends a restructuring of the immigration system's four principal operations as follows: 1 .

immigration enforcement at the border and in the interior of the united states in a bureau for immigration enforcement at the department of justice ; 2 .

adjudication of eligibility for immigration - related applications ( immigrant , limited duration admission , asylum , refugee , and naturalization ) in the department of state under the jurisdiction of an undersecretary for citizenship , immigration , and refugee admissions ; 3 .

enforcement of immigration - related employment standards in the department of labor ; and 4 .

appeals of administrative decisions including hearings on removal , in an independent body , the agency for immigration review .

the commission believes this streamlining and reconfiguring of responsibilities will help ensure coherence and consistency in immigration - related law enforcement ; a supportive environment for adjudication of applications for immigration , refugee , and citizenship services ; rigorous enforcement of immigration - related labor standards to protect u.s. workers ; and fair and impartial review of immigration decisions .

appendix c. reorganization plan modifying the immigration enforcement functions as dhs was forming , the administration provided the following explanation of the reorganization that created cbp and ice: ( a ) rename the "bureau of border security" the "bureau of immigration and customs enforcement. .

as required by the act , this bureau will be headed by an assistant secretary who will report directly to the undersecretary for border and transportation security .

this bureau will comprise immigration naturalization service ( ins ) interior enforcement functions , including the detention and removal program , the intelligence program , and the investigations program .

at the same time , pursuant to this modification , the interior enforcement resources and missions of the customs service and the federal protective service will be added to this bureau .

the mission of the bureau is: 1 .

to enforce the full range of immigration and customs laws within the interior of the united states ; and , 2 .

to protect specified federal buildings .

the assistant secretary will: 1 .

establish and oversee the administration of the policies for performing the detention and removal program , the intelligence program , and the investigation program functions as are — ( a ) transferred to the under secretary for border and transportation security by section 441 of the act and delegated to the assistant secretary by the undersecretary for border and transportation security ; or ( b ) otherwise vested in the assistant secretary by law .

2 .

advise the under secretary for border and transportation security with respect to any policy or operation of the bureau that may affect the bureau of citizenship and immigration services established under subtitle e of the act , including potentially conflicting policies and operations .

 ( b ) rename the "customs service" the "bureau of customs and border protection. .

this bureau will be headed by the commissioner of customs and will report to the under secretary for border and transportation security .

the bureau will contain the resources and missions relating to borders and ports of entry of the customs service , the ins , including the border patrol and the inspections program , and the agricultural inspections function of the agricultural quarantine inspection program .

the commissioner will: 1 .

establish and oversee the administration of the policies for performing the border patrol and inspections program functions as are — ( a ) transferred to the under secretary for border and transportation security by section 441 of the act and delegated to the commissioner by the under secretary for border and transportation security ; or ( b ) otherwise vested in the assistant secretary by law .

2 .

advise the under secretary for border and transportation security with respect to any policy or operation of the bureau that may affect the bureau of citizenship and immigration services established under subtitle e of the act , including potentially conflicting policies and operations .

