avian influenza , or "bird flu," is a contagious virus that normally infects only birds but occasionally crosses the species barrier to infect humans .

in 1997 , a particular strain of avian influenza , the h5n1 virus , infected 18 people in hong kong , killing 6 of them .

since mid - 2003 , more than 258 human h5n1 cases have been diagnosed worldwide , causing more than 154 deaths .

according to the world health organization , of the few avian influenza viruses that have crossed the species barrier to infect humans , the h5n1 virus has caused the largest number of cases of severe disease and death in humans .

the h5n1 virus is alarming because , if it mutates into a form that easily infects many humans , it has the potential to cause a deadly "pandemic," or a global disease outbreak in humans .

in the 20 th century , there were three pandemics , in 1918 , 1957 and 1968 , that killed millions of people worldwide .

on november 1 , 2005 , the bush administration issued a report entitled the "national strategy for pandemic influenza," which described the federal government's plan to address the potential outbreak of avian influenza .

the report explained: it is impossible to know whether the currently circulating h5n1 virus will cause a human pandemic .

the widespread nature of h5n1 in birds and the likelihood of mutations over time raise our concerns that the virus will become transmissible between humans , with potentially catastrophic consequences .

if this does not happen with the current h5n1 strain , history suggests that a different influenza virus will emerge and result in the next pandemic .

this fear of a global flu pandemic has compelled many countries to prepare for the threat by stockpiling antiviral drugs and attempting to develop vaccines against the disease .

according to the bush administration , these countermeasures are "the foundation of our [influenza virus] infection control strategy. .

the president's plan proposes to spend $1 billion to build a national reserve of antiviral medications such as tamiflu and relenza to help contain or suppress a pandemic outbreak .

as of june 2007 , the nation's "strategic national stockpile" ( sns ) contained 36 million courses of antiviral medications , with a goal of having 50 million courses anticipated to be warehoused in the federal stockpile by the end of 2008 .

the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) has worked with state governments to facilitate the purchase of more than 12 million treatment courses by the states as of june 2007 , with a goal of obtaining 31 million courses for their respective stockpiles by december 2008 .

hhs secretary michael leavitt has explained that the "ultimate goal is to stockpile sufficient quantities of antiviral drugs to treat 25% of the u.s .

population. .

in addition to stockpiling existing antiviral drugs , the u.s. government is promoting the development of new antiviral drugs to combat influenza .

for example , the federal government in january 2007 awarded a four - year contract of over $100 million for the development of a new influenza antiviral drug that may be quickly administered to treat persons with severe influenza .

the threat of compulsory licensing ( or imposing other legal limitations on roche's patent rights ) may have played a role in persuading roche to enter into the sublicensing agreements with third parties to produce tamiflu in greater quantities .

while the concern over the then - limited supply of tamiflu has largely been addressed by roche's substantial manufacturing expansion , the issue of intellectual property rights potentially conflicting with public health needs may again arise in the future .

therefore , this report will now examine the ways in which a patented drug's production may be increased , either without a patent holder's consent or with the patent holder's cooperation .

the primary legal mechanisms to accomplish permissible encroachment upon a patent right include ( 1 ) compulsory licenses under a government's statutory authority to issue them ; ( 2 ) compulsory licenses pursuant to an international treaty that grants this right ; and ( 3 ) voluntary licensing agreements negotiated between the patent owner ( or patent licensee ) and third parties .

this report addresses each of these options in turn .

should the h5n1 virus , or some other avian influenza strain , cause a human pandemic , antiviral drugs will likely play a critical role to help prevent infection and to relieve the flu symptoms of those infected .

the tamiflu supply shortage in 2005 had sparked public debate concerning the practicality and morality of protecting intellectual property rights during a possible health crisis , which can directly affect the availability and affordability of medicine for populations in dire need of it .

however , because roche has since reached sublicensing agreements with several manufacturing partners that have significantly increased production of tamiflu to satisfy global demand for the drug , the concern about intellectual property rights hindering preparations for pandemic influenza has largely subsided .

