the federal government has statutory obligations to regulate interstate commerce and securethe united states against terrorism .

therefore , congress has a strong interest in federal regulationsand programs related to hazardous chemicals security .

since september 11 , 2001 , legislators,government agencies , and industry have been working to prevent terrorist attacks involvinghazardous chemicals .

their goal is to ensure the continued availability of such chemicals forcommercial use while reducing the risk of their exploitation by terrorists .

large quantities of hazardous chemicals are found in commercial facilities , marinetransportation , rail transportation , and highway trucking .

 ( 1 ) to date , congressional attention has focused largely on the securityof hazardous chemicals transported by rail or tanker trucks , or stored at commercial facilities nearpopulated areas .

as the nation's rail , truck , and chemical facility policies mature , congress isreviewing federal policies related to marine transportation of hazardous chemical cargo .

 ( 2 ) in the 109th congress , forexample , h.r .

2651 would establish or increase penalties for criminal or terrorist activities aroundports and marine vessels .

s. 1052 includes provisions to increase general port security , includingports in foreign countries .

in response to the overall security environment , congress is likely to seeka broader understanding of hazardous chemical marine shipments and efforts to secure them .

this report provides an overview of hazardous chemicals marine transportation in the unitedstates .

the report discusses the general risks from such marine transportation in the homelandsecurity context .

it focuses on many of the hazardous chemicals with the greatest potential to affectthe public in a terrorist attack and the marine vessels that carry such chemicals .

it summarizesfederal statistics on the hazardous chemical marine shipments in u.s. waters , including shipmentvolumes by type of chemical and port location .

it provides a brief overview of relevant u.s.maritime security regulation .

it raises security policy issues associated with these shipments,including risk uncertainties , security resources , and security effectiveness .

the report concludes witha discussion of marine chemicals security as part of the nation's overall chemical security strategy .

marine shipments of hazardous chemical cargo are potentially attractive terrorist targetsbecause these chemicals are acutely toxic or highly combustible , and are shipped in large volumes .

they may represent a serious threat to human life and physical infrastructure if intentionally releasednear populated areas .

hazardous chemical marine vessels are also part of two "criticalinfrastructures" identified by the bush administration - - the chemicals and transportationsectors .

 ( 4 ) for thesereasons , the protection of hazardous chemical shipments passing through u.s. waterways and portsis an important component of u.s. homeland security strategy .

although security experts widely acknowledge that marine shipments of hazardous chemicalsmay be attractive terrorist targets , no marine vessel carrying hazardous chemicals has been used byterrorists in an attack on civilians .

nonetheless , marine accidents involving such shipments in theu.s .

and abroad have demonstrated their potential to impact nearby communities .

foreign terroristsalso have successfully attacked other types of marine vessels overseas .

as discussed later in thereport , intelligence suggests that terrorists may have both the interest and capability to executehazardous chemical shipping attacks in the united states .

homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) directs federal homeland securityactivities to focus on terrorist attacks that could cause "catastrophic health effects or mass casualtiescomparable to those from the use of a weapon of mass destruction. .

 ( 22 ) for purposes of thisreport , hazardous chemical cargo is chemicals carried aboard a commercial marine vessel that , ifaccidentally released or combusted , could , under certain circumstances , pose a catastrophic hazardto the general public .

typically , such hazards could include poisoning , asphyxiation , chemicalburns , or thermal burns .

in some cases , a single chemical could present a combination of thesehazards .

numerous federal standards identify potentially hazardous chemicals .

with respect topublic security , relevant standards are promulgated by the department of transportation ( dot ) , thecoast guard , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the army corps of engineers ( ace ) maintains statistics of marine commerce in u.s. waters .

these statistics may be used to estimate the marine shipping volumes of epa / rmp chemicals .

 ( see appendix 3 for a description of the ace database and its limitations. ) .

according to the acestatistics , a subset of the epa / rmp chemicals are transported through u.s. waters in significantquantities .

table 1 summarizes the total u.s. waterborne shipments of these chemicals by thedot's general hazard category .

as the table shows , over 48 million tons of epa / rmp chemicalspassed through u.s. waters in 2003 , the most recent year for which data are available .

thesehazardous chemicals accounted for 2% of total u.s. waterborne cargo tonnage .

table 1: 2003 u.s. waterborne tonnage of epa / rmphazardous cargo sources: 49 c.f.r .

â§ 173.2a ; army corps of engineers ; epa ; crs analysis .

note that dotdivisions are subcategories within a class .

many types of marine vessels may transport hazardous cargo in bulk .

these vessels havedistinct construction and operating characteristics depending upon the quantities and physicalproperties of the cargoes they are designed to carry .

cargo vessel characteristics are an importantsecurity consideration .

they determine , in part , the physical vulnerability of such vessels to accidentor deliberate attack , as well as the potential consequences of an accident or attack .

as figure 2 shows , over 67% of epa / rmp hazardous marine cargo in 2003 was shipped in tankers ( liquefiedgas or chemical parcel ) , or self - propelled liquid chemical barges .

an additional 29% was shippedin non - self - propelled liquid chemical barges .

container ships , dry cargo barges , and other vesselscarried 4% of such cargo .

this section will review the characteristics of each of these vesselcategories .

figure 2: marine shipments of epa / rmp chemicals by vesseltyp .

the public hazards associated with epa / rmp hazardous cargo in a given setting areproportional to volume .

accordingly , it is informative to compare the volumes of hazardouschemicals present on marine vessels to volumes of the same chemicals in other modes oftransportation and in stationary storage facilities on land .

marine shipments of epa / rmp hazardous chemicals either originate or terminate in u.s.ports .

in some cases , port facilities serve as transportation hubs for temporary storage and transferof hazardous cargo to rail tank cars or truck tankers .

in other cases , port facilities may be industrialplants that receive hazardous marine cargo directly for use in industrial processes , such aspetrochemical refining , water treatment , and fertilizer production .

some port facilities producehazardous cargo .

transportation and industrial facilities are more prevalent in some ports thanothers , so total marine shipments of epa / rmp chemicals may vary significantly from port to port .

likewise , shipments of specific epa / rmp chemicals vary across ports .

because security hazardsmay be related to both the volume and specific type of epa / rmp cargo moving through a givenport , it may be helpful to examine the relative concentration of epa / rmp hazardous marineshipments through u.s. ports .

the coast guard is the lead federal agency assigned to promote u.s. maritime security,including vessel and port security .

among other duties , the coast guard tracks , boards , and inspectscommercial ships approaching u.s. waters .

a senior coast guard officer in each port oversees thesecurity and safety of vessels , waterways , and many shore facilities in the geographic area .

in pursuit of its mission to protect life , property , and the marine environment , the coastguard has a history of special concern for ships and barges carrying hazardous cargo .

coast guardsafety and environmental protection regulations have long specified how vessels carrying such cargomust be constructed and operated , how hazardous cargo should be transferred at waterfront facilities,and what procedures should be used to respond to accidental cargo releases .

 ( 55 ) compliance with thesesafety regulations could help mitigate the damage from a terrorist attack , for instance , by minimizingthe amount of cargo released , and might also help deter an attack .

prior to 9 / 11 , however , the coastguard had only limited regulations directed specifically at terrorism ; existing marine anti - terrorismlaw was primarily concerned with cruise ships .

 ( 56 ) the coast guard's maritime security regulation has since beenexpanded .

securing hazardous chemicals against terrorist attack is a priority in u.s. homeland securitypolicy .

given the large quantities of such chemicals found aboard marine vessels on u.s. waterwaysand in u.s. ports , it is apparent that maritime security of chemical cargo is necessarily included inthis priority .

although congress and the coast guard have put in place new maritime securitymeasures since 9 / 11 , several policy issues related to hazardous marine cargo may warrant furthercongressional attention .

the most significant concerns are risk uncertainty , resource availability,and security effectiveness , although other issues have also emerged in recent policy discussions .

this report shows that marine shipments of epa / rmp hazardous chemicals are comparablein volume to quantities stored at large chemical plants , and are typically many times larger thanshipments in individual rail or highway tankers .

marine vessels carrying hazardous chemicals oftenpass near populated areas along u.s. waterways and through the largest and most commerciallyimportant u.s. ports .

available studies and anecdotal evidence suggest that these shipments maybe attractive terrorist targets and , if successfully attacked or used as a weapon , could causecatastrophic injuries among the general public .

both government and industry have taken numerous steps to try to improve maritime securityof hazardous chemical cargo .

the mtsa gives the coast guard clear and far - ranging authority overthe security of hazardous marine shipping .

in its efforts to fulfill this legislative mandate , the coastguard is continuing to evolve its security activities .

as oversight of the federal role in marinechemicals security continues , congress may raise questions concerning terrorism risk uncertaintyand efforts by federal agencies and the private sector to rigorously evaluate that risk .

congressionalpolicy makers may also analyze whether the coast guard , other government agencies , and theprivate sector have sufficient resources to secure hazardous chemical cargo commensurate with thatrisk and whether current security measures will be effective against a terrorist attack .

since a marineattack is possible even under tight security , evaluating the emergency response capabilities of coastalcommunities exposed to chemical shipping hazards may be of interest as well .

in addition to these specific issues , congress may assess how the various elements of u.s.hazardous chemicals marine security fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect the publicfrom hazardous chemicals and cargo .

bulk quantities of hazardous chemicals are found in marinevessels , in rail and highway tankers , and in chemical facilities on land .

as noted earlier in thisreport , the same physical shipment of a chemical may pass sequentially through all these sectors .

balancing the nation's chemicals security resources across these sectors is a policy challenge becausemarine transportation , land transportation , and chemical facilities fall under different homelandsecurity authorities and regulations .

limited vulnerability and consequence information , especiallyfor marine transportation , complicates this problem by making it difficult to compare terrorism riskscenarios across sectors , even for the same chemical hazard .

without such a comprehensiveperspective on hazardous chemical risks , security analysts may have difficulty identifying whichchemicals assets to protect and how well to protect them with the limited security resourcesavailable .

likewise , diverting marine resources away from safety to enhance security might furtherreduce terror risk , but increase overall risk , if safety programs become less effective as a result .

reviewing how these security priorities and activities fit together to achieve common goals couldbe an oversight challenge for congress .

source: 49 c.f.r .

â§ 173.2a .

note that dot divisions are subcategories within a class .

sources: 40 c.f.r .

â§ 68 , 49 c.f.r .

â§ 173.2 .

the army corps of engineers ( ace ) collects , processes , and archivesdetailed marine commerce statistics through its waterborne commerce statisticscenter ( wcsc ) .

these statistics are used by the ace primarily to plan new capitalprojects and manage existing projects .

the ace maintains separate domestic andforeign commerce databases .

the domestic database records domestic and foreignvessel trips and tonnages by commodity for u.s. ports and waterways .

the foreigndatabase records waterborne commerce between the u.s. and foreign countries byu.s .

port , foreign port , foreign country , commodity group , and tonnage .

vessel typesinclude dry cargo ships and tankers ; barges ( loaded and empty ) ; fishing vessels ; towboats ( with or without barges in tow ) ; tugboats ; crew boats and supply boats tooffshore locations ; and newly constructed vessels from the shipyards to the point ofdelivery .

vessels remaining idle during a monthly reporting period are also reported.under federal law , vessel operators must report domestic waterborne commercialmovements to the ace .

 ( 95 ) .

the ace waterborne commerce databases were not developed to support thetype of chemical - specific analysis presented in this report .

however , they may beused for that purpose subject to certain significant limitations and caveats .

at therequest of crs , the ace provided its best estimates of epa / rmp cargo statisticsderived from the available data .

based on a review of more limited shipping andhazardous chemicals data from other sources , crs believes the ace estimates aresufficiently accurate to warrant inclusion in this report .

however , the values reportedhere should be viewed strictly as estimates , with the following key caveats .

cargo classification .

the acedatabases identify cargos using two sets of standardized commodity codes - - aninternal wcsc code , and the united nations ( un ) international standard code .

insome cases , these commodity codes do not consistently or uniquely correspond to theindividual hazardous chemicals in the epa / rmp list , which are identified by theirchemical abstract service ( cas ) registry numbers as assigned by the americanchemical society .

such inconsistencies arise either from commodity aggregation ordifferences in definition .

crs has attempted to identify and correct for theseinconsistencies to the extent possible through comparison of wcsc and un codes,and consultation with classification experts .

for example , the wcsc systemclassifies lng and lpg under the same 5-digit code ( 34000 ) .

using lng trade datafrom the department of energy , crs was able to separate the lng and lpgvolumes for this report .

nonetheless , shipment estimates reported for a number ofother epa / rmp chemicals likely include some volume of other chemicals not on theepa / rmp list .

alternatively , shipments of certain epa / rmp chemicals may beincluded in the shipment totals for a similar epa / rmp chemical .

 ( 96 ) cargo volumes .

as noted earlierin this report , chemicals cargo vessels may load or unload partial cargoes at multiplelocations over the course of a single shipment .

the ace data report the movementof cargo at each of these loading and unloading points , but cannot report the totaltonnage of cargo actually carried aboard a vessel at any time .

data quality .

the acewaterborne commerce databases contain millions of records .

like any database ofthis size , errors in data classification , entry , and processing may appear in summarystatistics .

furthermore , crs's data request involved new and complex queries of theace databases .

the ace employs a rigorous internal review process for dataanalysis and reporting to minimize the infiltration of such errors into its analyticproducts .

nonetheless , crs identified inconsistencies in the ace estimates whichthe ace was able to correct .

it is possible , however , that additional , dataquality - related errors have escaped both the notice of the ace and crs .

the ace waterborne commerce databases contain detailed commercialinformation about private companies .

this report includes only summary estimatesof chemicals shipping data and does not associate shipping data for any specificchemical with any named vessel or operating company .

ace data at the level ofindividual shipments , vessels , or operators is considered privileged information notfor public release under 18 u.s.c .

â§ 93.905 .

crs products are not prepared forgeneral public distribution .

