a key element of the 1990 clean air act ( caa ) amendments ( p.l .

101-549 ; 42 u.s.c .

§§7661-7661f ) was the comprehensive permit program established in title v of the act .

it was added to the caa to enhance compliance by detailing for each covered facility all the emission control requirements to which the facility is subject .

previously , an industrial source's pollution control obligations — ranging from emission controls and monitoring to record - keeping and reporting requirements — were scattered throughout numerous , often hard - to - find provisions of state plans or various federal regulations .

while approximately 35 states or localities had operating permit programs before 1990 , they varied considerably , and few were as comprehensive as the new title v program .

adding these provisions to the caa was controversial , and implementation , too , has generated controversies .

congress's intent in creating the operating permits program was to " ( 1 ) better enforce the requirements of the law by applying them more clearly to individual sources and allowing better tracking of compliance , and ( 2 ) provide an expedited process for implementing new control requirements. .

benefits of the air permit program were expected to include clarification of pollution control requirements , simplification of procedures for modifying a source's control obligations , augmenting state resources through permit fees , and enhancing states' ability to administer other significant new caa responsibilities , such as the air toxics and acid deposition programs .

this report describes the statutory background of the title v program and the status of implementation , in terms of federal approval of state and local permitting authorities' programs and permit issuance .

regulatory actions by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to limit emissions of greenhouse gases that will have implications for title v permits are reviewed .

it also discusses broad policy issues identified by various stakeholders , including program complexity , costs and permit fees , and inconsistencies due to a lack of sufficient federal guidance .

prior to the 1990 amendments , the caa required individual permits only for construction of new or modified industrial sources of air pollutants .

existing sources did not have to obtain permits unless they were subsequently modified and increased their air emissions .

title v , which was modeled after a similar program in the clean water act , expanded the number of sources requiring federal permits by stipulating that all major pollution sources and other designated sources must obtain operating permits , which permitting agencies will use to ensure compliance with the caa .

operating permits are now an important tool in the overall compliance and enforcement aspects of the caa , because permits contain the plans and schedules for sources to reach attainment with provisions of the act , plus emission limitations and monitoring requirements .

further , they are enforceable , meaning that epa , states , or citizens may take action to require a source to achieve compliance with the terms of its permit .

epa estimates that nearly 15,500 industrial sources are subject to title v. these specifically include major sources , defined in the caa as stationary facilities that emit or have the potential to emit 100 tons or more per year of any regulated pollutant or combination of pollutants , and sources subject to the act's acid rain provisions .

title v also covers: sources in nonattainment areas that emit as little as 10 tons per year of volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) , depending on the region's nonattainment status ; sources subject to new source performance standards ( nsps ) ; regulated sources of air toxics emissions ( any source that emits more than 10 tons per year of an individual hazardous pollutant or more than 25 tons per year of any combination ) ; and sources required to have new source or modification permits under title i of the act .

permits compile in a single document all of the enforceable emission limitations and standards , plus inspection , monitoring , compliance certification , and reporting requirements for the source , but they are not intended to change or alter the existing , underlying requirements or add any substantive requirements .

permits generally contain these elements: emissions limitations and standards to assure compliance with all applicable requirements ; monitoring , record keeping , and reporting ; fee payments ; and an annual certification by a responsible official of the source .

they are issued for five - year periods and must be renewed thereafter .

title v is intended to be primarily a state - run program .

it provides two incentives in this regard: ( 1 ) permitting agencies are able to use permit fees collected from sources to run their permit programs and ( 2 ) epa will implement a federal operating program if a state fails to do so .

in many cases , states delegate to local programs the responsibility for implementing the operating permits programs .

for example , 34 local authorities implement the permit program in california , rather than a single state agency .

in other locations ( for example , tennessee , arizona , washington , and idaho ) , local authorities implement the program in parts of a state , and the state regulatory agency has responsibility elsewhere .

permitting agencies are required to collect permit fees sufficient to cover the cost of the permit program , and the fees may be used only for administering the program .

the act requires that the fee schedule be set so as to collect from all sources , in the aggregate , not less than $25 per ton of each regulated pollutant to cover all reasonable ( direct and indirect ) costs of administering the program .

regulated pollutants include vocs , national ambient air quality standard pollutants except carbon monoxide , and pollutants regulated under the hazardous air pollutant and nsps provisions of the act .

epa issued regulations to implement the permit program requirements in july 1992 ( 40 c.f.r .

part 70 ) , seven months after the statutory deadline .

the part 70 rules cover the minimum elements of state permit programs .

rules promulgated in july 1996 and amended in 1999 ( 40 c.f.r .

part 71 ) cover federal permitting on indian reservations and in any state that fails to adopt or implement an approvable title v program .

while state and local agencies primarily implement the title v program , the caa provides for epa oversight of permitting programs and gives epa the right to review permit applications and object to proposed title v permits .

defining the parameters of this oversight has been a source of tension among epa , states , and industry .

one overarching issue has been the question of developing permits with sufficient flexibility to allow for the fact that industrial sources often change their operations ( thus affecting air emissions ) in response to marketplace signals , and they want to be able to do so quickly without needing a revised permit for every such change .

the public also has an important role in the permitting process , because citizens may submit comments and request a hearing on draft permits .

further , under caa section 505 ( b ) , any person may petition epa to object to issuance of a permit , and section 502 ( b ) ( 6 ) requires that there be an opportunity for judicial review in state court of final permit actions .

judicial review may be sought by the applicant , persons who participated in the public comment process , and any other person who could obtain judicial review of such actions under state laws .

the part 70 regulations were challenged by environmentalists , states , and industry , mostly over details concerning permit revisions .

in response , in 1994 , epa proposed modifications intended to address some of the biggest issues .

those proposed changes were not widely accepted by states and industry , however , and epa took additional steps to streamline the permit programs .

since 1994 , epa has worked with states , industry , and environmentalists to reach consensus on key issues and has issued and re - drafted several regulatory proposals but has not finalized major modifications to part 70 .

the focus of efforts to revise the rules has been on how to streamline aspects of the regulations concerning permit modifications and revisions .

according to epa officials , the 1992 regulations give states ample flexibility to write permits that allow for minor operational changes by industry and to process permit modifications .

still , efforts to revise those rules have been driven by concerns of many permitting authorities and industrial sources that the current rules do not allow sufficient flexibility .

one issue that has been particularly contentious concerns the procedures and amount of public review required for relatively minor modifications at emissions sources .

at issue have been the definition and criteria for facility changes that are neither so minor that little or no review will be required , nor clearly so environmentally significant that full epa review and public comment will be appropriate .

epa continued internal and external discussions on revising the part 70 rules for some time , but by early 2005 , agency officials apparently had ceased these activities .

however , in 2009 , the obama administration finalized a rule announced as one of the bush administration's final regulatory actions .

called the flexible air permit rule , it clarifies existing regulations concerning how industry can make changes to facilities without having to obtain a new permit .

it is intended to reaffirm opportunities for accessing operational flexibility under current regulations , while ensuring existing levels of environmental protection .

during the lengthy consideration of possible part 70 rule changes , epa issued guidance in the form of white papers to address some implementation issues that had been raised , such as permit revisions , epa's role in reviewing permits , administrative complexity , etc .

the first was issued in 1995 ( concerning streamlining to reduce costs and paperwork ) , and the second in 1996 ( concerning overlapping federal and state requirements ) .

a third white paper , concerning options for operational flexibility , was drafted in mid - 2000 , but was criticized by environmentalists and some state officials and was not issued ( instead , epa issued the flexible air permit rule in 2009 , as discussed above ) .

in addition , epa has issued some formal guidance on specific implementation issues .

under the caa , all states and territories were to submit operating permit programs by november 15 , 1993 .

once a state or locality's program was approved by epa ( within one year ) , major industrial sources had one year to submit permit applications to the state or local authority , and permitting agencies had three years to issue permits .

as of june 1997 , epa had approved permit programs for all 114 submissions by states , local agencies , and territories .

in part because of regulatory and program approval delays , state and local agencies were slow to begin issuing title v permits .

in early 1998 , epa surveyed states and epa regions and found that only about 2,100 permits had been issued , compared with an estimated 11,000 that should have been issued .

in march 1999 , epa proposed an ambitious goal of resolving the permit backlog by the end of 2000 .

permit issuance increased , but it continued to fall far short of the statutory deadlines and epa's goals .

as of march 2001 , 57% had been issued .

while there were potential consequences for permitting authorities that did not get program approval by epa ( i.e. , the possibility of federal takeover , which epa initiated in a few cases but did not impose ) , there were no real consequences or penalties for industrial sources that did not receive title v permits due to state and local agencies' delays .

the principal consequence was a delay in attaining the policy objectives intended by congress when it established the title v program .

a 2002 epa inspector general ( ig ) report criticized epa and state and local agencies over the program's continuing problems .

the ig noted that , as of december 31 , 2001 , 30% of required permits had not been issued , and only 4 state and 17 local agencies had issued all of their title v permits .

key factors delaying the issuance of permits included insufficient state resources , complex epa regulations and limited guidance , and conflicting state priorities , the ig reported .

a consequence of those delays was that the benefits that congress intended the permit program to achieve have not been realized , according to the ig's analysis .

according to epa , as of january 2008 — 12 years after the first program approvals — 99% of all original permits required for title v sources had been issued .

after that initial process , the ongoing tasks of permit reissuance ( required after five years ) and modification have become the focus of most permitting authorities' attention .

according to epa , nationally , every year about 100 new sources are required to obtain initial permits , and about 3,000 sources are required to obtain renewal permits .

most stakeholders agree that at least some of the objectives and benefits identified by congress when it enacted the title v program in 1990 have been achieved: incorporating applicable requirements in one document that consolidates duplicative and redundant requirements is beneficial to regulatory agencies , the public , and regulated sources .

establishment of a funding mechanism provides resources to state and local permit programs .

source compliance assurance systems — driven by improved understanding of compliance requirements , obligations on corporate officials to certify compliance and report deviations , and a strengthened penalty / enforcement mechanism — have improved .

public participation has improved at various stages of the permitting process .

at the same time , there also has been widespread dissatisfaction with the program as it exists , due to program complexity ; confusion and uncertainty about some of its requirements ; and criticism of costs to regulated entities , permit agencies , and even the general public .

while many believe that the permit program has clarified requirements and fostered consistency and fairness in regulatory treatment of sources , others argue otherwise , saying that permits suffer from excessive length and increased complexity .

benefits are more likely to be observed in states and localities that had no operating permit program prior to title v and are likely to be questioned more vigorously where such a program previously did exist .

likewise , views are mixed on whether the title v program has resulted in air quality and health benefits .

arguably , this was not an objective , because title v is an administrative program and was not intended to have a direct impact on emissions .

permitting agencies , however , say that many major sources have voluntarily restricted their operating conditions or installed pollution controls in order to reduce emissions below the title v regulatory thresholds ( thus becoming what is often referred to as "synthetic minors" ; see discussion on page 10 ) , which is a plus for the environment .

critiques of the title v program are reflected in a 2005 report of the epa inspector general and in a 2006 report by a task force on title v implementation experience that was convened by epa's clean air act advisory committee .

the task force , consisting of state and local permitting agency , industry , and environmental advocacy group representatives , developed an extensive list of recommendations for program improvements , which it believed could be implemented under current legislative and regulatory authority .

beginning in 2003 , epa regional offices began conducting periodic audits of state , local , and territorial permitting programs to identify good practices , areas needing improvement , and ways that epa can improve its oversight .

many but not all of these evaluations are available on epa websites .

the evaluations identify a range of issues , such as timely permit issuance and backlogs , public participation , permit quality and documentation , staffing and training needs , adequacy of permit fee revenues , and communication with epa and the public .

the title v task force noted in 2006 that much about title v remains unsettled and subject to debate in both the legal and policy arenas — an assessment that likely still applies — and it urged that steps be taken to "stem the tide of transaction costs and to bring an increased level of certainty and stability to implementation of this program. .

responding to the task force report in september 2006 , epa officials identified a number of priorities and next steps .

over the following one to two years , the agency said that it would work with states to identify best practices such as standards for granting a public hearing , providing written responses to public comments , and coordination of title i and title v process .

similarly , over the next one to three years , epa would review existing guidance and issue new guidance as appropriate concerning clarification of the permit revision process and permit reopening , and clarification of certain statements required in draft permits .

finally , epa would initiate rule - makings to address several concerns , such as clarifying when insignificant activities are exempt from permits , and allowing alternatives to newspapers for public notice requirements .

rulemakings could take three years or more , epa said .

other priorities included improving online notice and online access to documents on the epa website .

however , it appears that little follow - up activity has occurred .

in 2008 , epa officials reportedly told an industry group that the agency was working on a proposed rule and guidance document , in partial response to the task force report .

the streamlining proposal and guidance were expected to address a number of issues — but only a small percentage of the task force's recommendations — including the types of emission units that must be included in a permit , the effectiveness of the public notice process , and the complexity and length of permits .

the proposed rule was also expected to remove insignificant emission units from the title v permit process , allow the use of online public notices instead of newspaper notices , and clarify the use of administrative amendments and minor permit revisions .

a proposed rule was expected to be released in early 2009 , but this has not occurred .

in 2012 , epa officials indicated plans to make certain rule changes and issue guidance on how permit writers should include "statements of basis" in the enforceable terms of permits .

the impetus for these plans , officials said , came from the 2005 epa inspector general report and president obama's executive orders on reducing regulatory burdens .

no proposal has been issued .

congressional oversight of the title v program has been limited to hearings by a house energy and commerce subcommittee and a senate environment and public works subcommittee in mid - 1995 , and a senate environment subcommittee field hearing in 2000 that addressed title v and other caa issues .

so far , congress has not considered statutory changes that would affect the title v requirements .

clean air act issues have been of considerable interest during the 114 th congress , especially scrutiny of epa's regulation of greenhouse gas emissions .

although epa's actions concerning ghgs involve multiple provisions of the act , this congressional attention has not included title v .

