the crude oil windfall profit tax act ( p.l .

96-223 ) was enacted in 1980 as part of acompromise between the carter administration and the congress over the decontrol of crude oilprices .

the structure of the wpt was based on the structure of the oil price control program .

despite its name , the crude oil windfall profit tax was not a tax on profits .

it was an excisetax - - or more accurately , a system of excise taxes - - on domestically produced oil effective march1 , 1980 .

the tax was imposed on the difference between the market price of oil , which wastechnically referred to as the removal price , and a statutory 1979 base price that was adjustedquarterly for inflation and state severance taxes .

 ( 8 ) all domestically produced oil that was not specifically tax - exempt was classified into oneof three categories or "tiers" based upon the age of the well , the type of oil , and the amount of dailyproduction .

these categories were a carryover from the oil price regulations which also categorizedoil into various tiers .

for example , tier i oil was oil classified as lower and upper tier oil under pricecontrols ; tier ii and tier iii oil was oil exempt from price controls .

domestic crude oil is oil producedfrom an oil well located in the united states , or in any of its possessions , and it includes thecontinental shelf area of the united states .

for each oil category there was a corresponding tax rate ( or rates , as explained below ) anda corresponding adjusted base price .

the tax rates and adjusted base prices differed not onlyaccording to the type of oil but also according to whether an oil producer was an integrated producer ( called a major ) or an independent oil producer .

the tax rates applicable to oil sold by anindependent oil producer were lower than the tax rates applicable to oil sold by a major integratedproducer .

 ( 9 ) the windfallprofit tax liability on any barrel of oil was limited to 90% of the net income ( profit ) from the sale ofthat oil , which was basically the taxable income ( gross income less costs ) corresponding to that sameoil .

five categories of oil were originally exempt from the windfall profit tax: ( 1 ) oil owned bya state or local government or any political subdivision thereof ; ( 2 ) oil owned by a qualifiededucational institution or a charitable medical institution ; ( 3 ) oil owned by indian tribes or individualindians on january 21 , 1980 , over which the u.s. exercises trust responsibilities ; ( 4 ) new oilproduced from much of alaska ; and ( 5 ) "front - end tertiary oil. .

 ( 10 ) stripper oil , and a limitedamount of oil produced by royalty owners , became tax exempt under an amendment in the economicrecovery tax act of 1981 .

table 2 shows the structure of the tax just prior to its repeal .

note thatnewly discovered oil is oil produced from a well which was not producing in 1978 .

for perspective,the average world market price was $32.37 in 1980 , and $13.25 in 1988 .

table 2 .

structure of the crude oil windfall profittax source: sections 4986-4998 of 1986 internal revenue code ; commerce clearinghouse , 1987 ; andresearch division of the internal revenue service .

notes: tier i oil is oil that was lower and upper tier oil under epca75 , and sadlerochit oil fromalaska's north slope ; tier ii and tier iii oil was uncontrolled oil under epca75 ; the 1981 ertalegislation changed the rate structure as follows: ( 1 ) the tax rate on new oil was reduced gradually,but further reductions were frozen in 1984 so that the rate remained fixed at 22.5% until 1988 ; ( 2 ) stripper oil produced by independents was made tax - exempt ; ( 2 ) royalty owners received a taxcredit followed by an exemption for limited amounts of oil production .

the wpt was imposed on domestic oil producers at the point of the first sale of taxable oil,which was generally to a refiner .

the refiner - - known also as the first purchaser - - withheld the taxfrom the amounts otherwise payable to a producer and deposited the funds semi - monthly into anaccount .

in other words , the tax amount per barrel was subtracted from the oil's purchase price .

thefirst purchaser was required to file tax returns on a quarterly basis .

in cases where withholding wasnot required , such as when the producer and first purchaser were one and the same , the tax was paiddirectly to the treasury .

the wpt was a deductible expense in determining an oil producer's income tax liabilitybecause , as with all other excise taxes , it was considered a cost of doing business .

as explained ina later section , this meant that , as a result of paying the wpt , a producer's income tax liability waslower than it would have been without the tax .

the wpt was a temporary tax .

the statute provided that the tax would begin to phase outsometime during the three - year period between january 1988 and january 1991 .

the precise startingpoint for the phase out depended on cumulative net revenues .

if the secretary of the treasuryreported that , on a given month beginning january 1988 , cumulative net revenues would exceed thepre - established target of $227.3 billion , then the phaseout of the tax would begin on the monthfollowing the attainment of the target .

if estimated cumulative net revenues would not exceed$227.3 billion between january 1988 and january 1991 , then the phase out of the tax would beginjanuary 1991 .

irrespective of the onset of the phaseout , once the phaseout began , the tax was to havebeen phased out over a 33-month period by reducing each producer's tax by 3% each month ( with4% on the last month ) .

cumulative net revenues , which totaled about $43 billion between 1980 and 1987 , fell farshort of the $227.3 billion target .

hence , had it not been repealed , the wpt phase out would havebegun january 1991 and the tax would have terminated on october 1 , 1993 .

as already discussed,the wpt was repealed in august 1988 , before the onset of the phase - out rules .

finally , while the tax was called a "profit" tax , it was not really a profit tax but rather aspecial type of excise tax - - a selective excise tax on oil producers .

the tax was paid first , beforeprofits from the sale of the oil were determined .

and except for the net income limitation , profitshad no bearing on how much wpt was paid .

the base prices had no precise or even approximaterelationship to the costs of oil production .

this difference between an excise tax and a true excessprofit tax is crucial because , as will be demonstrated , the two taxes have very different economiceffects , particularly on energy prices and oil imports .

the wpt resulted from a compromise between the carter administration , which wanted todecontrol oil prices , and the congress , which generally did not ; without the tax , many doubted thatthe congress would have supported oil price decontrol .

the reasons for the tax are manifold and complex ; they transcend economics and theyconcern the image and perception of the oil industry .

the record does show , however , that thecongress was concerned that the industry would reap enormous revenues and profits as a result ofdecontrol to world oil price levels .

the congress believed that the projected huge redistribution ofincome from energy consumers to energy producers would not be fair .

the congress was concernedthat the oil industry was not paying its fair share of federal taxes .

and finally , the congress waslooking for additional sources of revenue .

the major economic issues concerning the wpt and its effects were: revenues , increaseddependence upon foreign oil , economic efficiency , and the tax's administrative and complianceburden .

as discussed above , the need for revenue was one of the reasons for enacting the windfallprofit tax and was a principal issue in the debate over its repeal .

however , the tax's role in increasingdependence on imported oil , distorting resource use in the energy markets and the economy , as wellas the administrative and compliance burden of the tax , all played a role in its repeal .

there are currently 14 bills in the 109th congress to impose some type ofwpt .

these fall generally into one of two categories: those that impose an excisetype of wpt and those that would impose an income type .

in addition , the billsdiffer in the way the wpt receipts would be used .

some bills would allocate thereceipts to offset the cost of supplemental spending bills targeted to aid victims ofhurricanes katrina and rita .

others would allocate them to the highway trust fundto compensate for any losses from the proposed commensurate reduction in motorfuels excise taxes to offset the wpt .

several bills would appropriate the proceedsfor the low - income home energy assistance program , which gives grants to poorerhouseholds to offset high energy bills and for residential weatherization .

the algebraic formula for the wpt liability is as follows: t t = ï„ [p t m - p t b ( 1+ ï€ t - 2 ) ] ( 1- s ) ( 1- c ) where t t = the wpt in $ / barrel , in time t ( eg , in the 1st quarter of any year ) , ï„ = the wpt tax rate in percent ( see table 2 in the text ) , p t m = the market ( removal ) price of domestic crude oil at the wellhead at time t , p t b = the base price corresponding to the type of oil produced , as specified by law ( see table 2 ) ï€ = rate of inflation , as measured by the gnp deflator , so that ï€ t - 2 is the gnp deflatorlagged two quarters , ( 61 ) s = the rate of state severance tax , if any c = the rate of federal corporate income ta .

