state laws that require parental involvement in a pregnant minor's abortion decision have gained greater visibility in light of recent attempts by congress to criminalize the interstate transport of a minor to obtain an abortion .

at least forty - four states have enacted statutes that require a minor to seek either parental notification or parental consent before obtaining an abortion .

this report discusses the validity of state parental involvement laws in the context of planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v. casey , ayotte v. planned parenthood of northern new england , and other u.s. supreme court cases that address a minor's right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy .

in casey , the court upheld the right of a woman to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy , but permitted certain restrictions on a minor's ability to obtain an abortion , such as state parental consent requirements .

in ayotte , the court reiterated that a state may require parental involvement in a pregnant minor's abortion decision .

in addition to examining the relevant abortion decisions , this report reviews the state parental involvement laws , and discusses the availability of judicial bypass procedures and exceptions for medical emergencies .

the report also highlights recent federal parental involvement legislation and provides a survey of current state parental involvement laws .

in roe v. wade , the u.s. supreme court held that a woman has a constitutional right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy .

the court in subsequent cases has affirmed the basic right to an abortion , but has also permitted restrictions on a woman's access to an abortion .

casey established , for example , that a state may require parental involvement in a pregnant minor's abortion decision if the involvement does not unduly burden the minor's right to choose whether to obtain an abortion .

in that 1992 case , the court considered a constitutional challenge to five provisions of the pennsylvania abortion control act of 1982 .

one provision required a pregnant minor seeking an abortion to obtain consent from one parent or guardian before the procedure would be performed .

the court upheld the parental consent provision and also concluded that a state law that banned abortion completely would be unconstitutional .

in its holding , the court shifted away from the trimester - based strict scrutiny standard of judicial review it used in roe and articulated a new "undue burden" analysis .

courts will now invalidate a government - imposed abortion restriction if it imposes an "undue burden" on a woman's right to obtain an abortion .

applying the new standard , the casey court held that the parental consent provision did not unduly burden a pregnant minor's right to obtain an abortion because it included exceptions in the event of a medical emergency and when the minor demonstrates to a court that parental consent is not in her best interests .

in january 2006 , the court confirmed the validity of state laws that place certain restrictions on a pregnant minor's right to obtain an abortion .

in ayotte , the court considered a constitutional challenge to a state statute requiring parental notification before a minor may obtain an abortion .

the plaintiffs argued that the new hampshire parental notification prior to abortion act violated the right of a woman to obtain an abortion because it did not contain an exception to allow a pregnant minor to obtain an abortion without parental notification when the procedure was necessary to preserve the minor's health .

in writing for an unanimous court , justice o'connor stated explicitly that the holding did not revisit court precedent regarding abortion .

rather , the court addressed the relatively narrow issue of remedies .

it held that only certain applications of the act would violate a woman's constitutional right to an abortion , and remanded the case with orders for the lower courts to consider whether the act could be interpreted in a manner consistent with the judicial precedent that a state may not restrict access to an abortion when the health of the woman seeking the abortion is at issue .

despite its narrow holding , the court in ayotte expressly affirmed two legal propositions relating to pregnant minors' access to abortions: states have the right to require parental involvement in a minor's abortion decision , and a state may not restrict access to an abortion that is necessary to protect the life or health of a woman seeking an abortion .

twenty - two state parental involvement statutes require the consent of at least one parent or another adult relative before a pregnant minor may obtain an abortion , while 17 state statutes require only that the minor notify one or both parents that she intends to obtain an abortion .

as discussed , the court has held that a state law that requires parental involvement in a minor's abortion decision is unconstitutional if it unduly burdens the minor's right to terminate her pregnancy .

several court cases preceding casey and ayotte expressly established that a state parental involvement statute that permits a parent to unilaterally prohibit a minor from obtaining an abortion would be unconstitutional .

in planned parenthood of central missouri v. danforth , the court held that a state parental involvement statute must provide an alternate procedure for a minor to obtain authorization for an abortion .

in belotti v. baird , the court reiterated the danforth holding and stated that such an alternative must provide a pregnant minor the opportunity to demonstrate that she is "mature enough and well enough informed" to make an abortion decision without parental involvement , or that the abortion is in her best interests .

legislation that would prohibit the knowing transport of a minor across state lines with the intent that the minor obtain an abortion has been introduced in both chambers .

on january 25 , 2011 , senator john e. ensign introduced s. 167 , the child custody protection act ( ccpa ) .

under the ccpa , an individual who knowingly transports a minor across state lines with the intent that the minor obtain an abortion will be fined in accordance with title 18 of the u.s. code , imprisoned for not more than one year , or both .

the ccpa would not prohibit the transport of a minor across state lines if the abortion is necessary to save the life of the minor because her life is endangered by a physical disorder , physical injury , or physical illness , including a life endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy .

the child interstate abortion notification act ( ciana ) , introduced as s. 1241 by senator marco rubio on june 21 , 2011 , and as h.r .

2299 by representative ileana ros - lehtinen on june 22 , 2011 , would also prohibit the knowing transport of a minor across state lines with the intent that the minor obtain an abortion .

unlike the ccpa , however , the ciana would also prohibit a physician from knowingly performing or inducing an abortion on a minor who is a resident of another state unless actual notice is provided to a parent of the minor at least 24 hours before performing the procedure .

a physician who violated the notification requirement would be fined in accordance with title 18 of the u.s. code , imprisoned for not more than one year , or both .

the notification requirement would not apply in certain specified situations , including instances where the minor declared in a signed written statement that she was the victim of sexual abuse , neglect , or physical abuse by a parent .

the following table provides citations to state parental involvement statutes .

information concerning whether the applicable statute requires parental consent or notification is included in the table .

statutes that include judicial bypass provisions , medical emergency exceptions , and / or exceptions for a pregnant minor who is the victim of parental abuse or neglect are marked accordingly .

