on june 23 , 2005 , the supreme court handed down kelo v. city of new london , ( 1 ) addressing whether , under thefifth amendment takings clause , the sovereign power of eminent domain ( "condemnation" ) canbe used to transfer private property to new private owners for the purpose of economicdevelopment .

 ( 2 ) the courtheld 5-4 that the city of new london's use of private - to - private condemnations to further itseconomic revitalization project satisfied the takings clause's demand that eminent domain beemployed for a "public use," ( 3 ) despite the private nature of the transferees .

the city's good - faithpurpose , said the majority , was to carry out a carefully considered areawide redevelopment planbelieved by the city ( and state ) to be needed to reverse decades of economic decline .

on these facts,the majority deemed the public use requirement satisfied , especially given the strong deference owedby courts to legislative determinations of local needs .

many observers argue that kelo does not depart from established eminent domain law - - thatits view of public use as covering new london's revitalization plan is indistinguishable from priorcourt precedent sustaining eminent domain for mixed private and public gain .

contrariwise , a vocalminority ( starting with the four dissenters ) argues that the decision represents a major expansion ofpublic use , while still others counter that it actually narrows public use .

for present purposes , thisdebate is unimportant .

what matters here is that kelo cast a bright spotlight on a controversial andincreasingly frequent practice: the use of private - to - private condemnation by state and localgovernments solely to increase tax base or tax revenues , and create jobs .

the new attention givenby kelo to the possibility that people's homes can be taken involuntarily for such purposes ( uponpayment of compensation ) provoked a popular outcry and media coverage such as few recentsupreme court decisions have generated .

following kelo , the majority of state legislatures saw theintroduction of , or talk of the introduction of , bills limiting the use of eminent domain .

 ( 4 ) congress entered the fraythrough the introduction of roughly a dozen bills , most of them seeking to discourage state and localuse of eminent domain for economic development through the device of attaching restrictiveconditions on federal grant money .

 ( 5 ) the use of funding conditions , rather than a direct federalcommand that localities not condemn for economic development , presumably reflects theconstitutional federalism concerns raised by the latter approach under the commerce clause,fourteenth amendment ( section 5 ) , and tenth amendment .

 ( 6 ) the main topic of this report is the principal " kelo bill" in congress at this time , h.r .

4128 , the private property protection act of 2005 .

h.r .

4128 hews tothe prevalent congressional approach to kelo : imposing a condemnation - restricting condition on thegrant of federal money .

it was originally introduced as h.r .

3135 by representativesensenbrenner , chairman of the house committee on the judiciary , one week after the kelo decision .

it was reported in greatly expanded form as h.r .

4128 and passed the house376-38 on november 3 , 2005 .

this report also examines a bill amendment introduced by senator bond , like h.r .

4128 a federal - money - restricting provision .

the bond amendment was added onthe senate floor to h.r .

3058 , the transportation , treasury , housing and urbandevelopment , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations actfor fy2006 .

h.r .

3058 was enacted november 30 , 2005 , as p.l .

109-115 , with the bondamendment as section 726 .

other bills and resolutions responding to the kelo decision are not treated here , eitherbecause they have been eclipsed by h.r .

4128 , have seen little activity , or arenonbinding resolutions .

these include s. 1313 ( restricting federal funds ) , s. 1704 ( restricting federal funds ) , s. 1883 ( creating an office of propertyrights ombudsperson ) , s. 1895 ( restricting federal funds and eliminating tax benefitsfor private parties acquiring property ) , h.j.res .

60 ( amending the constitution ) , h.res .

340 ( expressing disagreement with the majority opinion in kelo ; passed houseon june 30 , 2005 by 365-33 ) , h.r .

3083 and 3087 ( each identical to s. 1313 ) , h.r .

3315 ( restricting federal funds ) , h.r .

3631 ( restricting federalassistance ) , h.r .

3405 ( restricting federal funds ) , and h.r .

4088 ( restricting federal funds ) .

the bond amendment to the transportation , treasury , housing and urban development,the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations act for fy2006is now enacted law: p.l .

109-115 , section 726 .

its full text states - - no funds in this act may be used to support any federal,state , or local projects that seek to use the power of eminent domain , unless eminent domain isemployed only for a public use: provided , that for purposes of this section , public useshall not be construed to include economic development that primarily benefits privateentities: provided further , that any use of funds for mass transit,railroad , airport , seaport , or highway projects as well as utility projects which benefit or serve thegeneral public ( including energy - related , communication - related , water - related andwastewater - related infrastructure ) , other structures designated for use by the general public or whichhave other common - carrier or public - utility functions that serve the general public and are subjectto regulation and oversight by the government , and projects for the removal of an immediate threatto public health and safety or brownsfield ( 35 ) as defined in the small business liability relief andbrownsfield ( 36 ) revitalization act ( public law 107-118 ) shall be considered a public use for purposes of eminentdomain: provided further , that the government accountabilityoffice ... shall conduct a study to be submitted to the congress within 12 months of the enactmentof this act on the nationwide use of eminent domain , including the procedures used and the resultsaccomplished on a state - by - state basis as well as the impact on individual property owners and onthe affected communities .

by its reference to "funds in this act," the bond amendment limits itself to federal monies used ordisbursed by the agencies receiving appropriations under the statute , and applies only to fy2006funds .

the second paragraph of the amendment , excluding from public use instances of economicdevelopment that "primarily" benefits private entities , is a rough paraphrase of the often - stated rulethat condemnations producing private benefits constitute a "public use" only if the private benefitis merely incidental or secondary to a primary public purpose .

 ( 37 ) some condemnationdecisions , however , declare or suggest a broader view of public use - - namely , that even projects primarily benefitting private entities can be deemed for a public use , as long as there is some publicbenefit .

 ( 38 ) supremecourt decisions , too , suggest such a broad view of public use - - stating that condemnation not be solely for a private use and be "rationally related to a conceivable public purpose. .

 ( 39 ) within the ambit of theamendment , the second paragraph makes clear that the former and narrower of these public usestandards applies .

the third paragraph of the amendment , declaring various projects to be public uses underthe amendment , conforms closely to existing takings clause jurisprudence as to what constitutesa public use .

particularly is this so because the paragraph uses the descriptors "benefit or serve thegeneral public," "designated for use by the general public," and "serve the general public" - - echoingthe supreme court's modern reading of constitutional public use as meaning "for a publicpurpose. .

 ( 40 ) many ofthe listed items are facilities to which the public has physical access , satisfying even the narrow,nineteenth century sense of public use under which condemnation into private ownership requiredthat the public still have physical access to the property .

two other items listed in the thirdparagraph , removal of immediate threats to public health and safety and removal of brownfields,plainly would constitute a public use .

the phrase "immediate threat to public health and safety" in the third paragraph replaced"blight ( including areas identified by units of local government for recovery from natural disasters ) "in the introduced version of the amendment .

very likely , the switch was made to align the bondamendment with the same "immediate threat to public health and safety" phrase in h.r .

4128 's list of exceptions from its definition of "economic development. .

it mayalso , as in h.r .

4128 , reflect congressional concerns as to overuse of blight - removaljustifications for local redevelopment involving condemnations .

 ( 41 ) the list of non - public uses in the second paragraph , and public uses in the third , would eachappear to be nonexhaustive .

so what criterion as to public - use status applies to non - listedcondemnation purposes ? .

one candidate is that in takings clause case law .

applying this criterion,however , the switch from "blight" to "immediate threat to public health and safety" may haveachieved little as to blight , since blight removal has been broadly endorsed as a constitutional publicuse by the supreme court , apparently irrespective of whether it constitutes an immediate threat topublic health and safety .

 ( 42 ) on the other hand , the criterion for non - listed condemnationpurposes might be statutory .

under this criterion , the fact of the language change from "blight" to"immediate threat ..." could ground an argument that removal of lesser degrees of blight are notpublic uses pursuant to the amendment .

whatever the parallels between the amendment's itemized public uses and non - public useand those of takings clause case law , the amendment clearly works a change in the law by addingthe funding prohibition .

under pre - existing law , the judicial invalidation of a state or localcondemnation as not for a public use did not require a cut - off of federal funding for the associatedproject .

this change effected by the bond amendment is enhanced in importance if the firstparagraph is construed broadly to trigger a funds cut - off when eminent domain is used for other thana public use anywhere in the jurisdiction , rather than solely as part of the project in question .

the final paragraph of the bond amendment calls for a gao study "on the nationwide useof eminent domain ...." by its literal terms , this mandate is of expansive scope: it includes federal,state , and local condemnations , and is not limited to , or even specially focused on , the kelo issueof condemnation for economic development .

senator bond's statement on introducing theamendment , however , does suggest such a constrained focus for the report , dwelling as it doesexclusively on kelo and similar circumstances .

 ( 43 ) similarly , the senator's statement implies that report coverageof inverse condemnation , literally included in the term "eminent domain," was not intended .

 ( 44 ) .

