the cdbg program , administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , is the federal government's largest and most widely available source of financial assistance to support state and local government - directed neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation , and economic development activities .

these formula - based grants are allocated to more than 1,100 entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities with populations of 50,000 or more , and urban counties ) , the 50 states , puerto rico , and the insular areas of american samoa , guam , the virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands .

grants are used to implement plans intended to address local housing , neighborhood revitalization , public services , and infrastructure needs , as determined by local officials with citizen input .

due to the block grant nature of the program , local and state officials exercise a great deal of discretion in determining which combination of eligible activities ( in 25 categories ) to undertake when developing their community development plans .

eligible cdbg activities include historic preservation ; real property acquisition , demolition , site preparation and disposition ; economic development and job creation , including assistance to for - profit entities and establishment of revolving loan funds ; housing assistance , including rehabilitation loans and grants ; public service activities , including job counseling and employment training ; and assistance to not - for - profit entities , including community development corporations and faith - based institutions .

any of the eligible activities undertaken by a community must address at least one of the program's following three national objectives: principally benefit low and moderate income persons ; aid in eliminating or preventing slums or blight ; or meet particularly urgent community development needs because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the public .

it is this third program objective — meeting an urgent threat — that allows cdbg funds to be used to assist in disaster response activities .

the program's authorizing statute requires each state and entitlement community to allocate 70% of its cdbg funds to activities that primarily benefit low - and moderate - income persons .

in response to previous disasters , hud has waived this provision in order to allow a community to address an urgent threat to the safety of residents .

the cdbg program has been used frequently by the federal government to respond to natural and manmade catastrophes ( for a list of cdbg disaster recovery appropriations see the appendix ) .

in general , congress has provided increased flexibility and allocated additional cdbg funds to affected communities and states to help them respond to and recover from presidentially declared disasters .

this includes allowing communities to reprogram cdbg funds to meet disaster - related needs , including short - term disaster relief , mitigation activities , and long - term recovery activities .

in assisting communities and states in responding to disasters , hud may expedite grant awards for affected communities in presidentially declared disaster areas , including allowing affected grantees to move up their cdbg program start dates .

in addition to providing cdbg funding assistance , congress has included a number of other provisions in past disaster relief appropriations to facilitate relief and recovery efforts and to ensure accountability .

these have included the use of waivers , funding transfers , matching funds , and reporting requirements .

on july 29 , 2010 , president obama signed into law the supplemental appropriations act for fy2010 , p.l .

111-212 .

the legislation appropriates supplemental cdbg funds for disaster recovery activities .

specifically , provisions included during senate consideration and passage of h.r .

4899 , the supplemental appropriations act of 2010 , recommended appropriating $100 million in cdbg supplemental funds for presidentially declared disaster areas affected by severe storms and flooding during the period from march 2010 to may 2010 .

p.l .

111-212 limits the $100 million in cdbg disaster assistance to states where the entire state has been declared a presidential disaster area ; or at least 20 counties in the state have been declared presidential disaster areas .

given these parameters , the act is intended to allocate cdbg disaster recovery funds only to the states of rhode island , kentucky , nebraska , and tennessee .

in addition , p.l .

111-212 allows each grantee to use up to 5% of its cdbg disaster recovery funds for administrative costs ; hud to award cdbg disaster recovery grants to both states and local governments ; cdbg disaster recovery funds to be used to meet the matching fund requirements of other federal programs ; and hud , at the request of a grantee , to waive any statutes or regulations governing the cdbg program except for provisions related to environmental review , fair labor standards , civil rights , and nondiscrimination .

the latter provision gives grantees greater flexibility in developing and implementing cdbg disaster recovery plans .

the cdbg program's broad list of eligible activities and its flexibility has allowed communities and states affected by disasters to undertake short - term disaster relief efforts , implement mitigation strategies , and finance long - term recovery activities .

these funds have been used to support disaster recovery efforts spanning multiple states , as well as to respond to disaster recovery efforts in highly urbanized areas .

as congress examines legislative proposals intended to finance long - term disaster recovery efforts , it may move to consider a number of cdbg - related policy questions: is the cdbg program an appropriate and effective means of providing federal support for long - term disaster recovery efforts ? .

if it is , what should be the level of cdbg assistance awarded to affected areas ? .

should cdbg assistance be controlled by the individual communities , by the states , or by a multi - state regional entity or entities ? .

should congress require states to meet a matching fund requirement as a condition for receiving disaster recovery - related cdbg funds ? .

if so , what level of matching funds would be appropriate ? .

would it be fixed , or adjustable to account for such factors as level of damage , state fiscal capacity , income levels , and other factors ? .

what additional compliance and accountability measures or actions , if any , should congress require of cdbg recipients as a condition of receiving cdbg funds ? .

