casework in a congressional office refers to the response or services that members of congress provide to constituents who request assistance .

casework appears to be one of the more enduring representational activities ; members of congress have been providing such service since the early years of the american republic .

in contemporary times , thousands of constituents seek assistance annually from members of congress , with requests ranging from the simple to the complex .

members and their staffs help individual constituents deal with administrative agencies by acting as facilitators , ombudsmen , and , in some cases , advocates .

typical casework requests include the following: tracking a misdirected benefits payment ; filling out a government form ; applying for social security , veterans' , education , and other federal benefits ; explaining government activities or decisions ; applying to a military service academy ; seeking relief from a federal administrative decision ; and seeking assistance for those immigrating to the united states or applying for u.s. citizenship .

in addition to providing services to individual constituents , some congressional offices also consider their liaison activities between the federal government and local governments or businesses concerned about the effects of federal legislation or regulation to be casework .

other congressional offices may include interactions with communities and nonprofit organizations seeking federal grants or other assistance as casework .

all congressional offices carry out some type of casework .

as part of the process of determining how to carry out their congressional duties , members of congress determine the scope of their constituent service activities .

as a consequence , the level and intensity of congressional casework may vary among member offices .

casework is conducted for various reasons , including constituent demand and a broadly held understanding among members and their staff that casework is integral to the representational duties of a member of congress .

others believe that casework activities can be part of an outreach strategy to build political support among constituents .

casework might also be seen by some as an evaluative stage of the legislative process .

some observers suggest that casework inquiries can provide members of congress with a micro - level view of executive agency activities , affording members the opportunity to evaluate whether a program is functioning as congress intended .

constituent inquiries about specific policies , programs , or benefits may also suggest areas in which programmatic or policy changes require additional institutional oversight , or further legislative consideration .

one challenge to congressional casework is the widely held public perception that members of congress can initiate a broad array of actions resulting in a speedy , favorable outcome .

the rules of the house and senate , and laws and regulations governing federal executive agency activities , however , closely limit the extent of an intervention made on behalf of a constituent .

when conducting casework , congressional staff cannot force an agency to expedite a case or act in favor of a constituent .

congressional staff may intervene to facilitate the appropriate administrative processes involved , encourage an agency to give a case consideration , and sometimes advocate for a favorable outcome .

subsequent sections of this report discuss house and senate rules and guidelines , laws , and regulations affecting congressional casework , as well as the role of caseworkers .

this report also provides sample outlines and document templates for establishing and managing congressional casework .

further casework materials are available at the crs casework resources web page at http: / / crs.gov / resources / pages / cs - casework.aspx .

each chamber has rules and guidelines regarding its members' casework activities .

house rules regarding casework services are discussed in the house ethics manual .

senate rule xliii and the senate ethics manual establish parameters for casework services in that chamber .

in each chamber , at the request of a constituent or petitioner for assistance , a member of congress may do the following: request information or a status report ; urge prompt consideration ; arrange for interviews or appointments ; express judgments ; call for reconsideration of an administrative response that the member believes is not reasonably supported by statutes , regulations , or considerations of equity or public policy ; or perform any other service of a similar nature consistent with the provisions of the rules of the house or senate .

senate rule xliii ( 3 ) prohibits the provision of casework assistance on the basis of contributions or services to organizations in which the senator has a political , personal , or financial interest .

guidelines in the house ethics manual say that when contacting a federal agency on behalf of a constituent , a member , officer , or employee of the house should not make prohibited , off the record comments , receive things of value for providing casework assistance , or improperly pressure agency officials .

finally , federal statute prohibits members of congress , chamber officers , and congressional staff from representing anyone before the federal government , except in the performance of their official duties .

decisions regarding staff employment in congressional offices rest with each member of congress , subject to applicable law and chamber rules .

some chamber administrative materials , such as the member's handbook ( for the house ) or the u.s. senate handbook ( for the senate ) , provide guidelines regarding what procedures must be followed to provide compensation , credentials , and general benefits such as health care and retirement programs to house or senate employees .

those documents provide no guidance on how a congressional hiring entity might determine the necessity of , or criteria for , a position , or the fitness of an applicant for employment .

experienced congressional staff and other observers suggest that a successful congressional caseworker is primarily a problem solver .

one study of congressional staff states that a "constituent services representative / caseworker" typically carries out the following duties: responds to casework inquiries from constituents ; acts as a liaison with federal , state , and / or local agencies on behalf of constituents ; acts as the grassroots representative for the member within assigned areas of responsibility ; and monitors and updates the member and district director on district and local issues .

to carry out their duties , congressional caseworkers typically communicate clearly with constituents about what can and cannot be done on their behalf ; learn the laws and regulations affecting a constituent's case ; build relationships with federal agency personnel ; and serve as a neutral facilitator between the constituent and agency .

no specialized training is required to become a congressional caseworker .

individuals who work as caseworkers come from a variety of backgrounds , including recently completed study or work experience in education , law , teaching , social work , political campaigns , government service , and the private sector .

observers suggest that most caseworkers enjoy working with people and have an interest in public service , but also note that the work can be challenging .

caseworkers typically learn the policies and procedures through which agencies operate to provide services or benefits , and work with constituents whose requests are sometimes made with a high level of personal and emotional engagement .

matters regarding the management of casework activities are at the discretion of individual congressional offices , subject to the rules of their respective chambers , relevant law , and the priorities of that office .

two laws , the privacy act of 1974 and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , affect casework .

the privacy act affects all constituents with casework inquiries that require interaction with a federal agency .

hipaa may affect constituents with casework inquiries that involve medical or other health - care information .

these laws prevent a federal agency from sharing an individual's personally identifiable information with a congressional office without the individual's express permission .

based on the priorities identified in individual congressional offices , many offices compile documentation to clarify policies related to casework .

such documentation could specify casework goals , management procedures , and expectations of staff .

having a manual or established protocol can help offices ensure consistency in their casework practices .

this type of document is not required , and there is no congressional standard regarding its format or contents .

all decisions regarding activities and operations in a member's office are within the discretion of the member , subject to chamber rules and relevant statute .

procedures are typically developed by modifying standardized outlines and protocols to a particular office , based on the priorities and goals of that office and the preferences and needs of the member's constituents .

the outline below suggests questions to help develop an office casework manual addressing those demands .

sample documents , which may be used in whole or in part , are also provided .

americans with disabilities act ( ada ) bankruptcy child support consumer credit matters copyright information — library of congress copyright office customs department of agriculture ( usda ) department of commerce department of education ( ed ) department of health and human services ( hhs ) department of homeland security ( dhs ) department of housing and urban development ( hud ) department of justice ( doj ) department of labor ( dol ) department of state ( dos ) department of the interior ( doi ) department of transportation ( dot ) department of the treasury ( treasury ) department of veterans affairs ( va ) environment environmental protection agency ( epa ) equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) federal communications commission ( fcc ) federal emergency management agency ( fema ) federal trade commission ( ftc ) flag requests general services administration ( gsa ) government auctions grants greetings , anniversary greetings , birthday greetings , marking achievement healthcare healthcare , military , tricare healthcare , veterans' home mortgages homeland security / federal emergency management agency ( fema ) homeland security / military , coast guard housing immigration immigration , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( cis ) immigration , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) information requests , general internal revenue service ( irs ) legal issues legislation , constituent opinion legislation , constituent proposals medicare medicare part a medicare part b medicare , part d , prescription drug coverage military / homeland security , coast guard military / national guard , air force military / national guard , army military / national guard , navy military / marine corps mortgages national forests office of personnel management ( opm ) passports patent information patent and trademark office post office prisons rural development scheduling service academy appointments service academy appointments , u.s. air force academy ( colorado springs ) service academy appointments , u.s. coast guard academy ( new london ) service academy appointments , u.s .

merchant marine academy ( king's point ) service academy appointments , u.s. military academy ( west point ) service academy appointments , u.s .

naval academy ( annapolis ) small business administration ( sba ) social programs social security student education financing student loans travel tricare u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( cis ) u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) unemployment united states forest service veterans' clinic veterans' hospitals veterans' services veterans' service organizations ( vso ) visas / entry permits , education visas / entry permits , emergency visas / entry permits , work washington visitor .

crs in focus if10503 , constituent services: overview and resources congressi onal liaison offices , at http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / liaisonoffices crs video wvb00093 , introduction to congressional casework crs report rl33209 , casework in a congressional office: background , rules , laws , and resources crs report r44696 , casework in congressional offices: frequently asked questions crs report casework , constituent services: casework , webpage , available at http: / / www.crs.gov crs report rl32113 , congressional intervention in the administrative process: legal and ethical considerations crs report rl33213 , congressional nominations to u.s. service academies: an overview and resources for outreach and management crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule crs report rs22450 , procedural analysis of private laws enacted: 1986-201 .

sample constituent guide / newsletter piece / outreach handout initial correspondence with constituents opening a case simple privacy act release form sample privacy act and hipaa release form case information and privacy act release form response correspondence 1: completed response from agency response correspondence 2: partial / interim response from agenc .

