social security plays an important role in reducing poverty , not only among the aged but among children as well .

children may be eligible for social security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies , becomes disabled , or retires .

in addition to receiving social security benefits in their own right , children may economically benefit from social security by living with other family members who receive benefits .

this report examines the effects of social security on child poverty .

the estimates presented in this report are based on a crs analysis of u.s. census bureau survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) data in april 2013 .

unlike welfare programs , in which eligibility is determined on the basis of limited income , social security is a work - related entitlement , in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history , without respect to current income .

children may be eligible for social security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies , becomes disabled , or retires .

for children of disabled or retired workers , the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount ( pia ) before adjustments .

 ( the pia is based on the parent's social security earnings record. ) .

children of deceased workers are generally entitled to benefits equal to 75% of the deceased parent's pia before adjustments .

a maximum family benefit applies , varying from 150% to 188% of the pia of the retired , disabled , or deceased parent .

the family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefits under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record .

child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker ( assuming that paternity / maternity has been established ) and to legally adopted children .

stepchildren may be eligible in some cases , as may some legally adopted grandchildren , with their benefits being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record .

children may receive benefits until they reach age 18 , and if in high school , through age 19 .

disabled children may receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before reaching age 22 .

in addition to receiving social security benefits in their own right , children may economically benefit from social security by living with other family members who receive benefits .

as noted above , children may qualify for social security benefits by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving social security or a survivor of a deceased worker who met the program's insured status requirements .

social security administration ( ssa ) data indicate that in december 2012 , 3.3 million social security beneficiaries ( 5.7% of all beneficiaries ) were children under the age of 18 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

among child beneficiaries , 1.2 million ( 37.2% of all child beneficiaries ) were children of deceased workers , 1.7 million ( 52.9% of all child beneficiaries ) were children of disabled workers , and about 322,000 ( 8.9% of all child beneficiaries ) were dependent children of retired workers .

the average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in december 2012 was $525 .

average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were lowest , about $323 in december 2012 , compared to about $601 for children of retired workers , and about $793 for children of deceased workers ( i.e. , children receiving survivor's benefits ) .

in total , aggregate social security benefits paid on behalf of children in december 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion , or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis , based on ssa administrative data .

social security benefits paid on behalf of children exceed federal dollars spent on cash welfare to families with children under the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program .

in fy2013 , combined federal and state tanf expenditures , in the form of cash aid to families , amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion , of which approximately $4.3 billion ( 49% ) was from federal funds .

while ssa administrative data provide a broad overview of the numbers of individuals receiving social security benefits and the type and amount of benefits received , they provide little information about the characteristics of individuals receiving benefits or the importance of social security to individual and family economic well - being .

in order to address questions relating to the income and poverty status of families in which children live , and the impact of social security benefits on income and poverty status of families with children , other data sources must be used .

for this analysis , u.s. census bureau survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) data are used in this report .

the most recent sipp data are from the 2008 panel , which is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period , from september 2008 through december 2013 .

the sipp collects detailed information on family composition , labor force participation , income , and program participation among families and their members in each of the 64 months they are included in the survey .

the analysis presented in this report relies on sipp data for april 2013 , the latest month in common from data released for the full sipp sample .

an appendix further describes the methodology used in this report .

crs analysis of sipp data for april 2013 indicates that among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18 , an estimated 8.5 million ( 11.6% ) lived in families in which one or more family members received social security — over two and one - half times the number of children estimated to receive social security benefits based on the administrative data discussed above from four months earlier ( 3.3 million in december 2012 ) .

as discussed in greater detail in the appendix , which describes the methodology used in this report , it is not possible to precisely identify the social security beneficiary status of children on the sipp .

among the estimated 8.5 million children living in families that received social security in april 2013 based on sipp data , an estimated 3.2 million ( 37% ) were in families in which social security was reported as having been received on behalf of at least one of the children in the family — a number quite close to the 3.3 million child recipients reported by administrative data , four months earlier .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

as noted in the appendix , most , but not all , of these 3.2 million children from the sipp are probably child beneficiaries .

another 1.9 million ( 22% ) lived in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving social security benefits , though not directly on behalf of a child .

these 5.1 million children are grouped together in analyses that follow as child beneficiaries and children of parents or guardians that receive social security .

the remaining 3.4 million children ( 40% ) lived in families where social security was received by someone other than a child or the children's parent ( s ) or guardian ( s ) ; in such cases social security benefits may have been received by an extended family member ( eg , grandparent , aunt or uncle , cousin , niece or nephew ) or an older adult sibling .

for this latter group , children may incidently be affected by social security , but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them .

the estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting .

additionally , the sipp data do not provide the comprehensive detail to precisely identify child beneficiaries .

it should also be noted that estimates of the pre - transfer poverty status of children ( i.e. , poverty status excluding social security from total income ) provide one measure of the relative importance of social security in combating poverty .

the pre - transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the social security program , as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program .

identifying child social security beneficiaries on the sipp it is not possible to precisely identify the social security beneficiary status of children on the sipp .

the sipp collects information on social security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over .

additionally , it collects information about whether an adult ( defined as a person age 15 and over ) collects social security on behalf of children under age 21 .

in such cases , however , it does not identify the specific children in the family for whom social security benefits are received , nor the specific reason ( s ) benefits are received on children's behalf .

in such cases it is uncertain whether all or only some children under 21 in the family are direct beneficiaries .

moreover , some adults may include the child's portion of their social security benefit as their own , without explicitly indicating that they received social security on behalf of a child .

in total , about 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified on the sipp in april 2013 as living in families in which social security benefits were reported , either on their own behalf , or on behalf of another family member .

in this analysis , all children of a parent ( or guardian ) who are under the age of 18 are identified as social security child beneficiaries if the child's parent or guardian reported that he / she received social security on behalf of a child under age 21 in the family .

to some extent , this method will overstate the number of children under age 18 who received social security , as potentially some , but not all , children of the parent may be beneficiaries in their own right .

in april 2013 , an estimated 3.148 million children under age 18 on the sipp were identified as social security child beneficiaries on the basis of a parent or guardian indicating that they had received social security benefits on behalf of a child .

another 27,000 children ages 15 to 17 reported directly receiving social security on the sipp in april 2013 .

thus , an estimated 3.175 million children were identified on the sipp as potential social security child beneficiaries .

an additional 1.893 million children lived with a parent or guardian who reported receiving social security on the sipp in april 2013 , but who did not indicate that benefits were received on behalf of a child .

in some cases the benefits received by these parents or guardians may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified .

because of issues in identifying child beneficiaries on the sipp and the avenues by which they receive social security ( eg , child survivor , dependent of a retiree or disabled worker ) , the two groups mentioned above are combined for purposes of analysis as "child beneficiaries and children of parents or guardians that receive social security. .

these 5.068 million children are differentiated from the remaining 3.430 million children who live in families in which social security was received only by extended family ( e.g , grandparents , aunts , uncles , nieces or nephews ) or other family members ( adult sibling ) .

for the former group , social security's effect on child poverty is more directly related to social security policy , whereas for the latter group , social security's effect on child poverty is incidental , being more directly related to children's incidental family living arrangements .

