logcap was established by the u.s. army on december 6 , 1985 , with the publication of army regulation 700-137 .

logcap is an initiative to manage the use of civilian contractors who perform services in support of dod missions during times of war and other military mobilizations .

the use of logcap contracts augments combat support and combat service support to military forces .

in september 2006 the army sustainment command ( asc ) was created to serve as the "logistics integrator" for the contingency contracting and sustainment needs of the military worldwide .

asc oversees about 65,000 contractors and manages about $25 billion in contracts .

the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) manages the task orders issued under the logcap contract .

in a may 2009 hearing before the senate commission on wartime contracting , the executive director for the u.s. army contracting command , army material command , testified on the status of the logcap iv contract .

excerpts of his remarks appear below: eight task orders have been awarded to date , including five task orders for performance and three task orders for project management offices ( one for each contractor ) .

services are transitioned from logcap iii to logcap iv as task orders are awarded .

in addition to protests against the award of the basic contracts , nearly all the task orders issued or awarded to date under logcap iv have been protested .

in testimony before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs subcommittee , u.s. army officials discussed the status of combat support operations under the logcap program , as described in excerpts taken from the hearing transcript: all logcap requirements in kuwait have successfully transitioned from logcap iii to logcap iv and logcap requirements are in the process of transitioning in afghanistan .

the current logcap iii contractor supports the responsible drawdown in iraq through base closure and de - scoping of logcap services which began in may 2009 and continues through august 2010 .

the two contractors that were awarded the logcap iv afghanistan task orders , fluor and dyncorp will increase their support as troops transition to the afghanistan theater .

the competitively bid pricing matrixes for the afghanistan task orders will be used to adjust the cost estimate for the increased support associated with the president's decision .

we are currently conducting a fair opportunity competition for transportation and corps logistics support services requirements in iraq that will result in requirements transitioning from logcap iii to logcap iv .

the next anticipated action involves base life support .

we are in the presolicitation phase for that acquisition with a draft request for proposal issued the week of december 7 , 2009 .

the army anticipates that the logcap iii contractor will provide logistics services in support of the iraq drawdown with theater transportation assets , augmentation of maintenance services , and support for the supply support activities in the retrograde of supplies and equipment from theater .

the logcap iii contractor also possesses other capabilities in support of the responsible drawdown of forces , such as packaging , blocking , bracing , and crating of equipment for shipment , wash rack operations , and cleaning of equipment for agriculture and customs .

these services are available to the supported unit upon request .

we expect the logcap iv contractor to provide the same level of services in support of the responsible drawdown but only for those bases that will remain after august 2010 .

as of march 29 , 2010 , 12 task orders have been awarded under logcap iv , as revealed in recent testimony before the senate commission on wartime contracting in iraq and afghanistan: twelve task orders have been awarded to date , including nine task orders for performance and three task orders for project management offices ( one for each contractor. ) .

to date , $1.8 billion has been obligated under the logcap iv contracts .

with inclusion of the core logistics support , theater transportation , and postal operations services ( cpt ) , 76 percent of logcap work has been competitively awarded under logcap iv .

services are transitioned from logcap iii to logcap iv as task orders are awarded .

potential contract oversight issues that congress may choose to examine include various aspects of contract administration , such as contract costs ; development of contract requirements ; costs - reimbursement and sole - source contracts ; transparency ; and the size , shape , and skill diversity of the acquisition workforce .

congress may choose to consider the following options when examining dod contracts for troop support: ( 1 ) implementing of the gansler commission's recommendations ; ( 2 ) broadening of the jurisdiction of the sigir to include dod contracts for troop support services ( like logcap contracts ) ; ( 3 ) convening of a study of the federal employee and contractor workforce ; ( 4 ) requiring more detail to give congress better information to perform its oversight role ; and ( 5 ) establishing a dedicated office to conduct audits and investigation of dod contracts .

perhaps the most significant recommendation of the gansler commission is that the army address some institutional and cultural issues that may provide an obstacle to moving forward .

the commission interviewed a number of knowledgeable army officials and concluded with the following observations about the challenges that the army will face in making significant improvements in its business operations , as described here in the report: those charged with getting the job done have provided valuable insight into the doctrine , policies , tools , and resources needed for success .

clearly , the army must address the repeated and alarming testimony that detailed the failure of the institution ( both the institutional army and the department of defense ) to anticipate , plan for , adapt , and adjust acquisition and program management to the needs of the operational army as it has been transformed , since the end of the cold war , into an expeditionary force .

the institutional army has not adjusted to the challenges of providing timely , efficient , and effective contracting support to the force in operation iraqi freedom ( more than half of which is contractor personnel ) .

essentially , the army sent a skeleton contracting force into theater without the tools or resources necessary to adequately support our war fighters .

the personnel placed in that untenable position focused on getting the job done , as best they could under the circumstances — where support is needed in a matter of hours , or , at best , days .

they used their knowledge , skill , limited resources , and extraordinary dedication to get contracts awarded .

alarmingly , most of the institutional deficiencies remain four - and - a - half - years after the world's best army rolled triumphantly into baghdad .

another option is to give the sigir the authority to audit and investigate dod logistical support contracts in iraq .

the sigir has already established a presence in iraq , and has issued more than 150 reports , including audits and investigations .

his efforts have largely resulted in the arrest of five people , and the convictions of four of them , with more than $17 million in assets seized .

the sigir has made several recommendations related to his audit and investigation of contracts under his jurisdiction .

his observations and insights may be relevant and appropriate for the contract administration and oversight of dod contracts for troop support services .

congress may want to convene a study of the federal employee and contractor workforce .

the study could examine three important questions: ( 1 ) is there an appropriate balance of federal employee and contractor roles ? .

 ( 2 ) is there an appropriate federal role and presence in the oversight area ? .

and ( 3 ) is the federal government attracting the right types of acquisition professionals ? .

congress could require a separate report , from each military service , on the size , scope , costs , and structure of its acquisition workforce ( including military , civilian , and contractor personnel ) .

congress could require dod to provide more details for better congressional oversight .

there are five questions that congress could consider: ( 1 ) should dod move to limit sole - source or limited competition for iraq contracts ? .

 ( 2 ) should dod use more fixed - priced contracting in iraq ? .

 ( 3 ) should task and delivery orders have certain dollar constraints ? .

 ( 4 ) should task orders be subject to public notice ? .

and ( 5 ) should larger contracts be divided into smaller contracts , with better - defined , discrete tasks ? .

to create more transparency and openness in defense acquisitions regarding contract administration , costs , and performance , congress could require a separate report from each military service .

each report could include data on the size , scope , costs , and structure of all contracts , particularly no - bid , sole - source , and costs - reimbursement contracts .

congress also could require that specific criteria be met before certain contract arrangements can be approved by dod or by congress .

in addition , congress could require a periodic re - competition of certain types of contracts , like logcap , that have the potential of spanning for many years .

congress could also require , for example , that task orders beyond a certain size be treated as a separate contract , and thus subject to competition among multiple contractors .

and finally , congress could require that large defense contracts be subject to competition and that a minimum of three contractors be selected for contracts beyond a certain size .

some have suggested based on available press accounts that some contracts for services in iraq might have been segregated ( into smaller contracts ) and opened for competitive bidding .

financial oversight might be more manageable in administering smaller contracts .

small businesses may have more of an ability to compete for contracts .

one of the recommendations of the sigir is to "designate a single , unified contracting entity to coordinate all contracting in theater. .

one way to accomplish this is to establish a contingency contracting corp ( a dod initiative currently underway is studying the issue ) that will deploy to iraq and establish a standing presence .

however , what additional resources might be necessary in order to provide better contract management and oversight of dod - appropriated funds ? .

given that the mission of the dod inspector general's office is to promote "integrity , accountability , and improvement of department of defense personnel , programs and operations to support the department's mission and to serve the public interest" , should the dod inspector general have a stronger presence in iraq ? .

given the many problems associated with logcap contracts , oversight agencies like the dod ig could have a pivotal role in preventing future contractor waste , fraud , or mismanagement .

congress may want to consider creating a singularly dedicated office for the audit and investigation of dod contracts for troop support services .

appendix a .

selected reports during the last four years , the congressional research service , general accounting office , department of defense inspector general , army audit agency , air force audit agency , and the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction have issued numerous reports on iraq contracting issues , including those listed below .

congress dollars , not sense: government contracting under the bush administration .

prepared by the special investigations division , committee on government reform - minority staff , u.s. house of representatives , june 2006 .

congressional research service crs report rs22923 , department of defense fuel costs in iraq , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34026 , defense acquisitions: how dod acquires weapon systems and recent efforts to reform the process , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33110 , the cost of iraq , afghanistan , and other global war on terror operations since 9 / 11 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32419 , private security contractors in iraq: background , legal status , and other issues , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21555 , iraq reconstruction: frequently asked questions concerning the application of federal procurement statutes , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32229 , iraq: frequently asked questions about contracting , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

congressional budget office contractor's support of u.s. operations in iraq , congressional budget office , august 2008 .

government accountability office gao - 08-857 .

dcaa audits: allegations that certain audits at three locations did not meet professional standards were substantiated .

report to congressional addressees , july 2008 .

gao - 07-1098t .

federal acquisitions and contracting .

systemic challenges need attention .

statement of david m. walker , comptroller general of the united states , july 17 , 2007 .

gao - 07-359t .

defense acquisitions: dod needs to exert management and oversight to better control acquisition of services .

statement of katherine v. schinasi , managing director , acquisition and sourcing management .

testimony before the subcommittee on readiness and management support , committee on armed services , u.s. senate , january 17 , 2007 .

gao - 07-145 .

military operations: high - level dod action needed to address long - standing problems with management and oversight of contractors supporting deployed forces , december 16 , 2006 .

gao - 06-800t .

dod acquisitions: contracting for better outcomes .

september 7 , 2006 .

gao - 06-838r .

contract management: dod vulnerabilities to contracting fraud , waste , and abuse , gao - 06-838r , july 7 , 2006 .

gao - 05-274 .

contract management: opportunities to improve surveillance on department of defense service contracts , march 17 , 2005 .

gao - 05-207 .

gao , high risk series: an update , january 2005 .

gao - 04-854 .

military operations: dod's extensive use of logistics support contracts requires strengthened oversight , july 19 , 2004 .

special inspector general for iraq reconstruction department of defense inspector general , quarterly report to congress , april 30 , 2008 semi - annual report to congress .

october 1 , 2006-march 31 , 2007 .

semi - annual report to congress .

april 1 , 2006-september 30 , 2006 .

semi - annual report to congress .

october 1 , 2005-march 31 , 2006 .

semi - annual report to congress .

april 1 , 2005-september 30 , 2005 .

semi - annual report to congress .

october 1 , 2004-march 31 , 2005 .

army audit agency ( the website is restricted to military domains ( .mil ) and to the government accountability office ) report number a - 2005-0043-ale logistics civil augmentation program in kuwait , u.s. army field support command , november 24 , 2004 .

gansler commission u.s. army .

urgent attention required: army expeditionary contracting , report of the commission on army acquisition and program management , at http: / / www.army.mil / docs / gansler_commission_report_final_071031.pdf .

published november 2007 .

appendix b .

selected legislative initiatives on iraq contracting selected legislation introduced in the 110 th congress the house has approved the following bills , as noted below .

h.r .

5658 , national defense authorization act for fy2009 passed house , may 22 , 2008 ; placed on senate legislative calendar , june 3 , 2008 .

h.r .

3033 , contractors and federal spending accountability act of 2008 this provision would require the administrator of general services to establish and maintain a database on defense contractors containing updated information on criminal , civil , or debarment and suspension proceedings as well as establish the interagency committee on debarment and suspension .

congress would require a report within 180 days of the act's enactment .

h.r .

5712 , close the contractor fraud loophole act this provision would require federal contractors to report violations of federal criminal law and over - payments on contracts valued greater than $5 million .

h.r .

3928 , government contractor accountability act of 2007 this provision would require "covered" government contractors to submit certification and other financial disclosure requirements in cases where the contractor receives 80% or less of its annual gross revenue from federal contracts .

contractors covered by this provision are those receiving more than $25 million in annual gross revenues from federal contracts , but are not publicly traded companies required to file reports with the security and exchange commission .

h.r .

4881 , contracting and tax accountability act of 2008 this provision would require tax compliance as a prerequisite for receiving federal contracts , and would prohibit contract awards to certain delinquent federal tax debtors .

several other bills have been introduced during the 110 th congress .

each could potentially impact dod contracting in iraq , as described below .

h.r .

4102 / s. 2398 , stop outsourcing security act this provision would require that only u.s. federal government personnel provide security to personnel at u.s. diplomatic or consular mission in iraq by six months after enactment , and require the president to report to congress s on "the status of planning for the transition away from the use of private contractors for mission critical or emergency essential functions by january 1 , 2009 , in all conflict zones in which congress has authorized the use of force. .

s. 2147 , security contractor accountability act of 2007 this provision would expand the coverage of the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) to include all persons "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united states in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. .

h.r .

528 , iraq contracting fraud review of 2007 this provision would require the secretary of defense , acting through the defense contract audit agency , to review all iraq defense contracts for reconstruction or troop support involving any contractors , subcontractors , or federal officers or employees indicted or convicted for contracting improprieties .

h.r .

663 , new direction for iraq act of 2007 these bill contains provisions addressing war profiteering , the recovery of funds from terminated contracts , and other issues .

a select number of additional legislative initiatives , proposed during the 110 th congress , that may impact defense contracting will follow .

h.r .

4102 , stop outsourcing security act this provision would require that only u.s. federal government personnel provide security to personnel at u.s. diplomatic or consular mission in iraq within six months after bill enactment , and would require that the president report to specified congressional committees on "the status of planning for the transition away from the use of private contractors for mission critical or emergency essential functions by january 1 , 2009 , in all conflict zones in which congress has authorized the use of force. .

s. 2147 , security contractor accountability act of 2007 this provision would broaden the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) to include all persons "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united sates in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. .

h.r .

897 , iraq and afghanistan contractor sunshine act this provision would require the secretaries of defense , state , interior , and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development to provide congress with copies and descriptions of all contracts and task orders valued at over $5 million .

h.r .

3695 , freeze private contractors in iraq act this provision would prohibit an increase in the number of private security contractors employed by dod , state , and usaid that perform certain security functions in iraq .

selected legislation passed in the 110 th congress p.l .

110-181 , the fy2008 national defense authorization act , h.r .

4986 ( formerly h.r .

1585 ) several provisions contained in h.r .

4986 focus on the management and oversight of dod contracts .

key provisions are listed below: section 802 prohibits future contracts for the use of new lead system integrators ; section 813 requires the comptroller general to report to congress on potential modifications to the organization and structure of dod major defense acquisition programs ; section 816 directs the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to conduct an annual review on the systematic deficiencies in major defense acquisition programs ; section 830 directs the comptroller general to report to congress on dod's use of noncompetitive awards ; section 841 establishes a commission to study federal contracting in iraq and afghanistan , called the "commission on wartime contracting ; " section 842 requires the dod inspector general , the sigir for iraq reconstruction , and the sigir for afghanistan reconstruction to collaborate on the development of comprehensive plans to perform a series of audits on dod contracts , subcontracts , and task and delivery orders for the performance of logistical support activities of coalition forces in iraq and afghanistan , as well as audits for federal agency contracts , subcontracts , and task and delivery orders for the performance of security and reconstruction functions in iraq and afghanistan ; section 851 , which would require that the secretary of defense ( as part of the strategic human capital plan for 2008 ) include a separate section of the report focused on the military and civilian acquisition workforce ; section 852 establishes a defense acquisition workforce development fund ; section 861 requires coordination between the dod , the department of state , and the united states agency for international development through the creation of a memorandum of understanding between the three agency heads on matters relating to contracting in iraq and afghanistan ; section 862 requires that the secretary of defense prescribe , within 120 days of enactment , regulations on the selection , training , equipping , and conduct of personnel performing private security functions under a covered contract or covered subcontract in a combat area .

these regulations would include processes for registering , processing , and accounting for such personnel ; and authorizing and accounting for weapons , and investigating the death and injury of such personnel , their discharge of weapons , and incidents of alleged misconduct .

the regulations would also provide guidance to combatant commanders on orders , directives , and instructions to contractors and subcontractors performing private security functions relating to force protection , security , health , safety , relations and interaction with locals , and rules of engagement ; section 863 requires the comptroller general to review annually all contracts in iraq and afghanistan and report to congress on the total number of contracts and task orders , total number of active contracts and task orders , total value of all contracts and task orders , the degree to which dod has awarded noncompetitive contracts , the total number of contractor personnel ( including the total number of contractor personnel performing security functions and the total number of contractor personnel killed or wounded ) ; also , section 863 would require the secretaries of defense and state to provide the comptroller general full accesses to the database as described in section 861 ; section 871 establishes a defense materiel readiness board ; section 872 grants authority to the secretary of defense to designate critical readiness shortfalls ; and section 941 requires the secretary of defense to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the roles and missions of the military forces , known as a quadrennial roles and missions review .

