nigeria is considered a key power in africa , not only because of its size , but also because of its political and economic role on the continent .

nigeria has overtaken south africa as africa's largest economy , and it is one of the world's major sources of high - quality crude oil .

the country's commercial center , lagos , is among the world's largest cities .

nigeria has the fastest - growing population globally , which is forecast to reach 410 million by 2050 and overtake the united states to become the world's third - most populous country .

it also has one of africa's largest militaries , and has played an important role in peace and stability operations on the continent .

few states in africa have the capacity to make a more decisive impact on the region .

despite its oil wealth , nigeria remains highly underdeveloped .

poor governance and corruption have limited infrastructure development and social service delivery , slowing economic growth and keeping much of the country mired in poverty .

nigeria has the world's second - largest hiv / aids - infected population and africa's highest tuberculosis burden .

the country is home to more than 250 ethnic groups , but the northern hausa and fulani , the southwestern yoruba , and the southeastern igbo have traditionally been the most politically active and dominant .

roughly half the population , primarily residing in the north , is muslim .

southern nigeria is predominantly christian , and nigeria's middle belt ( which spans the country's central zone ) is a diverse mix .

ethnic and religious strife have been common in nigeria .

tens of thousands of nigerians have been killed in sectarian and intercommunal clashes in the past two decades .

ethnic , regional , and sectarian divisions often stem from issues related to access to land , jobs , and socioeconomic development , and are sometimes fueled by politicians .

the violent islamist group boko haram has contributed to a major deterioration of security conditions in the northeast since 2009 .

it espouses a salafist interpretation of islam and seeks to capitalize on local frustrations , discredit the government , and establish an islamic state in the region .

the insurgency has claimed thousands of lives and exacerbated an already - dire humanitarian emergency in the impoverished lake chad basin region , comprising nigeria , niger , chad , and cameroon .

nigeria now has one of the largest displaced populations in the world — an estimated 2 million people — most of whom have fled boko haram - related violence .

in late 2013 , the state department designated boko haram and a splinter group , ansaru , as foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) .

boko haram's 2015 pledge of allegiance to the islamic state raised its profile , though the extent of operational ties between the two groups remains unclear .

a boko haram leadership dispute led , in 2016 , to the emergence of a splinter group , the islamic state - west africa ( is - wa ) .

the state department designated is - wa as an fto in early 2018 .

in the southern niger delta region , local grievances related to oil production in the area have fueled conflict and criminality for decades .

intermittent government negotiations with local militants and an ongoing amnesty program have quieted the region , but attacks on oil installations surged briefly in 2016 and remain a threat to stability and oil production .

some militants continue to be involved in various local and transnational criminal activities , including maritime piracy and drug and weapons trafficking .

these networks often overlap with oil theft networks , which contribute to maritime piracy off the coast of nigeria and the wider gulf of guinea ( see map ) .

already among the most dangerous bodies of water in the world , the gulf of guinea has seen a dramatic increase in piracy and attacks against ships in recent years .

presidential and legislative elections slated for mid - february 2019 and gubernatorial and state - level polls due two weeks later increase pressure on some of nigeria's sociopolitical fault lines .

protests in the igbo - dominated southeast over perceived marginalization by the government have led to clashes with security forces ; separatist sentiment among some igbo has arisen against the backdrop of a deadly civil war waged from 1967 to 1970 , during which secessionists fought unsuccessfully to establish an independent republic of biafra .

economic frustration is reportedly widespread in the region , but by many accounts the majority of igbo would not support insurrection .

meanwhile , an emerging conflict in border regions of neighboring cameroon has led over 30,000 cameroonians to seek refuge in nigeria .

in the middle belt , violent competition for resources between nomadic herders , largely muslim , and settled farming communities , many of them christian , has been on the rise in recent years and is spreading into nigeria's southern states .

herder - farmer tensions in nigeria are not new , but they overlap with ethnic and religious divisions and have been exacerbated by desertification , increasing access to sophisticated weapons , land - grabbing by politicians , and banditry .

nigeria , which gained its independence from the united kingdom in 1960 , is a federal republic with 36 states .

its political structure is similar to that of the united states: it has a bicameral legislature with a 109-member senate and a 360-member house of representatives .

nigeria's president , legislators , and governors are directly elected for four - year terms .

the country was ruled by the military for much of the four decades after independence before making the transition to civilian rule in 1999 .

subsequent elections were widely viewed as flawed , with each poll progressively worse than the last .

elections in 2011 were seen as more credible , although they were followed by violent protests in parts of the north that left more than 800 people dead and illustrated northern mistrust and dissatisfaction with the government .

the contest for power between north and south that has broadly defined much of nigeria's modern political history can be traced , in part , to administrative divisions under britain's colonial administration .

northern military leaders dominated the political scene from independence until the country's democratic transition in 1999 .

since the election of president olusegun obasanjo in 1999 , there has been a de facto power - sharing arrangement , often referred to as "zoning," between the country's geopolitical zones , through which the presidency is expected to rotate among regions .

the death of president obasanjo's successor , northern - born president umaru yar'adua , during his first term in office in 2010 , and the subsequent ascension of his southern - born vice president , goodluck jonathan , brought the zoning arrangement into question .

jonathan's decision to run in the 2011 elections was seen by many northerners as a violation of the arrangement , which contributed to the violence that followed the polls .

despite its oil wealth and large economy , nigeria's population is among the world's poorest , and the distribution of wealth is highly unequal .

the average life expectancy for nigerians ( estimated at 59 years in 2018 ) is rising , but the percentage of the population living on less than $1.90 per day has grown in the past decade to a projected 87 million , making nigeria the country with the largest population living in extreme poverty .

over 30% of the population has no access to improved sources of water , less than one - fifth of households have piped water , and some 70% lack access to adequate sanitation , according to the world bank .

nigeria ranked 157 out of 189 in the united nations' 2018 human development index ( hdi ) .

decades of economic mismanagement , instability , and corruption have hindered investment in education and social services and stymied industrial growth .

these challenges notwithstanding , nigeria has attained notable success in public health provision .

a small ebola outbreak in mid - 2014 was swiftly contained , enabling world health organization ( who ) authorities to declare the country ebola - free in october 2014 .

the country has taken great strides to eradicate polio , though sporadic cases have precluded its designation as polio - free .

other successes include decreasing malaria and tuberculosis prevalence and reducing hiv prevalence among pregnant women .

nigeria's hiv / aids adult prevalence rate of 2.9% is relatively low in comparison to southern african nations , but nigeria comprises the largest hiv - positive population in the world after south africa , with more than 3 million infected persons .

malaria remains the leading cause of death in nigeria .

in 2014 , the nigerian government announced the rebasing of its economy , which is now recognized as the largest in africa .

the rebased gdp , substantially larger than south africa's , was almost double what it was previously thought to have been and less reliant on the petroleum sector than expected .

nigeria's gdp now ranks 30 th in the world , according to the world bank , with notable nonoil contributions from the country's mining , services , manufacturing , and agriculture sectors .

economists suggest that the economy nevertheless continues to underperform , held back by poor infrastructure and electricity shortages .

low global oil prices , compounded by niger delta militant attacks on oil installations , led to a recession and sharp decline in real gdp growth in 2016 .

a subsequent rebound saw growth reach 1.9% in 2018 ; the imf forecasts real gdp growth of 2.0% in 2019 .

the organization of the petroleum exporting countries estimated nigeria's crude oil production to be 1.72 million barrels per day ( bpd ) in 2018 , up from 1.66 bpd in 2017 yet below levels recorded in 2010-2015 .

insecurity poses a perennial threat to this output: in june 2018 , vandalism by oil thieves prompted shell's nigerian subsidiary to briefly declare force majeure on exports from one of its streams .

china has played a growing role in nigeria's economy , notably through investment in transport infrastructure , manufacturing , and agriculture and energy projects .

according to the american enterprise institute , chinese investments and contracts in nigeria totaled $8 billion in 2018 , when nigeria ranked as the largest recipient of chinese investment in sub - saharan africa .

notable projects include the 700mw zungeru hydropower plant , projected to be completed in 2020 ; cneec - sinohydro consortium , a chinese firm , is developing the $1.3 billion project , which is jointly funded by the nigerian and chinese governments .

china is also involved in the development of the massive mambilla hydropower project , which is slated to produce more than 3,000mw of energy once operational .

the four - dam , $5.8 billion mambilla project is being constructed by chinese firms and is largely funded by china's exim bank and other chinese lenders ; it is reportedly expected to be completed in 2023 .

after a period of strained relations in the 1990s , when a military dictatorship ruled nigeria , u.s. - nigeria relations steadily improved under president obasanjo ( 1999-2007 ) and remain robust .

diplomatic engagement is sometimes tempered by u.s. concerns with human rights , governance , and corruption issues , which nigerian officials sometimes reject as u.s. interference in their domestic affairs .

in 2010 , the obama and jonathan administrations established the u.s. - nigeria binational commission ( bnc ) as a strategic dialogue to address issues of mutual concern .

buhari's election in 2015 ushered in an improvement in bilateral relations , which became strained due to u.s. criticisms of the jonathan administration's corruption and poor handling of the boko haram crisis .

president obama hosted president buhari at the white house in 2015 .

bilateral relations under the trump administration appear broadly consistent with those pursued under the obama administration .

president trump's call to president buhari in february 2017 , his first to any sub - saharan african leader , suggested continued emphasis on the importance of the bilateral relationship , and nigeria was among the counties visited by then - secretary of state rex tillerson in march 2018 .

president buhari was the first sub - saharan leader to visit the trump white house , in april 2018 .

during the visit , president trump lauded nigeria's security efforts and u.s. cooperation while voicing the need to improve commercial and business ties .

in november 2017 , the commerce department launched the u.s. - nigeria commercial and investment dialogue ( cid ) with an initial focus on "infrastructure , agriculture , digital economy , investment , and regulatory reform. .

deputy secretary of state john sullivan outlined security cooperation , economic growth and development , and democracy and governance as defining goals of u.s. - nigerian relations during the 2017 meeting of the bnc .

assistant secretary of state for african affairs tibor nagy visited nigeria during his first official trip to the continent , in november 2018 .

he indicated a u.s. interest in seeing nigeria play a larger role in the region , both in terms of peacekeeping and advancing democracy .

the assistant secretary described nigeria as at the center of his efforts to increase u.s. trade and investment in africa .

he and other u.s. officials have stressed the importance of free , fair , transparent , and peaceful elections in 2019 .

the united states and like - minded donors expressed concern with reported intimidation , interference , and vote - buying during gubernatorial elections in 2018 .

the united states maintains an embassy in abuja and a consulate in lagos .

the state department also maintains "american corners" in libraries throughout the country to share information on the culture and values of the united states .

the state department's travel advisory for u.s. citizens regarding travel to nigeria notes the risks of armed attacks in the niger delta and the northeast as well as the threat of piracy in the gulf of guinea , and it warns against travel to borno , yobe , and northern adamawa states .

nigeria has played a significant role in peace and stability operations across africa , and the united states has provided the country with security assistance focused on enhancing its peacekeeping capabilities .

given nigeria's strategic position along the coast of the gulf of guinea , the united states has also coordinated with nigeria through various regional forums and maritime security initiatives .

nigeria's waters have been named the most dangerous in the world for maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea .

nigeria is also considered a transshipment hub for narcotics trafficking , and several nigerian criminal organizations have been implicated in the trade .

the u.s. navy has increased its operations in the gulf of guinea and in 2007 launched the african partnership station ( aps ) there .

aps deployments have included port visits to nigeria and joint exercises between u.s. , nigerian , european , and other regional navies .

bilateral counterterrorism cooperation increased in the aftermath of the 2009 bombing attempt of a u.s. airliner by a nigerian national , but was constrained during the jonathan administration despite u.s. concern over the rising boko haram threat .

the nigerian government has coordinated with the department of homeland security , the federal aviation administration , and the international civil aviation organization to strengthen its security systems .

cooperation with the department of defense has also expanded in recent years .

nigeria is a participant in the state department's trans - sahara counterterrorism partnership ( tsctp ) , a u.s. interagency effort that aims to increase regional counterterrorism capabilities and coordination .

its role in that program , however , has been minor in comparison to sahel countries .

u.s. military assistance for regional efforts to counter boko haram has been channeled primarily through engagement with nigeria's neighbors: cameroon , chad , and niger .

support has also been focused on the region's multinational joint task force ( mnjtf ) .

the united states and several other foreign countries conduct periodic aerial surveillance operations in the region .

many u.s. officials , while stressing the importance of the bilateral relationship and the gravity of security threats in and potentially emanating from the country , have been concerned about abuses by security services , and about the government's limited efforts to address perceived impunity within the forces .

obama administration concerns culminated in the 2014 decision to block the sale of u.s. - manufactured cobra helicopters by israel to nigeria .

security cooperation subsequently improved and the obama administration proceeded with plans for the sale of 12 super tucano a - 29 aircraft and accompanying ammunition and weaponry , but when a nigerian jet struck an idp camp in early 2017 , the united states suspended the process .

the trump administration revisited and approved the sale , worth an estimated $345 million , in december 2017 .

in a joint press conference during buhari's 2018 visit to the white house , president trump downplayed the obama administration's concerns .

buhari has faced domestic pressure around the purchase , particularly over his withdrawal , reportedly without parliamentary approval , of nearly $900 million from nigeria's excess crude account to fund the super tucano acquisition and other security - related purchases .

according to the contract award , work on the super tucanos is expected to be completed in may 2024 .

nigerian officials are reportedly sensitive to perceived u.s. interference in internal affairs and have sometimes rejected other forms of assistance , in particular some u.s. military training offers .

upon taking office , president buhari pledged to "insist on the rule of law , and deal with any proven cases of deviation from laws of armed conflict , including human rights abuses. .

nonetheless , observers question whether the government has taken serious steps to hold senior commanders responsible for abuses , and raise concern that "scorched earth" tactics may persist .

nigeria routinely ranks among the top recipients of u.s. bilateral foreign assistance in africa .

the united states is nigeria's largest bilateral donor , providing an average of over $450 million annually ( see table 1 ) .

according to the state department's fy2019 congressional budget justification , "assistance will address the drivers of conflict by seeking to strengthen democratic governance , broaden economic growth by introducing methods that increase agricultural sector productivity and efficiency , and expand the provision of basic services to nigerians at the state and local levels. .

nigeria is a focus country under the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) and the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , and nigerian farmers benefit from agriculture programs under the feed the future ( ftf ) initiative that focus on building partnerships with the private sector to expand exports and generate employment .

interventions to encourage private sector participation in trade and energy are also key components of economic growth initiatives in nigeria .

u.s. security assistance to nigeria has focused on enhancing maritime security , counternarcotics , counterterrorism , and peacekeeping capacity .

counterterrorism assistance to nigeria , while increasing , has been constrained by various factors , including human rights concerns .

the state department has included nigeria on its child soldiers prevention act ( cspa ) list since 2015 due to the cjtf's recruitment and use of children .

nigeria has received various equipment via the excess defense articles ( eda ) program , including naval vessels and mine resistant ambush protected vehicles ( mraps ) .

nigeria was one of four country recipients of a $40 million global security contingency fund regional program launched in 2014 to counter boko haram .

u.s. africa command ( africom ) has provided advanced infantry training for some of the troops deployed in the northeast and has deployed u.s. military advisors to the nigerian military's operational headquarters in maiduguri , in borno .

u.s. advisors have also supported the headquarters of the african union - authorized , donor - supported mnjtf , which is commanded by a nigerian general .

u.s. military assistance has increased under the trump administration: the department of defense ( dod ) has notified congress of over $16 million in dod train - and - equip support ( 10 u.s.c .

333 ) in fy2018 and fy2019 .

terrorism - related concerns have dominated congressional action on nigeria in recent years , although some members have also continued to monitor human rights , governance , and humanitarian issues ; developments in the niger delta ; nigeria's energy sector ; and violence in the country's middle belt .

nigeria's elections are often a focus of congressional interest: two resolutions introduced in the final weeks of the 115 th congress , h.res .

1170 and s.res .

716 , would have called for nigeria to hold credible , transparent , and peaceful elections in 2019 ; those resolutions have been reintroduced in the 116 th congress as h.con.res .

4 and s.con.res .

1 .

several congressional committees have held hearings on boko haram in recent years .

the house homeland security subcommittee on counterterrorism and intelligence held congress's first hearing to examine the group in late 2011 .

prior to the state department's decision to designate the group as an fto , several members in the 113 th congress introduced legislation , including h.r .

3209 and s. 198 , that would have advocated for the designation .

other recent boko haram - related legislation includes , but is not limited to , the following: p.l .

114-92 ( fy2016 national defense authorization act , 114 th congress ) , with report language directing the secretaries of defense and state to provide an assessment of the boko haram threat and a description of u.s. counter - boko haram efforts .

p.l .

114-266 ( boko haram regional threat strategy , 114 th congress ) , requiring a regional strategy to address the threat posed by boko haram .

p.l .

115-31 ( consolidated appropriations act , 2017 , 115 th congress ) , making funds available for assistance for nigeria , including counterterrorism programs , activities to support women and girls targeted by boko haram , and efforts to protect freedoms of expression , association , and religion .

