the current federal contested elections act ( fcea ) , enacted in 1969 and codified at 2 u.s.c .

sections 381-396 , sets forth procedures for contesting a seat in the house .

in modern practice , it is the primary method for a losing candidate to challenge the results of a house election .

the fcea defines "contestant" as an individual who contests the election of a member of the house of representatives under the statute , and defines "contestee" as a member of the house of representatives whose election is contested under the statute .

in the 113 th congress , the committee on house administration found that a tax - exempt organization did not meet the definition of a contestant under the fcea and therefore , was not authorized to file a contest .

the parties to an election contest case may , by stipulation , agree to a state recount , or may conduct their own recount , if permitted , which may then become the basis of a stipulation upon which the house may act .

however , a contestant on his or her own accord generally may not conduct a recount without the supervision of the committee after an election contest has been initiated .

a motion for a recount in an fcea - initiated election contest may be granted by the committee if there is sufficient evidence to raise at least a presumption of fraud or irregularity .

a recount would not necessarily be ordered by the committee on the mere assertion of fraud or irregularity .

a party to a contested election case who would claim that the state recount of the ballots was in error would have the burden of proof to establish such error before the committee would order a recount .

the burden would be on the contestant to prove to the committee that a recount would show substantial fraud and irregularity , change the result of the election , and make him or her the winner .

moreover , a contestant arguably should exhaust state remedies in obtaining a recount under state election laws or through the state courts before requesting the committee to conduct such a recount .

although the committee has the power to undertake a recount outside of state recount proceedings when it deems it necessary , it may wait until the contestant has exhausted state remedies including state court actions .

the committee , after voting for a recount , may reconsider its action and determine that such a recount is not necessary .

should the committee decide that a recount , limited or districtwide , is necessary , a set of stipulations is generally agreed upon by counsel for the parties subject to the approval of the committee , and the committee may issue a set of rules that would govern the recount .

stipulations made by the parties or a motion or house resolution stipulating certain ground rules could include , inter alia , such matters as controlling house precedents ; controlling statutory and / or constitutional provisions relating to recounts , ballots ; conduct of election , etc .

 ; disputes over qualifications of voters ; scope of recount ; procedure by which committee counsel , auditors , or staff are to examine ballots , ballot boxes , tally sheets , and records and other pertinent documents and materials ; procedure for counting ballots ; decision on presence of press during counting ; designation of election ( counting ) judges ; comparison of registration books and poll books , counting of spoiled and mutilated ballots ; determination of fraud and any irregularities ; criteria for proper marking of ballots to determine clear intention of the voter ; and allowing counsel to file objections and evidence at any stage of the recount proceedings .

under the u.s. constitution , there is a division of authority with respect to elections to federal office , whereby the states have significant administrative authority over the procedures of federal elections , that is , authority over the "times , places and manner" of federal elections ( unless congress designates otherwise ) .

article i , section 5 , clause 1 of the constitution expressly provides , however , that each house of congress is the judge of the elections of its own members , and thus the house has sole and exclusive jurisdiction to make an unconditional and final judgment determining the right to a seat in the house .

in light of such power , the committee is not bound to follow state law or state court decisions concerning the procedures of a house election , and may make its own determinations independently .

although state court decisions and state laws are not binding on the committee , they may be used to aid the committee in its determination of a house contested election case when they are consistent with the committee's notions of justice and equity .

in 1917 the committee on elections explained: your committee maintains that the authority of the house of representatives to judge of the elections and qualifications of its members is infinite .

since the formation of the government the house has often signified its willingness to abide by the construction given by the state court , in good faith , to its statutes .

but the decisions of a state court are not necessarily conclusive on the house , and will only guide and control it when such decisions commend themselves to its favorable consideration .

in short , the house has the final say over house contested election cases .

generally , the committee and the house "seek[ ] to follow state law" and state court decisions in resolving house election contests , but in certain instances , this has not been the case , particularly with regard to the validity of the ballots where the intentions of the voters are clear but that have been declared invalid for failure to follow certain "technicalities" required by state law for marking ballots .

for example , in a 1902 house contested election case , the house elections committee refused to reject ballots merely because they had not been marked according to the technical requirements of a state election law .

the committee ruled that it would accept those ballots where the intention of the voter was clear , regardless of a state election statute that required that ballots had to be marked strictly within the designated space .

thus , the committee on house administration has noted that "in addition to the fact that the house is not legally bound to follow state law , there are instances where it is in fact bound by justice and equity to deviate from it," such as to ensure that "the will of the voters should not be invalidated" by mere technicalities of state law or regulation in instances where voters' "obvious intent" may be discerned .

in addition , the committee has noted that the "house has chosen overwhelmingly in election cases throughout its history not to penalize voters for errors and mistakes on election officials. .

that is , in the absence of fraud , and where the honest intent of the voters' may be determined , "the house has counted votes ... rather than denying the franchise to any individual due to malfeasance of election officials. .

in the course of its investigation , the committee on house administration has a number of remedies available , including a recommendation of dismissal upon a motion to dismiss by the contestee , a recommendation on the seating of a certain candidate on the grounds that he or she received a majority of the valid votes cast , a recommendation to seek a recount and to investigate any fraud or irregularities in the voting process in various precincts , a recommendation to order the seating of a certain candidate after the committee has conducted a recount and investigation , and a recommendation that the returns from the election be rejected and that the seat be declared vacant and a new election be held .

however , in the 1985 case of mccloskey and mcintyre , the committee noted that the house of representatives has been "very hesitant" to declare a seat vacant , preferring instead to "measure the wrong and correct the returns," when possible .

the committee reiterated the general principle that , "[n]othing short of an impossibility of ascertaining for whom the majority of votes were given ought to vacate an election , especially if by such decision the people must ... necessarily go unrepresented for a long period of time. .

indeed , the committee in mccloskey and mcintyre characterized setting aside an election and declaring a house seat vacant as a "drastic action" that it recommended against "in nearly every instance. .

if a contested election case is not resolved by motion , such as a motion to dismiss by the contestee , or by other prior committee proceedings , it is generally disposed of pursuant to a house resolution following consideration and debate on the house floor .

a resolution disposing of a contested election case is privileged and can be called up at any time for consideration by the house .

the resolution , along with the committee report on a house contested election case , may be called up as privileged and be agreed to by voice vote and without debate .

in some cases , the parties to an election contest have been permitted to be present during the debate , although the parties generally have not participated .

in a situation where the contestee is a member , he or she may be permitted to participate in the debate on the house resolution disposing of the contest .

after floor consideration and debate , the adoption by the house of a resolution disposing of an election contest , whether by declaring that one of the parties is entitled to a seat in the house or by declaring a vacancy with appropriate notice to the governor of the state , essentially ends the contested election case .

with respect to the former , the prevailing party is administered the oath of office and seated in the house .

