in the 1994 general election , republicans won a majority of seats in the house for the first time since the 83 rd congress ( 1953-1955 ) .

by practice , the majority party organizes the house .

it elects its speaker , chairs its committees , holds majorities on its committees , selects its officers , and manages its legislative agenda .

one of the majority's prerogatives is writing the house's rules and using its majority status to effect the chamber's rules on the day the new house convenes .

it is a feature of the house , but not of the senate , that it must adopt rules at the convening of each congress .

it is also a feature of the house that it relies heavily on its formal rules , and formal means of temporarily changing them , rather than on the informal , ad hoc procedures so often used in the senate .

although each new house largely adopts the chamber rules that existed in the previous congress , each new house also adopts changes to those rules .

among the many subjects that the rules may cover , these changes can strengthen the ability of the majority to control the legislative process and the legislative agenda , and they can bestow rights on the minority party , minority interests , and individual members .

the changes made by the republican majority in the 104 th congress rules resolution and in subsequent rules resolutions adopted by republican majorities through the 109 th congress addressed nearly every aspect of the legislative process , budget process , committee organization , administrative operations , and ethical standards .

the changes the republican majority made were not conceived solely in the days following the 1994 elections , but drew on many experiences and sources .

this report has two principal parts reflecting its two principal purposes .

the first part analyzes the sources of republican rules changes .

republicans built their critique of democratic management of the house over many years .

in drafting rules for the 104 th and subsequent congresses and in other exercises of the house's rulemaking authority , republicans could draw on their experience and on a variety of partisan and bipartisan plans and proposals .

the first purpose of the report is to identify the sources of the broad rewriting of house rules in the 104 th congress and additional changes in subsequent congresses .

the second part of the report organizes rules changes affecting committees and the house floor topically and changes affecting budgetary legislation , house administration , and ethics by congress , and briefly explains the changes in layman's terms .

these changes were included in the rules resolutions adopted at the beginning of the 104 th through 109 th congresses , special orders adopted in conjunction with the rules resolutions , and speakers' policy announcements made at the convening of each of these congresses .

the major topical headings for this part of the report are as follows: " rules changes affecting committees " " rules changes affecting the chamber and floor " " rules changes affecting budgetary legislation " " rules changes affecting administrationof the house " " rules changes affecting ethics standards " each of these major headings is further subdivided by topic or by congress .

the second purpose of the report is to catalogue and briefly explain by topic — regardless of the location of a topic in one or more rules — specific changes to rules over the course of republican majority control of the house .

this report supplements the official source of rules changes , the house rules and manual .

this volume , printed in each congress to reflect adoption of a rules resolution , contains the current provisions of house rules .

for each rule , it also contains the house parliamentarian's notes describing changes to the rule ( or its specific clauses ) and decisions of presiding officers and the house based upon the rule .

rules in the house rules and manual are arranged by rule number .

this report does not describe all of the actions taken during each congress that effected permanent and temporary organizational , procedural , administrative , and other changes in the operation of the house .

in addition to changes made through rules resolutions , such changes were made through freestanding legislation and as provisions of bills or resolutions , and in report language on legislation and in joint explanatory statements accompanying conference reports .

legislative branch appropriations bills and budgetary legislation contained organizational , procedural , and other changes that were temporary or permanent .

so - called fast - track or expedited house procedures were included in legislation that otherwise addressed a policy matter .

democratic caucus and republican conference rules and decisions also had an impact on how specific house rules ( such as rules on suspension of the rules and on committee assignment limits ) were implemented .

in a few instances , changes made by means other than the house rules resolution are described , where necessary to understand changes made in rules resolutions .

selected references to relevant freestanding bills and resolutions , however , are provided in footnotes in the report .

between the 104 th and 109 th congresses , some committees were created and others were abolished , and some committees' names were changed .

in this report , the names of committees appear as they existed in the specific congress referenced .

following the next section , " the 103 rd congress: prelude to change ," there is a section titled " recodification of house rules , 106 th congress . .

during the 105 th congress ( 1997-1999 ) , a rules committee task force completed the first recodification of house rules since the 1880s .

citations appearing in this report are only to the recodified rules .

the parliamentarian's notes in the house rules and manual , attached to specific rules , clauses , or paragraphs , trace the recodification of specific provisions of house rules , in addition to changes to the text of the rules .

this report is the first in a series on house rules changes .

a second report currently covers changes for the 110 th through 112 th congresses: crs report r42395 , a retrospective of house rules changes since the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

it is also divided into two parts , with the first part covering the partisan critique of the majority party's management of the house — a source of rules changes when the majority changed — and the second part organizing rules changes topically .

the topic headings in reports in the series are the same , to the extent that the same procedural and other topics were addressed in each time frame .

the house rules changes made in the 104 th congress reflected a republican frame of reference that was built over many years as the minority party , including more democratic floor processes , minority party rights , a subordinate role for seniority , accountability in house operations , and streamlining of the house's organization and staffing .

the rules changes in the succeeding five republican - organized congresses continued to draw on this frame of reference , but also drew on current experiences in managing the house .

while republican members as members of the minority party for 40 years had less invested in the status quo of the house than democratic members , they nonetheless had some investment , such as the opportunity awaiting those republican members who might assume the chairmanship of a committee on which they had long served as ranking minority member .

these interests also influenced the final 104 th congress rules package .

republican criticisms relevant to the changes made in the 104 th congress began with the decisions on rules made at the direction of the democratic caucus beginning after the 1974 election .

the committee reform amendments , agreed to just a month before the 1974 elections , had abolished proxy voting in committees and allocated to the minority one - third of statutory committee staff and one - third of investigative committee staff .

the rules for the house in 94 th congress ( 1975-1977 ) restored proxy voting , although requiring proxies to be given in writing , and abrogated the committee staff allocation formula , with minority committee staffing in the 94 th congress anticipated to be about 20% of total committee staffing .

as the democratic majority began innovating in the 1970s and 1980s with special rules — such as modified closed rules and "king of the hill" rules — to give a procedural advantage to its preferred policy outcome , republican house members formed groups , such as the conservative opportunity society and the republican '92 group , to contest democrats' legislative management of the house by employing house procedures to attract attention , to critique democratic proposals , and to develop and publicize substantive republican alternatives .

the conservative opportunity society , founded by then - representative newt gingrich in 1983 , promoted conservative proposals as an alternative to the so - called welfare state .

the '92 group , named for the goal of electing a republican majority in the house in 1992 , was founded by republican moderates such as then - representatives olympia snowe and tom tauke .

it also advanced proposals for governing as an alternative to democratic legislation .

then , in the 102 nd and 103 rd congresses , scandals cast a pall over public perceptions of congress , exposing members' special treatment and self - dealing , and contributing to the public's sense of disconnection between members of congress and their constituents .

the disclosure of damaging information began in 1991 with an investigation of the house post office stamp clerks for embezzlement and drug dealing .

a reported allegation by a post office supervisor that he had helped members of congress "get thousands of dollars in cash through phony transactions disguised as stamp purchases" led to subpoenas for the records of three members , one of whom was the chair of the ways and means committee , representative dan rostenkowski .

on may 31 , 1994 , representative rostenkowski was indicted on 17 criminal charges involving embezzlement , fraud , and coverup .

in september 1991 , a general accounting office audit revealed that members had written 8,331 bad checks ( non - sufficient fund checks ) in the 12 months ending june 30 , 1990 , at the house bank , a check - cashing service in the capitol for members and staff .

later that month , house administration committee members revealed that more than 250 members were in arrears for bills at house restaurants for more than $255,000 .

in march 1992 , the house voted to release the bad check audit data , including members' names .

in may 1992 , the ranking republican member of the house appropriations committee was separately indicted on bribery and illegal gratuities charges .

in august 1992 , a democratic member from massachusetts was separately indicted on charges of extortion , racketeering , and tax evasion .

in the 102 nd and 103 rd congresses , a greater than usual number of members of both chambers were investigated by their house's respective ethics committees or federal authorities and a number of members of the house were indicted .

facing a volatile electorate in the 1992 elections , 52 representatives retired , 19 were defeated in primaries , and 24 were defeated in the general election .

while the state of the economy set the tone for the 1992 elections , the scandals , particularly the house bank scandal , figured prominently in incumbents' decisions not to run for reelection and in incumbents' defeat .

in the 1994 election , voters ended democrats' 40-year majority in the house .

while a desire for change was a theme that political observers found among the electorate , a significant group of voters responded specifically to the republicans' campaign manifesto , the contract with america , which called for "institutional reforms designed to make the house less cumbersome and more accountable. .

the republicans' 104 th congress rules package , subsequent rules packages , and other exercises of the house's rulemaking authority drew many specific changes from experiences like these and from three principal sources: the republican alternative rules package in the 103 rd congress , the recommendations of the joint committee on the organization of congress , and the house republicans' contract with america .

these three sources are discussed in detail in this section .

the recodification of house rules was a recommendation of the joint committee on the organization of congress .

a brief explanation is included here in this report since references to the numbers and clauses of rules in succeeding sections are to the recodified rules .

with the speaker's approval , the rules committee established a task force on recodification at the committee's organizational meeting for the 105 th congress .

house rules had last been comprehensively recodified in the 1880s .

fifty - one rules were collapsed to twenty - eight , without substantive change but with deletion of obsolete provisions .

the recodification sought to use consistent language , to cluster together like provisions , and to retain rules numbers long associated with certain procedures .

the rules committee presented its recommendations to house leaders , chairs , and ranking minority members in october 1998 .

the proposed recodification was adopted when the house adopted its rules for the 106 th congress on january 6 , 1999 .

the parliamentarian's notes in the house rules and manual , attached to specific rules , clauses , or paragraphs , trace the recodification of specific provisions of house rules , in addition to changes to the text of the rules .

therefore , citations appearing in the balance of this report are only to the recodified rules , and only to a clause of a rule at the time a change was made .

cross references to house rules prior to recodification may be found in the parliamentarian's notes or through table 2 , and changes following recodification to the numbering of clauses , paragraphs , and subparagraphs may be found in the parliamentarian's notes .

surveys and hearings conducted by the joint committee on the organization of congress showed that members and staff , in overwhelming numbers , ranked committee structure and other matters involving committees to be among their greatest concerns .

the house had previously made extensive changes to committee organization or procedures or both in the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , the legislative reorganization act of 1970 , the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 , the committee reform amendments of 1974 , and a 1980 resolution realigning committee jurisdiction over energy .

incremental changes to committee organization and procedures had been made in biennial rules resolutions , and , as noted above , decisions in the democratic - controlled house in the 103 rd congress eliminated four select committees .

changes to the committee system made in rules resolutions in the 104 th congress and subsequently addressed most aspects of the committee system .

the following section identifies changes made to the committee system on the opening day of each congress since the 104 th congress in resolutions adopting the rules of the house and establishing special orders , and pursuant to the speakers' announcements .

the section is organized around three central themes: ( 1 ) structure and organization , including committee chairmanships and committee assignments , committee jurisdiction , and subcommittees ; ( 2 ) procedure , including committee hearings and meetings , committee reports , referral , and oversight ; and ( 3 ) staff and funding .

while in the minority , republican complaints included being denied the opportunity to offer amendments to measures because of restrictive rules , an inability to routinely offer a motion to recommit with instructions , the increased volume of commemorative legislation , and a floor schedule that was neither family friendly nor conducive to deliberation .

on the opening day of the 104 th congress , the new majority rules package attempted to address some of these complaints , while renewing procedural rules that allowed them to control the schedule , agenda , and proceedings .

over the next several congresses , some rules changes agreed to in 1995 were modified or even repealed as the majority party considered the competing demands of deliberation and decision making .

in the 108 th congress , in response to the september 11 , 2001 , and anthrax terrorist attacks , the majority's rules package addressed a previously unanticipated concern: how could a house with fewer members conduct business ? .

the following section identifies changes made to operations on the house floor on the opening day of each congress from the 104 th through the 109 th congress with adoption of the resolution continuing but amending the rules of the house and establishing special orders , and pursuant to the speaker's announcements .

it is organized topically , with cross references between the different topics and to related changes in other sections of the report .

this section of the report explains or lists rules and separate orders related to budgetary legislation that were included in each house's rules resolution in the 104 th through the 109 th congresses .

other sources of change to the consideration of budgetary legislation , such as the annual concurrent resolution on the budget that is often a source of permanent or temporary changes in the budget process , have not been analyzed .

other process changes may be included in appropriations acts and other freestanding legislation ; those changes are not discussed in this report .

rules changes beginning in the 104 th congress affected the structure of the house's administration and the relationships within it .

some offices were abolished , while others were created .

responsibilities were shifted , and accountability was increased .

modern practices , such as financial audits , were put in place , and traditional practices , such as requirements for distribution of printed materials , were reformed in light of changed conditions , such as the proliferation of versatile desktop information technology .

changes to the administration of the house have also been implemented in all congresses since the 104 th congress through other legislation , not covered here , including the annual legislative branch appropriations bills , and freestanding legislation , such as the house administrative reform technical corrections act .

many changes in the administration of the house were taken at the initiative of the house leadership , the house administration committee or house oversight committee , the house appropriations committee , house officials , the house and senate together , or legislative branch agencies .

for example , in 1994 , neither thomas nor the legislative information system existed , and the use of information technology was not ubiquitous in the house .

the world wide web was in its infancy , and use of e - mail was still somewhat novel .

the blackberry® personal digital assistant was first introduced in 1999 .

the commitment to using information technology in the house was not generally effected through changes to house rules or specific provisions in legislation , but through initiatives exercised in various fora , including committee reports on legislation , joint explanatory statements accompanying conference reports , and actions of the house administration committee not requiring house consideration .

again , this report analyzes the rules , special orders , and speaker's announcements at the convening of a congress and not all of the actions taken during a congress .

with regard to ethics standards , the rules packages before the house at the beginning of each congress since the 104 th congress largely dealt with technical matters .

substantive changes were achieved at other times through house resolutions and new laws — many of them consequential and far - reaching — and through the parties' revisions of their own rules .

the house committee on standards of official conduct also regularly issues advisory memoranda and provides other assistance interpreting the ethical standards applicable to members , officers , and employees of the house .

the ethics changes made in the rules package at the beginning of the 109 th congress , however , proved controversial , and the house rescinded those changes and reinstated the text of the ethics rules from the 108 th congress within four months .

a dispute between the majority and minority over committee rules and staffing also delayed the organization of the standards of official conduct committee in the 109 th congress .

again , this report analyzes the rules , special orders , and speaker's announcements at the convening of a congress and not all of the actions taken during a congress .

 ( for changes affecting the structure of the ethics committee , see " structure and organization " under " rules changes affecting committees ." ) .

as stated earlier in this report , the house rules changes made in the 104 th congress , and since , including changes affecting the organization of committees and the administration of the house , reflected a republican frame of reference that was built over many years as the minority party .

republican criticisms of changes in the house made at the direction of the democratic caucus beginning after the 1974 election and continuing through the 103 rd congress , the ideas of the conservative opportunity society in the 1980s , the republican '92 group , the republican rules package of the 103 rd congress , the recommendations of the bipartisan joint committee on the organization of congress , the contract with america , and other sources came together in the rules package the republicans put before the house in the 104 th congress .

the republican majority continued to draw on these antecedents in rules packages for subsequent congresses .

the extensive changes of the 104 th congress were followed by incremental changes in the 105 th , 106 th , and 107 th congresses .

at the same time , a number of rules did not change , either at all or substantially .

the great bulk of house rules was continued from congress to congress since the rules had been built up over decades to support the majority in its organization and operation of the house .

after control of four congresses , however , a confluence of events caused the republicans to revisit the rules and some of the changes they had made .

with the events of 9 / 11 and the anthrax attacks on capitol hill , publication of the 9 / 11 commission report , the return of the federal budget deficit , a republican president in the white house and republican control of both houses of congress , and a widening of republican margins in the house and senate , house republicans made more extensive changes in house rules in the 108 th and 109 th congresses and adapted to changed conditions .

the republican majority adjusted to the end of the first round of committee chair term limits , discontinued the speaker's term limit , accommodated demands for additional subcommittees , created a homeland security committee and altered other committees' jurisdictions vis - à - vis homeland security , realigned appropriations committee subcommittees to handle homeland security spending and then reorganized the subcommittees to better accommodate republican spending priorities , implemented new analyses of tax legislation , grappled with the possibility of a terrorist attack that could kill or disable many representatives , and picked their way through ethical breaches by both democratic and republican members .

through actions intended to open up congress , and especially the house — including the advent of thomas , putting documents online at committee and other websites , and "webcasting" — congress allowed more citizens to know more , and to know more quickly , about congress , and , concomitantly and unavoidably , readily gave lobbyists and political activists more knowledge and insight into congress and policymaking .

committee and floor actions were increasingly accompanied by intense lobbying , grassroots communications , public relations , and coverage 24 / 7 by an array of traditional and new news and opinion outlets in a variety of media .

most members also felt compelled to be in their districts three or four days every week , and many full weeks , making themselves available to their constituents .

the cost of campaigns and the pressure to raise money for their parties , too , opened many members to more contact with more people who became interested in an individual member's actions .

congressional districts have become more politically homogeneous through demographic changes and redistricting , and fewer voters are registering by party , arguably leaving a more politically homogeneous set of voters voting in each party's primaries .

rules changes do not necessarily enable a majority to pass legislation , to keep all the party's members together , to work smoothly with the minority , to achieve the same outcomes as the other body , or to overcome voter sentiments .

rules facilitate the majority's organization and operation of the house , but they do not dictate to party leaders and others how to run the house .

in more recent congresses , the republican majority needed to accommodate a more assertive range of republican members' perspectives , and to deal with an emboldened minority .

consequently , the number of open — and modified open — special rules diminished and the number of structured rules increased , a third day for the consideration of legislation by suspension of the rules was added , fewer days were spent in session , more competition over jurisdiction between committees occurred , some measures passed by the house could not pass the senate , and convening conferences between the chambers was sometimes problematic .

despite the extensive rules changes in the house since the 104 th congress , the house remains one of the two independent political institutions of congress , designed to be so by the framers .

interest balances interest , as noted in the federalist papers ( no .

10 ) , and unless there is majority political will — not necessarily a party majority but a majority of members of each house — to take an action , such as make a specific law , that action will not happen .

one role of congress is to make law , but its larger role is to winnow the proposals about what should be law — because some proposals are bad ideas or lack public support or offend a constituency or cost too much or are impractical or are for some other reason unable to generate the needed majorities .

if rules — chamber rules , not house special rules — allow opportunities for all members to participate at all stages of the legislative process , in both chambers , then the framers' system would be viewed by many as working .

as the 109 th congress entered its closing months , it was a telling statistic that 60% of representatives , delegates , and the resident commissioner had not known another set of rules and operational frame of reference than the one that has existed since the 104 th congress .

of the 438 members of the house in august 2006 , 265 sitting members began their service in the 104 th or a later congress — 153 republicans and 112 democrats .

twenty - one members , whose service began in the 103 rd congress or before , left the house by retirement , resignation , or death during the 109 th congress , and the house ultimately welcomed 60 new members , elected during the 109 th congress or in the 2006 election .

the rules of the house do not exist to achieve a specific legislative result .

they are available to all members and to any majority or minority .

many factors besides party control , and the party's use of rules , affect the congressional environment .

to look back in history , speaker thomas bracken reed could be said to have created the modern , majority - minority house with his rulings , but he could not have contemplated how a very strong speaker like joseph cannon would use the speakership to dominate the house .

the corrections calendar was announced with great fanfare when it was created in 1995 ; it had long been moribund when it was terminated in the rules package for the 109 th congress .

the consideration of legislation under suspension of the rules was a minor , relatively infrequent procedure 40 years ago ; motions to suspend the rules were now in order mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays when the house is in session .

the congressional budget act of 1974 called for two budget resolutions each year ; the procedure was impractical and hugely time consuming and was abandoned .

the house rules — the common language of the house — are very important components of governance , and they exist for all members and all majorities and minorities to use .

