the federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program provides income support to eligible workers through the payment of uc benefits during a spell of unemployment .

uc benefits are available for a maximum duration of up to 26 weeks in most states .

unemployment benefits may be extended for up to 13 or 20 weeks by the extended benefit ( eb ) program under certain state economic conditions .

for information on the temporary , now - expired emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program , which provided additional unemployment benefits depending on state economic conditions during the period of july 2008 to december 2013 , see crs report r42444 , emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) : status of benefits prior to expiration .

certain groups of workers who lose their jobs because of international competition may qualify for income support through trade adjustment act ( taa ) programs .

unemployed workers may be eligible to receive disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) benefits if they are not eligible for regular uc and if their unemployment may be directly attributed to a declared major disaster .

former civilian federal employees may be eligible for unemployment benefits through the unemployment compensation for federal employees ( ucfe ) program .

former u.s. military servicemembers may be eligible for unemployment benefits through the unemployment compensation for ex - servicemembers ( ucx ) program .

the emergency unemployment compensation act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-164 ) provides that ex - servicemembers be treated the same as other unemployed workers with respect to benefit levels , the waiting period for benefits , and benefit duration .

this report describes two kinds of unemployment benefits in detail: regular uc and eb .

the report explains their basic eligibility requirements , benefits , and financing structures .

uc is a joint federal - state program financed by federal taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes under the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) .

the uc program has a direct impact on almost every business in the united states as most businesses are subject to state and federal unemployment taxes .

an estimated $6.3 billion in federal unemployment taxes and $39.1 billion in state unemployment taxes will be collected in fy2018 .

in fy2018 , states will spend a projected $28.6 billion on regular uc benefits .

approximately 141.0 million jobs are covered by the uc program .

originally , the intent of the uc program , among other things , was to help counter economic fluctuations such as recessions .

this intent is reflected in the current uc program's funding and benefit structure .

when the economy grows , uc program revenue rises through increased tax revenues while uc program spending falls as fewer workers are unemployed .

the effect of collecting more taxes than are spent dampens demand in the economy .

this also creates a surplus of funds or a "cushion" of available funds for the uc program to draw upon during a recession .

in a recession , uc tax revenue falls and uc program spending rises as more workers lose their jobs and receive uc benefits .

the increased amount of uc payments to unemployed workers dampens the economic effect of earnings losses by injecting additional funds into the economy .

the eb program was established by the federal - state extended unemployment compensation act of 1970 ( euca ) , p.l .

91-373 ( 26 u.s.c .

3304 , note ) .

euca may extend receipt of unemployment benefits ( extended benefits ) at the state level if certain economic situations exist within the state .

the eb program is triggered when a state's insured unemployment rate ( iur ) or total unemployment rate ( tur ) reaches certain levels .

all states must pay up to 13 weeks of eb if the iur for the previous 13 weeks is at least 5% and is 120% of the average of the rates for the same 13-week period in each of the two previous years .

there are two other optional thresholds that states may choose .

 ( states may choose one , two , or none. ) .

if the state has chosen a given option , they would provide the following: option 1: an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's iur is at least 6% , regardless of previous years' averages .

option 2: an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's tur is at least 6.5% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years ; an additional 20 weeks of benefits if the tur is at least 8% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years .

each state's iur and tur are determined by the state of residence ( agent state ) of the unemployed worker rather than by the state of employment ( liable state ) .

eb benefits are not "grandfathered" when a state triggers "off" the program .

when a state triggers "off" of an eb period , all eb benefit payments in the state cease immediately regardless of individual entitlement .

for current information on states that have eb available , see the u.s. dol eb trigger notices , which are available at https: / / workforcesecurity.doleta.gov / unemploy / claims_arch.asp .

the timing of when an eb period is activated depends on whether the trigger is based on the state's iur or tur .

if eb is activated based upon the iur ( triggers "on" ) , the eb period is immediately in effect .

few states trigger on to eb using an iur based measure .

if eb is activated based upon the tur , the activation is subject to a different requirement .

by law , a state triggering on to an eb period based upon a tur based trigger will begin to offer those benefits on the third week after the first week for which there is a state "on" indicator .

the analogous rules apply for deactivating an eb period .

if an eb period is deactivated based upon the state failing to meet iur based trigger requirements ( triggers "off" ) , the eb period is immediately ended .

if an eb period triggers off based upon a state failing to meet tur based trigger requirements , the eb period will end on the third week after the first week for which there is a state "off" indicator .

by federal law , no eb period shall last for a period of less than 13 consecutive weeks , and no eb period may begin before the 14 th week after the close of a prior eb period with respect to such state .

the department of labor produces trigger notices indicating which states qualify for eb benefits — as well as euc08 benefits when the program was authorized — and provides the beginning and ending dates of payable periods for each qualifying state .

the trigger notices covering state eligibility for these programs can be found at https: / / workforcesecurity.doleta.gov / unemploy / claims_arch.asp .

the iur statistics change weekly , as they are based upon weekly programmatic data .

the tur statistics change monthly , as they are based upon monthly local area unemployment statistics ( laus ) data .

the eb program imposes additional federal restrictions on individual eligibility for benefits beyond the state requirements for regular uc .

the eb program requires that a worker make a "systematic and sustained" work search .

furthermore , the worker may not receive benefits if he or she refused an offer of "suitable" work , which is defined as "any work within such individual's capabilities. .

in addition , p.l .

97-35 , among other items , amended the euca to require that claimants work at least 20 weeks of full - time insured employment or equivalent in insured wages during their base period .

states use one , two , or three different methods for determining an "equivalent" to 20 weeks of full - time insured employment .

these methods are described in both federal law ( section 202 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the euca ) and regulation ( 20 c.f.r .

615.4 ( b ) ) .

in practice , states that require any of these three methods for receipt of regular uc benefits and do not allow for exceptions to those requirements do not need to establish that the worker meets the 20 weeks of full - time insured employment .

the three methods are listed below: earnings in the base period equal to at least 1.5 times the high - quarter wages ; or earnings in the base period of at least 40 times the most recent weekly benefit amount , and if this alternative is adopted , it shall use the weekly benefit amount ( including dependents' allowances ) payable for a week of total unemployment ( before any reduction because of earnings , pensions or other requirements ) that applied to the most recent week of regular benefits ; or earnings in the base period equal to at least 20 weeks of full - time insured employment , and if this alternative is adopted , the term "full - time" shall have the meaning provided by the state law .

the base period may be the regular base period or , if applicable in the state , the period may be the alternative base period or the extended base period if that determined the regular uc benefit .

the underlying reasoning behind the requirements seems to be the following: because there are 13 weeks in a quarter , 1.5 times the high - quarter wage is roughly equivalent to 1.5 times 13 weeks of wages or about 20 weeks of wages .

 ( many states require high quarterly earnings of under $2,000 , which works out to less than $4 / hour under full - time assumptions .

this is less than the federal minimum wage of $7.25 / hour. ) .

similarly , because the weekly benefit amount is roughly equivalent to half the average weekly wage , 40 times the weekly benefit amount is roughly equivalent to 20 weeks of wages .

