there are several ways the united states might encourage china to move more quicklytowards increasing the value of the yuan .

these options or policy tools are not mutually exclusive,but it might be difficult or awkward for the united states to pursue some of them simultaneously .

 ( 95 ) first , the u.s. government might continue pressing china publicly for additional changes inits foreign exchange system in order to make the international value of the yuan better reflect marketconditions and economic realities .

this assumes either that china is reluctant to change or thatreformers in china will be helped by external stimulus .

second , the u.s. government might stoppressing china publicly for change .

this option is predicated on the expectation that reformers willbe able to move china more rapidly towards currency liberalization if china is not pressured fromabroad .

third , the united states could enact legislation restricting chinese exports to the unitedstates if the value of the yuan is not increased .

this assumes that china will change its exchangerate policies only if forced to do so .

fourth , the u.s. government might refer the question to theimf , asking the international agency to determine whether china has been manipulating its currencyin violation of imf rules .

this assumes that technical findings and persuasion by the imf and itsmajor member countries may have effect .

fifth , the u.s. government might refer the issue to theworld trade organization ( wto ) , alleging that the united states has been injured by unfair tradepractices linked to the undervaluation of china's currency .

if the wto found that the u.s. petitionhad merit , it could authorize trade remedies to correct the allege abuse .

this assumes that exchangerate issues and questions of general system - wide subsidy will fall within the purview of the wtorules .

continued public pressure is one method the united states might use to encourage china toadopt further reforms in its foreign exchange procedures .

this might include official findings by thetreasury department that china is a manipulator or strong exhortations by high - level u.s. officials .

among other things , u.s. officials might press chinese officials to provide them more informationas to the ways they intend to link reform of their domestic economy to reform in their exchange rateregime and the criteria they might use for discerning progress .

in evaluating this option , it would be helpful to know whether chinese officials really intendto move towards a market - based valuation of the yuan or whether they intend to drag the process outas long as possible .

if china adopted the reforms announced to date mainly in response to foreignpressure , then it is possible that further pressure might persuade them to go faster .

however , ifchinese officials adopted these reforms because they believe that market - based reform is in china'sbest interests , foreign pressure may complicate this process .

china has a long tradition of not givingin to foreign pressure .

foreign pressure might strengthen the hand of the reformers , but it might alsostiffen resistence by the opponents of reform and make it harder for the reformers to achieve theirends .

it also might be helpful if u.s. officials and legislators had more information about china'sinternal decision making process .

how strong are the reformers ? .

what key choices do chineseofficials believe they face as regards the economy and value of the yuan ? .

how do they think chinaand other countries can best determine what the true international value of the yuan might be ? .

whatcriteria do they believe are relevant for determining currency value and their timetable for change ? .

given their most recent statements , other g - 7 countries will likely support the united statesif it continues to press china for more rapid action .

however , they may also back away and leavethe united states on its own if they believe u.s. efforts are potentially counterproductive .

instead of pressing china publicly for reform , the united states might decide on a policy ofrestraint .

this is not an option in favor of the status quo .

rather , it accepts the premise that chineseofficials want to proceed with their reform program as rapidly as economic conditions and the policyconsensus in china permits .

this option assumes that overt foreign pressure may becounterproductive if it slows the process and strengthens the hand of those in china who opposereform .

arguably , the treasury department has shown restraint of this sort when it said , in itsrecent reports , that china was not manipulating the value of its currency .

some might argue that the united states should view the trade and currency dispute withinthe context of its overall relationship with china .

while economic issues are important , this viewwould suggest , it is also important not to raise tensions to the point where china becomes reluctantto cooperate with the united states on other issues , such as north korea's policies on nuclearweapons .

pressing the yuan - dollar exchange rate issue to the exclusion of other important u.s.interests might be seen , from this perspective , as counterproductive .

others might respond,however , that china will cooperate with the united states in other areas when it believes that thisserves its interests .

china may have strong reasons for wanting change in its foreign exchange system .

as notedbefore , china faces the prospect of serious inflation if it does not slow or stop the growth in itsforeign exchange reserves .

an increase in the value of its currency would be a key way ofaccomplishing that goal .

ironically , some kind of external encouragement may still be needed to help chinaaccomplish its plans .

even if chinese authorities want to move forward with their reform program,they may need some external pressure - - if only in the form of agreed deadlines and benchmarks - - to help them overcome inertia when they encounter difficult choices as they put their currency reformpolicies into effect .

instead of exerting public and mostly verbal pressure , the united states could adoptlegislation restricting china's access to the u.s. market until it raises the value of its currency .

thereare several ways this could be done .

the english bill ( h.r .

3282 ) , ryan - hunter bill ( h.r .

1498 ) and schumer / graham bill ( s. 295 ) , all mentioned above , would have this effect .

by raising the u.s. price of chinese imports , they would presumably reducethe flow of chinese exports to the united states , raise the prices paid by u.s. consumers ( perhapshelping some u.s. producers ) and stimulate the growth of export industries in other countries thatwould take china's place .

similar effects would likely occur if the u.s. government invoked the provisions of section301 , authorizing the u.s. trade representative to respond to unreasonable or discriminatorypractices that burden or restrict u.s. commerce .

 ( 96 ) likewise , if the treasury department found in its semi - annualreport that china was manipulating the value of its currency to the detriment of the united states,consultations with china and trade actions would also be required .

under the section 301mechanism , the united states could impose trade sanctions against chinese goods if china does notchange its trade or foreign exchange policies .

the united states could also use other u.s. trade lawsto impose special "safeguard" restrictions on chinese goods if the growth in chinese imports isfound to have caused ( or threatens to cause ) market disruption to u.s. domestic produce .

 ( 97 ) measures of this sort areallowable under wto rules on a temporary or limited basis but it is less clear that they may be usedacross the board or for longer periods .

it is not clear how much the price of chinese goods would need to increase , or the volumeof chinese exports to the united states would decrease , though , if the value of the yuan increased .

components purchased from other countries account for a major share of the value of exportsbearing the label "made in china. .

the cost of malaysian or thai inputs would not change for theproducer in china if the value of the yuan increased .

the price of the final product would only needto increase by an amount sufficient to recover the higher cost of the producer's that weredenominated in yuan .

depending on the products and methods of production , it is possible that theoverall increase in product costs would be modest and the volume of chinese exports to the unitedstates would be large even after the value of the yuan increased .

it is uncertain what the chinese authorities and chinese firms would do if faced withrestrictive import legislation of this sort .

they might cut prices and trim profits in order to keepunchanged their share of u.s. markets .

they might retaliate against u.s. exports , setting off a tradewar between the united states and china .

they might also ask the wto for authority to levy tradesanctions , on grounds that the united states was not complying with the wto rules on internationaltrade .

alternatively , they might raise the value of the yuan in hopes that this will eliminate the newu.s .

tariffs on their goods .

the wto trade rules allow countries to levy countervailing duties to offset any subsidiesforeign exporters might receive from their home governments .

wto rules do not allow countriesto impose tariffs or restrictions merely for the purpose of excluding foreign goods .

if the unitedstates hopes to persuade other countries that its special levies on chinese imports are fair andcompensatory , it will likely need to show that the size of the levies match the degree of subsidywhich chinese producers receive through the undervalued yuan .

it might be helpful in this regardif there were more agreement among scholars and the affected countries as to whether and by howmuch china's currency is undervalued .

if the united states put special levies on chinese goods , china might ask the wto to rulethat the united states acted in a manner inconsistent with its obligations .

 ( 98 ) the countervailing dutiesand anti - dumping penalties allowed under wto rules are usually applied to specific goods ratherthan to all exports coming from a particular country .

exchange rate manipulation might be seen asa type of general across - the - board subsidy for a country's exports .

nevertheless , there is littleprecedent ( but see below ) at the wto for considering exchange rates from this perspective .

thewto may be concerned that the rules governing world trade would be harder to enforce if countrieswere free to impose countervailing duties whenever they decided unilaterally that the currencies ofother countries were undervalued .

if the wto agreed with china's petition , it could authorize china to retaliate by withdrawingtariff concessions on u.s. goods .

the wto dispute settlement process is adjudicated with referenceto the wto rules and there seems little room for political pressure by the united states and othercountries .

other countries could , however , submit briefs in support of the u.s. or the chineseposition .

countries likely will give some thought to the potential impact that a trade dispute betweenthe united states and china might have more broadly on world trade negotiations .

if the volume of chinese exports to the united states declines because of new tradelegislation , the profits of foreign firms located in china which produce those goods will likely godown as well .

exporters could shift their production facilities further to the west in china , wherelabor costs are lower than on the coast .

this might reduce costs enough for chinese exporters to paythe new tariff and leave their prices unchanged .

alternatively , chinese companies and internationalfirms might shift production to other countries where the costs of production have become lowerthan those in china because of yuan revaluation .

in that case , these countries might replace chinaas major suppliers of manufactured products to the united states .

if the united states wants to keep out foreign products ( not just chinese products ) whichundersell u.s. manufactures , then new legislation would be needed to penalize other countries asthey ramp up to take china's place .

this would violate wto rules and the terms of internationaltrade agreements to which the united states is a party .

because the u.s. economy needs to importforeign goods of similar value to the foreign capital it imports each year , it may be hard for the u.s.government to stop countries from expanding their exports to the united states .

role .

if the volumeof imports declines , however , prices for manufactured products in the united states may increase,giving u.s. producers some relief .

u.s. consumers would likely need to spend a larger portion oftheir income in this case to purchase the goods which were previously produced abroad .

the united states could also pursue the issue of china's exchange rate policy at theinternational monetary fund .

the key issue is whether china is complying with the requirementsof article iv of the imf articles of agreement and , if not , what steps it should take to comply .

though other countries seem to have preferred that the united states take the lead and break the icefor them , they are also affected by china's trade policies .

arguably , international meetings whererepresentatives of the major countries may speak with chinese officials at the same time will bemore persuasive than scattered bilateral talks where the only strong public statements come from theunited states .

there continues to be debate as to what , if anything , the outside world can do to acceleratethe reform process in china .

in late september 2005 , treasury under secretary adams demandedthat the imf crack down on countries that violate the prohibition in article iv against currencymanipulation , though it is not clear what tools he thought the imf should use .

 ( 99 ) the imf was , he said,"asleep at the wheel" and it should confront china concerning the deficiencies in its exchange ratepolicies .

imf managing director rodrigo de rato rejected that charge .

 ( 100 ) the imf wasaddressing all aspects of the issue , he replied .

the imf had already investigated and rejectedsuggestions that china's currency policies warrant the use of "special consultations. .

rather , hesuggested , the united states should act more vigorously to straighten out its own budget andeconomic policies rather than blaming other countries for its problems .

according to imf sources , special consultations between imf management and a countryhave occurred twice previously in response to formal complaints by another country that it wasmanipulating its currency .

in the 1990s , the united states made a complaint about korea andgermany filed a complaint about sweden .

the two countries eventually adjusted their currencyvalues , though they may have done this for their own reasons rather than in response to imfconsultations .

in january 2006 , adams maintained that the imf should play a stronger role enforcingexchange rates and preventing currency manipulation .

 ( 101 ) the imf should demonstrate strong leadership on multilateralexchange rate surveillance , he said .

"a strong imf role in exchange rate issues is central to thestability and health of the international economy," he remarked .

the imf's leaders "should endorsesuch an enhanced role for the imf , restoring its central role on exchange rates. .

while adams didnot mention china by name , he said the imf should identify countries "whose exchange rate policiesmight not be in accord with fund principles" and it should "seek to identify problematic orinappropriate exchange rate behavior. .

however , imf managing director rato told a session at the world economic forum indavos , switzerland that he does not consider china to be a currency manipulator .

he rejectedproposals that the fund should put greater pressure on china .

he said "there is a trade - off betweenour role as confidential adviser in our surveillance work and our role as a transparent judge. .

 ( 102 ) he noted that the imfhad been the first international body to urge china to move from its fixed peg to a more flexibleexchange rate process .

rato also said the imf should not take a proactive role on exchange rates,in response to adam's question what the imf should do about countries "that are attempting tothwart balance of payments adjustments. .

on february 9 , 2006 , rato outlined his future plans for the imf .

he said the imf should putmore emphasis on surveillance but he raised several reservations about the fund's taking the centralpolicing role adams had proposed .

 ( 103 ) the imf is a place where the views of affected countries can be presented to china andefforts can be made to press china to revalue its currency .

the imf cannot force countries to haveexchange rate policies which mirror underlying economic conditions , even if they might benon - compliant with imf rules .

however , continuing discussion at the imf and at other internationalmeetings serves to focus attention on the issue .

at the least , it puts chinese officials in a situationwhere they need to explain or justify their policies and to respond in some way to internationalpressure .

arguably , it has caused them to take steps towards liberalization that they otherwise mightbe reluctant to take - - or they might have taken more slowly - - if these conversations had not takenplace .

if the imf were given the broader authority contemplated by adams and others , thefundamental structure of the world exchange rate system would change and many countries , inaddition to china , would have to seriously revise their domestic and international economic policies .

china might not be willing to make fundamental changes in its foreign exchange and economicpolicies unless other major countries make fundamental changes in their policies as well .

another option might be for the united states to refer the issue of china's undervaluedcurrency to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in 2004 , the china currency coalition and 30members of congress petitioned the u.s. trade representative separately asking the administrationto take action of this sort .

the undervalued exchange rate for the yuan is a kind of subsidy forchinese exports , they argue .

it lowers the cost of production in china and enables chinese exportersto sell products abroad at prices lower than their real costs of production should allow .

they believethis is an unfair practice which is inconsistent with the rules of the world trading system and theyappear to believe that a wto dispute settlement panel would support that view if the issue were putbefore it .

the administration rejected the two petitions , however .

 ( 104 ) officials expresseddoubt that the united states could win a case of this sort in the wto , though they did not detail thereasons for their doubt .

they also said that action to challenge china's exchange rate and tradepolicies in the wto might be "more damaging than helpful at this time. .

 ( 105 ) the wto and imf have a formal agreement between them which specifies that certain kindsof international finance issues shall be referred to the imf for judgment , if they come up in thecontext of wto deliberations , and the imf's findings will be considered conclusive .

 ( 106 ) the scope of theagreement is discussed below .

china's critics acknowledge that the wto has no authority toadjudicate exchange rate issues .

some believe , however , that if the united states complained to thewto that china was manipulating its currency in order to gain unfair trade advantage and the imfagreed , the wto could authorize the united states and other countries to put special tariffs onchinese goods .

these would stay in effect until china raised the value of its currency .

this section discusses whether appealing this issue to the wto is a feasible alternative .

first , this section examines the question whether export subsidies arranged through exchange ratemanipulation are a "subsidy" as the wto defines the term .

the wto's list of prohibited practicesis specific and limited in scope .

complaints that china is subsidizing its exports through currencymanipulation are actionable in the wto dispute settlement process if currency manipulation is notconsidered to be covered by the agreement .

second , this section discusses two ways the unitedstates might seek to change the rules of the world trading system so as to make currencymanipulation actionable in the wto context .

there are several contexts within the wto where theunited states could raise the issue and seek international agreement to revise the rules andobligations of members of the organization .

in some cases , consensus or unanimity is required .

inone instance , however , a very large majority can change the requirements of the wto in way thatapplies the changes so that new requirements apply to all member countries , even those which didnot approve its adoption .

the wto's dispute settlement process is a quasi - judicial procedure that is intended to resolvetrade disputes between countries which cannot be resolved through conciliation or negotiation .

ifa complaining country so requests , a three member panel is appointed .

the panel reviews the factsand arguments in the case and renders judgment based on the facts and wto rules .

 ( 107 ) the wto appellatebody may review the initial panel's findings and , unless the panel and appellate body's findings areset aside by the wto membership by consensus , the disputing parties are expected to implementthe panel decision , together with any modifications made by the appellate body .

if a country doesnot comply within a reasonable period of time , the wto may authorize the complaining country toimpose retaliatory duties on the non - compliant country's goods or take other retaliatory action thecomplainant proposes .

those duties or barriers remain in force until the country complies or untilthe disputing parties otherwise resolve the issue .

 ( 108 ) there are several issues with the china scenario discussed above .

first , some critics maymisconstrue the nature and extent of the agreement between the imf and the wto .

the agreementhas to do with temporary trade restrictions , not with exchange rate policies or currency manipulation .

the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) and the general agreement on trade inservices ( gats ) include provisions which allow countries to impose temporary trade barriers inorder to safeguard their external financial situation .

certain financial and balance of paymentsconditions must be present , however , in order for countries to be justified in taking these steps .

theimf has the final word as to whether those conditions prevail .

 ( 109 ) currency manipulationfor the purpose of gaining unfair trade advantage and exchange rate policy are not mentioned in theinteragency agreement between the wto and imf or in the text of the gatt itself .

 ( 110 ) second , the key issue is not so much whether china's exchange policy gives it unfairadvantages in international trade but whether this is a kind of subsidy which is prohibited by wtorules .

when chinese officials say they need to keep their currency at roughly its present rate becausean increase might bankrupt large sectors of china's export economy , they are admitting that theirexchange rate subsidizes exports .

however , the wto has a specific definition as to the types ofthings which are subsidies and therefore prohibited under its rules .

currency manipulation is notincluded among them .

when the core rules and obligations of the world trading system were laid down in 1947,with the adoption of the gatt , the world was on a fixed - parity exchange rate system managed bythe imf .

it was difficult , during this period , for countries to manipulate their exchange rates in orderto gain unfair trade advantage .

during the 1970s , the fixed rate system broke down and the rulesof the imf were changed to allow countries to have floating , fixed or whatever other types ofexchange rate systems they desire .

 ( 111 ) the imf was given the task of monitoring ( "surveillance" ) exchange rates but , as discussed above , it was given no effective means of enforcing its rule ( articleiv ) against currency manipulation .

for its part , the gatt did not amend its rules when the imfprocedures changed to take into account the possibility that countries might use exchange ratemanipulation as a trade policy tool .

the wto likewise took no steps when it was formed to fill thisapparent lacuna in the rules and obligations of the world trading regime .

the wto defines the concept "subsidy" in very specific terms .

if a government's actions donot meet the terms of the definition , even if they benefit exporters or cause trade injury , they are notactionable ( subject to challenge ) for purposes of the wto dispute adjudication process .

further,to be actionable , subsidies must be specific to an industry ( "specificity." ) .

the wto agreement onsubsidies and countervailing measures ( ascm ) expressly prohibits ( 112 ) export subsidies , whichare defined as "subsidies contingent...upon export performance. .

the ascm deems export subsidiesto be per se specific .

domestic subsidies are not prohibited but may be challenged if they cause tradeinjury , as specified in the ascm .

subsidies that are not directly export contingent are also not allowed if ( 1 ) the governmentmakes a financial contribution and ( 2 ) it benefits the recipients .

government financial support cantake a variety of forms , such as direct payments to the exporter , the waiver of tax payments or otherrevenue that would otherwise be collected from the exporter , or special government purchases or theprovision of low - cost goods and services ( other than general infrastructure ) which lowers the costof production .

tax subsidies to broad categories of exporters , through mechanisms such as foreignsales corporations , also meet the test for specificity .

the wto agreement makes no mention of subsidies provided through exchange ratepractices or monetary policy .

all of the subsidies mentioned in the agreement occur on the fiscalside of the government's ledger and involve a direct cost to the government .

some legal analystsbelieve that , though doing so would be difficult , it might be possible to challenge china's actions inthe wto .

 ( 113 ) benitah suggests , for instance , that if the united states were able to show that china's fixedexchange rate is a de facto export subsidy it could take advantage of the per se specificity language .

he also suggests that china's fixed rate might be viewed as a form of "in kind" subsidy similar tothat prohibited by the ascm .

other legal commentators believe , however , that the likelihood thatthe wto would view china's exchange rate practices as a prohibited subsidy are at best veryslim .

 ( 114 ) some critics of china's exchange rate policies have sought to circumvent this difficulty byarguing that china pays a direct subsidy to chinese exporters through its exchange rate policy .

thedirect financial support occurs , they say , because chinese exporters receive more yuan in exchangefor the dollars they earn from trade than they would if the yuan were valued correctly .

an exportermight receive 8 yuan from the central bank today when it exchanges its dollars for yuan , whereas itmight receive 7 yuan instead if the yuan were valued appropriately .

that extra yuan is a subsidy toexporters , the theory holds , and it is therefore a direct violation of wto trade agreements .

 ( 115 ) the idea that exports can be subsidized in this fashion seems to contradict the normallyaccepted concepts about international monetary transactions .

moreover , the effects on the worldtrading system would be considerable if the idea were accepted and applied to all countries .

thechinese are perhaps more blatant in the way their official actions effect currency values , but mostgovernments do things from time to time which influence the value of their national currency .

if acentral bank lowers interests rates and the exchange value of its currency declines , one could arguethat the central bank is making its national exports more competitive and increasing the amount ( inlocal currency ) that its national exporters earn from trade .

likewise , an increase in exchange ratesmight be seen as an effort to purchase goods from other countries for less than their true value or toreduce the price that a country's foreign investors would need to pay in real terms for foreignacquisitions .

if every change in the exchange rate for a currency is deemed to provide a subsidy orraise a barrier to trade , then the current rules of the world trading system would be unworkable ina world of floating ( or inaccurately fixed ) exchange rates .

some would also argue that the concept that exchange rate differences can provide a subsidyto exporters is fundamentally flawed .

regardless of the exchange rate , the exporter receives a dollar'sworth of its local currency whatever the current rate might be .

when the local currency goes up invalue , the exporter receives less local currency but each unit is more valuable than before .

importedgoods would also be cheaper and a dollar's worth of local currency would buy more foreign goodsthan before .

firms that use imports as part of their commercial process would see their costs declineproportionally .

in any case , the presumed subsidy implicit in the yuan exchange rate is not paid solely toexporters , as likely would be necessary for it to be found in violation of the direct payment andexport contingency provisions of the ascm .

anybody - - exporters , tourists , banks , or personswishing to buy yuan in order to make foreign investments in china - - receives the same exchangerate for their money .

it is also not clear that the exchange rate "subsidy" is paid by the government or at thegovernment's behest .

many organizations in china buy and sell currency and - - while the centralbank continues to have a substantial effect on currency prices - - market forces determine the contextin which the central bank exerts its influence .

if an exporter sells dollars to a commercial bank , theimplicit subsidy in the transaction would be paid by the bank and not the government .

if chineseexports were priced in yuan , the purchaser would have to sell dollars and buy yuan in order to settleits bill .

in that case , the purchaser would pay any subsidy that is implicit in the transaction .

it appears that a strict interpretation of the wto's current rules would provide little latitudefor a finding that china's exchange rate practices constitute a "subsidy" for exports insofar as thatterm is used within the wto .

the united states has taken a "strict construction" view of the wtorules .

special trade representative susan schwab told congress in may 2006 , for example , that"the united states has emphasized the necessity for strict adherence to the rules negotiating mandate... which requires that the effectiveness and basic principles of the wto antidumping and subsidiesagreements must be preserved. .

 ( 116 ) efforts by other countries to interpret the rules more broadlyor flexibly have been met , she said , by vigorous u.s. attacks .

schwab also said that "initiating a wto case on this matter [currency manipulation] wouldplace china in the position of defending , rather than reforming , its currency regime. .

 ( 117 ) this would be the firstoccasion where the wto was asked to resolve a currency dispute , she said , and it "would thereforehave an unpredictable outcome and take a relatively long time to reach completion. .

some suggestthat a wto decision against the u.s. position could have the effect of making currency manipulationan implicitly acceptable practice under the wto , a result quite contrary to u.s. goals .

schwab saidthat continued dialog with china about its currency regime would likely be a more constructivemeans for resolving this concern .

article iv of the imf charter prohibits countries from manipulating their exchange rates forthe purpose of gaining an unfair trade advantage .

giving the imf the authority to enforce thatprovision of its charter would be one way of addressing the currency manipulation problem .

however , as noted above , this could require major changes in the structure of the world financialsystem and it could give the imf new authority over the economic policies of its member countries .

many countries might be reluctant to adopt far - reaching changes of this sort merely to address theexchange rate aspects of a controversy about international trade .

it might be possible to address this issue through adjustments in the rules governing worldtrade .

it could be argued , for example , that restrictions on currency manipulation should be includedin the rules of the wto in order to make its procedures consistent with the requirements of thearticles of agreement of the imf .

the imf may not have the effective authority to enforce theprohibition in its articles of agreement against currency manipulation for the purpose of unfair tradeadvantage .

this does not mean , however , that the world must live with the problem of currencymanipulation and contrary effects it may have on the relative efficiency of international productionand the patterns of international trade .

the wto could choose instead to incorporate this sameprohibition against currency manipulation into its own text in order to take deleterious trade effectsinto account .

there are two ways the united states might seek to make exchange rate manipulationactionable within the wto dispute settlement framework if it wished to pursue the issue .

first , itcould raise the issue during the doha round trade negotiations .

second , it could raise the issueseparately at the wto governing council or the wto ministerial conference in hopes of garneringa sufficient majority to reinterpret the wto rules or to amend the trade agreements .

in both cases,the goal would be adoption of changes in the wto language in order to make exchange ratemanipulation a prohibited trade practice .

first , the united states might broach the issue in the current world trade negotiations .

thedoha round of trade negotiations is currently discussing major changes in the basic ground rulesfor world trade as well as possible adjustments in tariff rates .

the united states could ask that thecurrency manipulation issue should be added to the agenda .

there are already many difficultsubjects on the agenda , however , and the wto members have not yet agreed on a framework fornegotiating the most contentious issues before them .

adding another controversial issue to theagenda may not make the task of the negotiators any easier .

on the other hand , nobody knows atthis point how many countries might want to make currency manipulation actionable under wtorules .

alternatively , the united states could raise the issue of currency manipulation in the wto'sgoverning council and in the biannual meeting of its ministerial conference .

the doha roundnegotiations seem to be in trouble and it may be too late , as a practical matter , to add anothercontroversial issue to the agenda .

the ministerial conference consists of the trade ministers of allthe wto member countries .

these are the top policy making bodies of the wto .

positive actionby them could lead to a change in wto treatment of the exchange rate issue , either throughreinterpretation of the existing wto rules or through amendment to the international agreementsthemselves .

 ( 118 ) article ix of the agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto agreement ) says that decisions shall be made by consensus .

however , it says , when consensus cannot beachieved , decisions shall be made on the basis of a majority of the votes cast , each country havingone vote .

interpretation of the charter and of international trade agreements and amendments tothose documents require a higher majority , however , to be effective .

article ix of the wto chartersays that the general council and ministerial conference have exclusive authority to adoptinterpretations of the wto agreement and the multilateral trade agreements such as the gatt,gats , trips , ascm , etc .

interpretations are to be based on recommendations of the council andrequire an affirmative vote of three - quarters of the entire wto membership .

in theory , a three - quarters vote of the general council and ministerial conference couldinterpret the existing trade rules in such a way as to make exchange rate manipulation for the purposeof gaining unfair trade advantage actionable under wto rules .

however , article ix says that theinterpretation clause should not be used to undermine the amendment clause ( article x ) of the wtocharter .

the procedural difficulties of using article ix are daunting .

a three - quarters vote of theentire membership is required , yet at most meetings of the wto less than that share of themembership is in attendance at any one time .

nevertheless , there are sections of the gatt whichmight be considered anew in terms of their contemporary relevance .

article xv says , for instance,that the contracting parties "shall not , by exchange action , frustrate the intent of the provisions of thisagreement , nor , by trade action , the intent of the articles of agreement of the internationalmonetary fund. .

whether this could be interpreted as meaning that members of the wto shouldnot violate article iv of the imf charter by manipulating their currency might be a matter for debate .

the united states could also propose that the wto agreement should be amended .

articlex of the wto agreement says that any country may propose to the ministerial conference that thewto charter or the multilateral trade agreements should be amended .

amendments can also beproposed by the wto general council or its subsidiary bodies .

the ministerial conference mayadopt amendments to these documents by consensus .

if consensus is not reached , then theconference may recommend by a two - thirds vote of the entire membership to submit a proposedamendment to the wto's member countries for their consideration .

generally , amendments becomeeffective if they are ratified by two - thirds of the wto's member countries .

amendments to a fewarticles of the wto charter and the multilateral trade agreements require a unanimous vote .

however , none of these seem to involve exchange rate issues or questions of export subsidy .

theimpact of any amendment to the wto agreement or the multilateral trade agreements may belimited , however .

article x says that any amendment which affects member rights and obligationsshall apply only to the countries which ratified it .

one prominent wto legal scholar , john h.jackson , says that , in practice , this means that any changes of a substantive nature would apply onlyto the countries which endorsed them .

 ( 119 ) it would seem likely , then , that an amendment which said thatcurrency manipulation for the purpose of achieving unfair trade advantage was not an acceptabletrade practice would apply only to the countries which endorsed it .

the ministerial conference can also decide by a three - quarters vote of the entiremembership , however , that an amendment shall apply to all countries even if all countries have notratified its adoption .

article x says that the ministerial conference may decide that a country whichdoes not accept an amendment within a time period specified by the conference "shall be free towithdraw from the wto or to remain a member with the consent of the ministerial conference. .

presumably , serious negotiations would predate any decision that a country would be allowed toremain a wto member without accepting the application of a new amendment to itself .

it cannot be known in advance whether the united states and other countries that areconcerned about the trade effects of currency manipulation would succeed in gaining the votesnecessary to reinterpret or amend the trade rules .

this is a very steep requirement .

while theunited states and its associates were lobbying the membership to consider the change , china andother countries which employ that practice would presumably be lobbying the membership to votethe other way .

the result would likely depend on the strength of the arguments brought forth insupport of the initiative and the number of countries that believe that currency manipulation for thepurpose of gaining unfair trade advantage is injuring their interests or is otherwise undesirable .

it may not be possible to achieve the three - quarters positive vote needed to reinterpret thewto agreement or to adopt amendments which are mandatory for all member countries .

nonetheless , discussion of this issue within the wto may have salutary effects .

it would requirethe countries which favor use of this trade practice to defend their policies and to explain why theybelieve currency manipulation is an appropriate tool of trade policy .

the countries which might beamenable to changes in the wto rules might also be identified .

this information may be usefulif the united states decides to seek a negotiated arrangement during a later phase of the doha tradenegotiations or in some future round of talks .

a strategy of taking the chinese currency issue to the wto is not likely to lead to a promptresolution of the controversy .

it seems doubtful that adequate grounds can be found , given thecurrent language of the wto agreement and the accompanying multilateral trade agreements , tosuccessfully address the question in the wto dispute settlement process .

addressing the questionin the wto policy process may offer opportunities for building support for changing the rules andguidelines used by organization , however .

discussion in the general council and ministerialconference would offer the united states an opportunity to discuss why , as a general principle,currency manipulation should not be a legitimate tool of national trade policy .

it need not bediscussed , in this context , as an issue affecting only china .

obtaining the three - quarters vote tochange the language or prevailing interpretation of the wto agreements would be difficult .

discussion in this context may help identify potential supporters and lay the groundwork for possiblyincluding currency manipulation as an additional agenda item in future trade negotiations .

