social security and medicare are large and important parts of america's safety net .

about 45 million older and disabled individuals — 1 in 7 americans — are beneficiaries of both social security and medicare .

social security and medicare account for a large amount of federal spending .

for 2010 , spending on the two programs is projected at about $1.2 trillion , about 35% of outlays and about 8.4% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , one measure of the size of the u.s. economy .

although social security and medicare both play important roles in the well - being of older and disabled americans , the interactions between the two programs are rarely examined .

this report focuses on how medicare premiums affect social security beneficiaries .

medicare premiums are rising faster than social security benefits and are consequently consuming an increasing share of benefits over time .

rising medicare premiums could have a large effect on social security beneficiaries , particularly on those with low incomes and those who rely on social security as their primary source of income .

some beneficiaries may have more difficulty paying for rising health care costs than others .

for example , among americans aged 65 and older , 50% of married couples and 72% of unmarried persons receive more than half of their income from social security , and 20% of married couples and about 41% of unmarried persons receive more than 90% of their income from social security .

some of these beneficiaries may see a decline in their standard of living as their medicare premiums rise .

this report shows how the deduction of medicare part b and part d premiums affects social security beneficiaries .

it describes how increases in social security benefits and medicare premiums are calculated under current law and explains the circumstances under which many social security beneficiaries are held harmless for increases in the standard part b premium , as well as the premium assistance available to low - income beneficiaries .

it shows the growth in social security benefits and part b premiums in recent years and describes how rising part b premiums have affected social security beneficiaries with different levels of earnings , including both current beneficiaries and new enrollees .

it also provides estimates of social security benefits and medicare parts b and d premiums to 2078 , using the social security and medicare trustees' intermediate projections , and describes how beneficiaries would be affected by projected medicare premium increases .

the analysis in this report focuses on social security beneficiaries who pay medicare premiums .

however , low - income individuals ( including ma participants ) may qualify for low - income subsidies , that cover all or part of their part b and part d premiums .

as of early 2009 , about 8.8 million low - income medicare beneficiaries received full part b premium subsidies , and 9.6 million receive part d subsidies .

some beneficiaries who qualified for premium subsidies did not apply for them .

to qualify for subsidies , beneficiaries must have limited income and assets .

beneficiaries may qualify for full part b premium subsidies if they have incomes of less than 135% of poverty and assets of less than $4,000 for an individual or $6,000 for a couple .

beneficiaries may qualify for full or partial part d premium subsidies if they have incomes of less than 150% of poverty and assets of less than $12,510 for an individual and $25,010 for a couple in 2010 .

a hold harmless provision reduces the part b premium for most beneficiaries whose social security colas are not sufficient to cover the standard part b premium increase .

if , in a given year , the increase in the standard part b premium would cause a beneficiary's social security check to be less , in dollar terms , than it was the year before , then the part b premium is reduced to ensure that the nominal amount of the individual's social security check stays the same .

several groups are not covered by the hold harmless provision .

new enrollees to either medicare or social security , as well as part b enrollees who do not receive social security benefits , will pay higher part b premiums without protection from the hold harmless provision .

high - income individuals , who pay income - related part b premiums instead of the standard premium , are not protected by the hold harmless provision and may see reduced social security checks from one year to the next as a result of an increase in the part b premium .

low - income beneficiaries are not held harmless , but because they also do not pay the part b premium — medicaid pays the premiums for them — the costs of low - income beneficiaries' rising part b premiums will generally be borne by state governments instead of by the beneficiaries themselves .

whether a beneficiary is held harmless depends on the amount of the standard part b premium increase relative to the amount of his or her social security cola in a given year ; this determination is made by ssa .

as described earlier , an individual's social security cola is determined by multiplying his or her benefit amount by the inflation rate ( i.e. , the cpi - w ) .

part b premiums are determined by projected part b program costs .

thus , the number of people held harmless can vary widely from year to year , depending on annual inflation rates and projected part b costs .

in some cases , a beneficiary may be held harmless one year but not the next .

in other cases , a beneficiary will be held harmless in a current year because his or her part b premium was reduced in an earlier year .

the cumulative effect of the hold harmless provision can produce substantial savings for individuals with low benefits .

a beneficiary is not held harmless if the increase in his or her part d premium ( or the combined increase in part b and part d premiums ) causes his or her social security check to decline .

in other words , a person's social security check may decrease from one year to the next as a result of part d premium increases .

 figure 1 shows the annual rates of increase in medicare premiums and social security retiree benefits ( reflecting cola increases ) from 2001 to 2010 .

the cumulative growth in standard part b premiums has been dramatic , but annual changes have been somewhat erratic .

during the past 10 years , annual part b premium increases have ranged from 0% to more than 17% .

social security colas , meanwhile , have ranged from 0% to 5.8% .

in 2009 , there was no part b premium increase and in 2010 , there was no cola for a worker who retired in 2001 , the percentage increase in the part b premium exceeded the social security cola in each year through 2008 .

in dollar terms , which increase is greater would vary from individual to individual , depending on how the dollar amount of the part b premium increase compares to the dollar amount of a given individual's cola ( which in turn depends on the dollar amount of his or her benefit before the cola increase ) .

ultimately , almost everyone who is eligible for social security retirement or disability benefits qualifies for medicare .

most people who elect to participate in the part b or part d programs pay premiums .

by law , the medicare part b premium is automatically deducted from the social security benefits of those enrolled in part b ( including ma and ma - pd participants ) .

medicare part d participants may choose to have their part d premiums deducted from their benefits or to pay them directly to their prescription drug plan sponsors .

for new enrollees , the full amount of the part b premium , including any annual increase , is subtracted from the social security benefit .

new enrollees are not held harmless from part b premiums increases , as described above .

initial social security benefits generally increase in line with national wage growth ; in other words , as successive cohorts of workers retire each year , each cohort's initial benefits is somewhat higher as a reflection of the wage growth it experienced while working .

over the past decade , initial benefits have increased by about 37% .

during the same period , standard part b premiums have more than doubled , from $50.00 in 2001 to $110.50 in 2010 , an increase of 121% .

once a person has retired , his or her social security benefit is indexed to inflation and thereafter grows with annual social security colas .

a "hold harmless" provision , described below , caps the part b premium increase ( but not the part d increase ) at the dollar amount of a beneficiary's cola .

over the past decade , social security's annual cola resulted in a cumulative benefit increase of about 31% , less than the part b premium growth of 121% .

as a result of ssa's announcement that no cola will be paid in 2010 , and if , as projected , there is no social security cola in 2011 , then a range of issues may potentially be addressed through legislation .

these issues may include the impact of the hold harmless provision on the part b premiums paid by beneficiaries who are not held harmless , the impact on seniors who will pay higher part d premiums and higher out - of - pocket medical costs , and other issues .

several bills before the 111 th congress would address one or more of these issues .

for more information , please see crs report r40561 , the effect of no social security cola on medicare part b premiums , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

rising medicare premiums are consuming a growing share of beneficiaries' social security benefits .

an increasing number of americans will be affected by this interaction as the number of social security and medicare beneficiaries grows over time .

the social security trustees project that by 2040 , the proportion of americans aged 65 and older — most of whom are eligible for both social security and medicare — will almost double .

low - income beneficiaries and those who rely primarily on social security may see a decline in their standard of living as their medicare expenses rise .

premiums for parts b and d are projected to increase significantly faster than social security benefits .

as a result , the part b and part d premiums are projected to consume a growing share of the annual social security cola , which was designed to maintain beneficiaries' living standards .

some beneficiaries will be protected from rising medicare premiums: medicaid covers premiums for some persons who meet income and asset tests , and the hold harmless provision protects most social security beneficiaries against part b increases ( although not part d increases ) that exceed the annual social security cola .

many beneficiaries could struggle to cover their health care expenses , however , including new enrollees who are not covered by the hold harmless provision .

out - of - pocket costs for parts b and d are projected to grow at the same rates as premiums , contributing to the growing health care expenses of beneficiaries .

most beneficiaries are likely to have some income apart from their social security benefits .

however , many of tomorrow's beneficiaries , like today's , are likely to rely mostly on social security , especially as traditional pension coverage declines and many americans save little or nothing for retirement .

finally , it is important to remember that social security beneficiaries gain from their participation in the medicare program .

medicare provides health care coverage to the vast majority of americans aged 65 and older and to most disability beneficiaries .

together , medicare and medicaid cover a majority of participating social security beneficiaries' health care expenses .

although social security beneficiaries are affected by rising health care costs , the benefits of participating in medicare are substantially greater than the costs .

