the economic argument for federal support of farms , in contrast to nonfarm businesses , is that markets do not efficiently balance commodity supply with demand .

imbalances in agricultural markets develop because consumers do not respond to price changes by buying proportionally smaller or larger quantities ( demand is price - inelastic ) and , similarly , farmers do not respond to price changes by proportionally reducing or increasing production ( supply is price inelastic ) .

the imbalances then often result in inadequate or exaggerated resource adjustments by farmers .

the imbalances are further exacerbated by the long time lag between crop planting ( or livestock breeding ) and harvest , during which economic and yield conditions may dramatically change .

the objectives of federal commodity programs are to stabilize and support farm incomes by shifting some of the risks of short term market price instability and longer - term capacity adjustments to the federal government .

the goals are to maintain the economic health of the farm sector so that it can utilize the nation's comparative advantages in natural , infrastructure , and technology resources to be globally competitive .

the law mandates federal support for a specific list of commodities .

for most of these commodities , support began during 1930s depression era efforts to generally raise farm household income when commodity prices were low because of prolonged weak consumer demand .

while initially intended to be a temporary effort , the commodity support programs survived , but have been modified away from supply control and commodity stocks management to direct income support payments .

critics of commodity programs agree on the underlying fundamental economic conditions that make stability more difficult to achieve for agriculture than for some other sectors .

however , they argue that ( 1 ) current programs are highly distorting of world production and trade , ( 2 ) the levels of subsidies are high and have become capitalized into land prices and rents that raise the cost of production and make the united states less competitive in global markets , and ( 3 ) the benefits are concentrated among a comparatively small number of commodities produced on a small number of large farms .

supporters of commodity subsidy programs may not contradict the critics , but do point out that other nations have distorting subsidy programs and / or trade barriers that should be eliminated if the united states is to make reforms .

landowners are concerned about a loss of rents and wealth if land prices drop in response to a reduction in the subsidies .

similarly , rural communities are concerned about any large decline in the real estate tax base that supports local schools , roads , and other community services .

while large farms do receive most of the production - linked subsidy payments , recipients argue that lower input costs and marketing efficiencies make large farms efficient and small farms uneconomic in the production of bulk commodities .

therefore , targeting subsidies to small farms , recipients say , would encourage inefficient production .

as congress moves increasingly closer to the 2007 expiration of current farm support programs, policymakers face design of a new law that ( 1 ) meets the nation's domestic needs , ( 2 )  satisfies this country's international trade obligations under the world trade organization , and  ( 3 ) fits within budgetary constraints .

secretary of agriculture johanns has repeatedly stated that his objective is for commodity assistance to be equitable across commodities , predictable in terms of design regularity , and beyond challenge within the framework of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

sales of fruits , vegetables , and tree nuts account for nearly one - third of u.s. crop cash receipts and one - fifth of u.s. agricultural exports , according to usda's economic research service ( ers ) .

when floriculture , greenhouse , and nursery crops are included , specialty crops account for approximately 50% of all u.s. cash receipts of farm crops ( and about one - fourth of total crop and livestock receipts ) .

despite their relatively large share of crop receipts , specialty crops occupy only about 3% of u.s. harvested cropland .

although certain states and regions are predominant , nearly every state has some commercial specialty crop production within its borders .

although specialty crops are not eligible for support under usda's farm commodity price and income support programs , their production is closely linked with the major program crops in several ways .

for example , according to a november 2006 report by ers , 80% of the land planted to vegetables for processing ( sweet corn , tomatoes , dry beans , and potatoes ) is located on farms that likely also receive direct and countercyclical payments because they rotate the vegetable crops with program crops .

on the other hand , some specialty crop producers have testified strongly in favor of extending a 2002 farm bill provision ( originating in the 1996 farm bill ) that restricts producers of the major commodities from planting fruits and vegetables on program acreage if they do not have a history of doing so .

these producers argue that allowing program crop producers to switch even small numbers of acres to fruits or vegetables would negatively affect existing growers' annual income .

the november 2006 ers report suggests that a number of constraints likely would prevent large - scale switch - overs from program to specialty crops if the restriction were lifted , but states that some individual producers could be significantly affected .

finally , some stakeholders and policymakers are calling for specialty crop issues to occupy a larger role in farm bill policy discussions than in the past .

they assert that the traditional farm commodity support programs are under pressure from constraints on the federal budget , from developments related to existing trade obligations , and from negotiations on further trade liberalization .

policies covering both subsidized and unsubsidized crops more comprehensively — such as providing more assistance through trade promotion , conservation , credit , marketing programs , domestic food assistance , and research — could provide a way to address those pressures while increasing u.s. competitiveness , they argue .

the meat and poultry industries do look to the federal government for leadership and support in resolving foreign trade disputes , establishing transparent , science - based rules for importing and exporting animal products , and reassuring domestic and foreign buyers alike that these products are safe , of high quality , and free from pests and diseases .

omnibus farm legislation often contains policy guidance and resources aimed at achieving these objectives .

much is at stake economically: the farm value of animal production now averages about $124 billion annually , more than half the total value of all u.s. agricultural production .

approximately 1.1 million of the nation's more than 2.1 million farms were classified by the 2002 census of agriculture as primarily an animal production operation .

the total included more than 664,000 classified primarily as cattle farms and ranches , 55,000 as cattle feedlots , nearly 73,000 as dairy operations , 34,000 as hog / pig operations , 44,000 as poultry or egg producers , nearly 44,000 involved in sheep or goat production , and more than 228,000 involved in some other livestock activity ( eg , horses , bison , beekeeping , aquaculture ) .

these producers face intense pressures to become larger , more specialized , and more cost - efficient , to better compete in the increasingly global marketplace .

transactions today are moving away from live cash markets and toward contractual relationships that can provide a guaranteed supply of live animals at predetermined prices .

more of these animals are being supplied by canada ( cattle , sows and pigs ) and mexico ( cattle ) , and u.s. dominance as a leading exporter of red meats and poultry is being challenged by highly competitive countries like brazil , australia , india , argentina , and new zealand .

these trends continue at a time when feed costs have begun to rise significantly due largely to the government's promotion of ethanol ( now largely corn - based ) as an alternative fuel .

in congress , debate revolves around what , if any , role government should play in mitigating the economic impacts of structural changes and global challenges in the livestock , poultry , and meat processing industries .

other public policy concerns include animal agriculture's obligations with respect to environmental protection , food safety , and animal welfare .

the united states is the world's largest exporter of agricultural products .

the volume of u.s. agricultural exports , as a share of production , has ranged from 21% to 23% in recent years .

the value of u.s. agricultural exports , as a share of the value of production , has averaged about 18% recently .

total u.s. agricultural exports have grown steadily over the past two decades , rising from around $26 billion in fy1986 to a forecast $77 billion in fy2007 .

 ( figure 2 displays the growth of exports and imports over time ) .

all categories of agricultural exports have grown , but exports of horticultural products have become the largest single component of u.s. farm exports .

exports of pork and poultry meat also have shown rapid growth .

beef products were among the fastest - growing components of u.s. agricultural exports until most foreign markets banned imports of u.s. beef following the 2003 discovery in the united states of a cow with bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad - cow disease" ) .

the effect of bse on u.s. beef exports illustrates the impact that animal diseases can have on farm product trade as well as the way veterinary restrictions can affect trade in meat products .

u.s. agricultural trade is influenced by a number of factors , especially global income and population growth .

other important factors are global commodity supplies and prices , exchange rates , government support policies , trade policies , and trade agreements .

while many of these factors are beyond the scope of congressional action , agricultural trade policy and commercial export promotion programs typically have been dealt with in the trade title of the omnibus farm bill .

agricultural imports have grown more steadily than agricultural exports over the past two decades , increasing from about $21 billion in 1986 to a forecasted $69 billion in 2007 .

with growth in imports since 1996 has come a shrinking agricultural trade surplus .

the excess of agricultural exports over imports , as high as $27 billion in 1996 , is forecast to be $8 billion in 2007 .

competition from agricultural imports raises concerns among some producers and policymakers , but farm bill trade titles generally have not addressed import issues .

the new round of world trade organization ( wto ) multilateral trade negotiations , launched in doha , qatar , in 2001 , was suspended in july 2006 .

for agriculture , the doha negotiations aimed to strengthen existing multilateral rules and disciplines by making further reforms in market access , export subsidies , and domestic farm support .

most u.s. agricultural groups would support these negotiations only if u.s. negotiators could open new markets for u.s. farm products in exchange for reductions in u.s. trade - distorting domestic support .

when u.s. negotiators concluded that market access offers from developed and developing countries were insufficient to convince u.s. farmers to accept reductions in trade - distorting domestic support , the round collapsed .

agriculture is generally viewed as an inherently risky enterprise .

farm production levels can vary significantly from year to year and by location , primarily because farmers operate at the mercy of nature , and frequently are subjected to weather - related and other natural disasters .

since the great depression , policymakers have been persuaded that the federal government should absorb some portion of the weather - related production losses that otherwise would depress farm income and could alter farmer's decisions about what to produce in some high - risk locations .

federal multi - peril crop insurance is the primary ongoing crop loss assistance program .

it is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c .

1501 et seq .

 ) , and is administered by usda's risk management agency ( rma ) .

this is complemented with the non - insured assistance program , administered by the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which is available to producers not offered insurance coverage .

lack of insurance availability occurs in locations where there is insufficient production history to determine actuarial risks of a crop or in regions where production of a specific commodity is relatively small .

following a widespread and severe drought in 1988 , congress approved a large ad hoc disaster assistance program to supplement the ongoing disaster programs .

such ad hoc assistance subsequently has became routine .

the federal government has a long history of providing credit assistance to farmers .

usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) issues direct loans and guarantees loans made by commercial lenders .

the direct and guaranteed loans are intended to assist farmer borrowers who do not qualify for regular commercial loans , but only if they are expected to eventually graduate to commercial loans .

authority for the size of the loan programs is specified in the 2002 farm bill and expires at the end of fy2007 .

at the same time that congress examines and possibly modifies the fsa loan programs , it may address several issues concerning the farm credit system ( fcs ) .

fcs , second only to commercial banks as a holder of farm debt , is chartered by the federal government as a cooperatively owned commercial lender only to agriculture - related borrowers .

other sources of credit for agriculture include commercial banks , life insurance companies , and individuals .

figure 4 shows that commercial banks lend the largest portion of the farm sector's total debt ( 37% ) , followed by the farm credit system ( 30% ) , individuals and others ( 21% ) , and life insurance companies ( 5% ) .

the farm service agency provides 3% of the debt through direct loans , and guarantees another 4% of the market ( additional loans issued by commercial banks and fcs ) .

fcs is the largest real estate lender ; commercial banks issue the most non - real estate loans .

credit is an important input to agriculture , with all lenders holding about $214 billion in outstanding farm loans in 2005 .

yet only about 66% of farmers have any debt ( farm or nonfarm ) , and only 38% have farm debt .

the types of farms holding the most debt include the larger commercial farms that produce most of the output , and medium - sized family farms .

creditworthy farmers generally have adequate access to loans , mostly from the largest suppliers — commercial banks , fcs , and merchants and dealers .

according to reports from lenders , credit conditions are good , and default rates have been trending lower to levels not seen since before the credit crisis of the 1980s .

overall , usda data show that debt - to - asset ratios for the farm sector have been stable or slightly declining over the past decade , indicating that the sector is not highly leveraged with debt .

recent strength in farm income has given farmers more capacity to repay their loans or borrow new funds .

farm equity has been rising because increases in debt typically have been more than offset by larger gains in land values .

nonetheless , despite the relatively strong farm economy in recent years , some farmers continue to experience financial stress due to individual circumstances , and may be unable to qualify for loans .

agriculture is also prone to business cycles that may pose financial difficulties .

thus , many interests in production agriculture continue to see some need for federal intervention in agricultural credit markets .

farm bills usually contain a credit title that makes policy changes to the underlying permanent statutes that authorize fsa and fcs .

federal agriculture conservation programs have largely addressed soil and water conservation and pollution problems associated with crop and livestock production .

however , increasing attention is being paid to wetlands restoration , wildlife habitat , farmland protection , and other objectives .

while the programs are broadening and techniques to address the problems are changing , the basic approach has remained unchanged — voluntary farmer participation encouraged by providing land rental payments , cost - sharing funds , technical assistance , education , and basic and applied research .

conservation programs avoid using regulations and emphasize partnerships with relevant public and private entities to address common concerns .

the closest the conservation effort comes to regulation is with three compliance programs — sodbuster , swampbuster , and conservation compliance .

producers can lose specified federal farm program benefits if they cultivate highly erodible lands that have not been previously cropped ( sodbuster ) , drain wetlands ( swampbuster ) , or cultivate highly erodible cropland without implementing a conservation plan ( conservation compliance ) .

with authorization of the conservation reserve program ( crp ) in the 1985 farm bill , congress began a 20 plus - year expansion of programs and spending that may not yet have ended .

before 1985 , the few conservation programs that existed were funded through annual appropriations amounting to about $1.0 billion annually .

spending is now about $5.2 billion annually and most of it is mandatory and supplied by the commodity credit corporation ( the same source that finances the commodity support programs ) .

as measured by spending , the conservation effort today is largely cropland retirement .

other approaches now being emphasized include creating buffers to protect water bodies from nearby crop production and reducing tillage to prevent erosion ( and save energy ) .

the 2002 farm bill altered the conservation effort in two especially significant ways .

it mandated a large increase in funding for many conservation programs , and it created a new conservation security program ( csp ) to reward producers practicing conservation on land in production .

so called working lands conservation may gain prominence over cropland retirement as agriculture becomes an increasingly large supplier of the nation's renewable energy and more land is needed to produce energy crops .

this likely will be one of the major debates in the 2007 farm bill .

agriculture - based renewable energy production — especially biofuels and wind power — has expanded dramatically during the past two years , with profound implications for the u.s. agricultural sector .

most notably , the escalating demand for corn as a feedstock in ethanol production has driven grain and oilseed prices sharply higher since september 2006 .

prices for oilseeds and other grains that compete with corn for cropland also experienced similar sharp price rises during that period .

as agriculture - based energy production expanded , so has the level of support provided under federal and state programs .

total federal and state biofuel subsidies have been estimated in the range of $5.5 to $7 billion per year .

prospects for continued growth in biofuel production and related strong commodity prices have been greeted in some quarters as the long - awaited economic breakthrough for the agricultural producers and small towns , but many market watchers , policymakers , and producers from other agricultural sectors question the potential consequences of continued rapid growth of u.s. biofuel production .

biofuels are liquid fuels produced from biomass .

the major u.s. biofuels are ethanol ( 98% from corn ) , and biodiesel ( 90% from soybean oil ) .

fuel ethanol is generally blended in gasoline to reduce emissions , increase octane , and extend gasoline stocks .

biodiesel is used directly as an alternative diesel fuel .

the potential development of a cellulosic - based ethanol industry is presently impeded by the state of cellulosic conversion technology , which still is expensive relative to corn - based production .

however , the enormous potential supply of low - cost cellulosic plant material available in the united states makes it an attractive prospective feedstock .

u.s. ethanol production has been expanding rapidly , rising from about 175 million gallons in 1980 to 4.8 billion gallons per year in 2006 .

ethanol now dominates u.s. biofuel production .

biodiesel production is at a much smaller level , but has also shown growth , rising from 0.5 million gallons in 1999 to an estimated 75 million gallons in 2005 .

u.s. ethanol production presently is underway or planned in 22 states located primarily around the central and western corn belt , where corn supplies are most plentiful .

usda estimates that 20% of the 2006 corn crop ( or 2.15 billion bushels ) will be used by the ethanol sector to produce nearly 6 billion gallons of ethanol during the 2006-2007 crop year .

ethanol production is projected to continue growing rapidly through at least 2010 on the strength of both market forces as well as the extension of existing and the addition of new government incentives .

those incentives include a per gallon tax credit of $0.51 , a mandate to use renewable vehicle fuels of 7.5 billion gallons by 2012 , and a tariff on imported ethanol of $0.54 per gallon .

by mid - december 2006 , the pace of ethanol plant expansion was well on its way to exceed the rfs goal ( 7.5 bil .

gal .

by 2012 ) with 5.3 billion gallons of annual ethanol production capacity currently in operation and another 4.4 billion gallons of capacity under construction and potentially on - line by early 2008 .

based on a conversion rate of 2.75 gallons per bushel , the rapid expansion of ethanol production capacity suggests that the u.s. ethanol sector will need over 3 billion bushels of corn as feedstock in 2007 and over 3.6 billion bushels in 2008 ( 34% of the 2006 crop ) .

several factors have emerged since 2002 that could influence the consideration of agricultural research , education , and extension policies when congress next visits this usda mission area in the context of a 2007 farm bill .

the current farm bill was debated in a time of budget surpluses ; congress will construct the next bill in an era of large federal deficits .

funding is the first of several major factors that will affect the upcoming debate .

the other factors concern specialty crop issues , pressure to reform long - standing methods of distributing federal funds for agricultural research , and trade .

some rural areas , such as those within commuting distances of metropolitan areas or with environmental amenities and / or affluent retirees , are thriving .

other rural areas with sparse populations and declining economies continue to face significant challenges .

the less diversified the local economy , the more vulnerable it is to economic downturns and the more difficult it may be to create new competitive forces in these areas during periods of recovery .

when agricultural production and related businesses dominated rural economies , federal policies that strengthened and improved agriculture also tended to strengthen and improve the well - being of most of america's small communities and rural residents .

as the power of this linkage has declined , many observers have felt that rural policy has been left fragmented and unfocused , comprising a patchwork of programs and initiatives rather than a coherent policy .

agriculture remains the primary policy framework for congress's consideration of rural issues , and questions have been raised about whether current rural policies and programs are helping to create new economic capacity in rural america that will generate future competitive advantages .

researchers and others who discuss conditions in "rural" america most often refer to conditions in nonmetropolitan areas .

metropolitan ( metro ) and nonmetropolitan ( nonmetro ) areas are delineated by county .

in june 2003 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) released the census 2000 version of metropolitan ( metro ) and nonmetropolitan ( nonmetro ) areas , a classification system often used to define urban and rural america .

in this most recent update , nonmetro america comprises 2,052 counties , contains 75% of the nation's land , and is home to 17% ( 49 million ) of the u.s. population .

in the middle of the 20 th century , nearly 40% of the rural population lived on farms , with about a third of the rural workforce laboring in production agriculture .

currently , less than 10% of rural people live on farms and only 6.5% of the rural workforce is directly employed in farm production .

off - farm income sources now account for approximately 89% of farm household income .

many of the counties where agricultural production represents 20% or more of labor and proprietor income ( predominantly in the great plains and upper midwest ) have seen population losses between 2000 and 2005 .

today , manufacturing accounts for over a quarter of rural private sector earnings .

the united states is the world's leading supplier of food aid for humanitarian relief and economic development .

during the period 1995-2005 , the united states contributed almost 60% of total global food aid .

the european union is the second largest provider , with a contribution during the same period of 25% .

the united states is also the major contributor to the united nations world food program ( wfp ) , a un agency that provides humanitarian food relief in times of emergency need .

over 50% of wfp's food aid resources were provided by the united states during 1995-2005 .

the nutrition title accounts for approximately 62% of all farm bill spending .

the lion's share of this nutrition spending is for the food stamp program , which is widely viewed as the federal government's primary response to the food needs of low - income americans .

nutrition assistance programs ( all administered by usda ) also play a role in federal support for the agricultural sector through direct commodity purchases and increased demand .

omnibus farm bills have become the legislative vehicle for reauthorizing expiring authorities and appropriations , especially for food stamps and several smaller domestic food programs ; most recently , the 2002 farm bill reauthorized expiring nutrition program authorities and appropriations authorizations through fy2007 .

congress uses farm bills as an opportunity to review the administration , effectiveness , eligibility and benefit rules , and funding levels of some nutrition programs — and as a place for new initiatives .

in addition , the nutrition title serves the political objective of bringing urban members into the farm bill process .

occasionally , the large budget for nutrition programs also serves as a tempting target for other agriculture committee priorities when spending is constrained .

the usda oversees almost 20 domestic nutrition assistance programs , spending some $54 billion in fy2006 , over half of usda's outlays .

virtually all the programs are administered by states , schools , or local grantees under federally prescribed rules .

federal oversight of these programs ( eg , regulations governing program operations ) is the responsibility of the usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) .

in addition , the agriculture marketing service ( ams ) , the farm service agency ( fsa ) , and the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) play roles in the procurement of commodities for some programs .

the upcoming farm bill is may cover five program areas , accounting for 65% of federal nutrition aid spending .

they include: the food stamp program in the 50 states , the district of columbia , guam , and the virgin islands ; programs operating in lieu of the regular food stamp program — nutrition assistance block grants for puerto rico , american samoa , and the northern mariana islands , along with the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) ; the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) ; the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) ; and community food projects .

moreover , the 2002 farm bill added statutory authority and mandatory funding for a new seniors farmers' market nutrition program ( sfmnp ) and established a pilot program to distribute free fruit and vegetables in schools ( later expanded and made permanent ) .

all farm bill domestic nutrition assistance programs , except for the csfp and the administrative / distribution - cost component of tefap , are treated as mandatory entitlements for budget purposes .

taken together they represent about one - third of usda spending ( outlays ) and are estimated at $35 billion or more for fy2006 .

a number of issues for the 2007 farm bill have emerged .

however , as with the 2002 bill , action on most of them will depend heavily on budgetary considerations .

major programs and issue areas are outlined below .

forestlands in the united states total nearly 747 million acres , about a third of all land in the country .

these lands provide wood for lumber , plywood , paper , and other materials , as well as a host of environmental and ecological services , including recreation , clean water , wildlife habitat , and more .

ownership of forestlands is divided among ( 1 ) non - industrial private forest landowners ( private owners who do not own wood processing facilities ) , with nearly 363 million acres ( 49% of the total ) ; ( 2 ) the federal government , with 247 million acres ( 33% of the total ) ; ( 3 ) state and local governments , with 70 million acres ( 9% of the total ) ; and ( 4 ) industrial private owners ( private owners who also operate sawmills and / or wood pulp / paper plants ) , with 68 million acres ( 9% of the total ) .

federal forestlands are administered largely by the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( with 48 million acres ) and the usda's forest service ( with nearly 147 million acres ) .

in addition to administering 155 national forests and various other designations , the forest service provides technical and financial assistance to non - industrial private landowners , directly and through state forestry agencies .

three of the past four farm bills have contained separate forestry titles .

traditionally , farm bills address forestry assistance programs , but federal forest management and protection also is within the agriculture committees' jurisdiction .

the next farm bill may include a forestry title to modify existing programs and possibly establish new options for forest land management and protection .

forestry assistance programs are managed primarily by the state and private forestry ( s&pf ) branch of the forest service .

funding is enacted in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

there are three groups of forestry assistance programs .

forest health management includes programs to survey and control forest pests and pathogens ( including invasive species ) on federal and nonfederal ( cooperative ) lands .

cooperative fire assistance includes equipment , financial , and technical assistance to states and volunteer fire departments .

cooperative forestry assistance programs include: forest stewardship — financial and technical assistance to states for forestry programs ; forest legacy — federal or state acquisition of lands or easements on lands threatened with conversion to non - forestry uses ; urban and community forestry — financial and technical assistance for forestry activities in urban and community settings ; economic assistance — financial and technical assistance for diversifying forest - dependent rural communities ( economic action program and pacific northwest assistance ) ; and forest land enhancement — cost - share assistance for forestry practices on private forests ( forest land enhancement program ( flep ) , enacted in the 2002 farm bill to replace the forestry incentives program ( fip ) , and stewardship incentives program ( sip ) ) .

two smaller programs include international forestry and forest inventory activities .

appropriations for many forestry assistance programs rose in fy2001 in response to the national forest plan .

this plan was prepared in september 2000 at president clinton's request in response to the severe summer 2000 fire season .

funding for forest health management and cooperative fire assistance have persisted at relatively high levels compared to those before fy2001 .

also , funding for forest legacy has grown substantially , from less than $3 million annually for most of the 1990s to an average of more than $60 million annually over the past five years .

in contrast to these programs , technical and financial aid to rural , forest - dependent communities — to help businesses and workers adjust to a more diverse , less traditional forest product based local economy — has declined .

the bush administration proposed terminating funds for economic assistance in each of the past four budget requests ; appropriations have declined from the fy2001 peak of $63.6 million to $9.5 million in fy2006 .

such assistance has been popular locally , and is seen in part as a way to help use the excess biomass fuels that need to be removed from forests to reduce the risk from wildfires .

consequently , approaches to expand and fund fs economic assistance programs might be examined in the next farm bill .

funding for the forest land enhancement program may attract attention in the upcoming farm bill .

flep was enacted in the 2002 farm bill with mandatory funding of $100 million through fy2007 .

however , actual funding has totaled $50 million , and congress , at the request of the administration , has cancelled the remaining funding .

this perceived "failure" to fulfill the "promised" funding likely will be a major part of the forestry debate in the next farm bill .

funding for forestry assistance programs is shown below , in table 11 .

the threat of wildfires to forests and to communities and homes in the wildland - urban interface seems to have grown .

the 2002 farm bill authorized a new community wildfire protection program , but the program has been funded only as part of state fire assistance , with no separate funds for community protection .

as the threat from wildfire persists , wildfire protection options may be considered in the next farm bill .

invasive species , typically exotic plants and animals , are increasingly displacing or harming native plants and animals in the united states and worldwide .

fs chief dale bosworth described invasive species as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands .

options and opportunities to prevent and control the spread of invasive species , especially forest pests and especially on private forestlands , might be a farm bill issue .

the environmental losses associated with conversion of forestlands to other , non - forest uses ( eg , agriculture and residential development ) have generated concern .

the substantial expansion of the forest legacy program reflects this growing concern .

however , some stakeholders have suggested that non - market services from private forestlands ( water quality , open space , carbon storage , wildlife habitat , biological diversity , etc. ) .

might be compensated .

the idea of federal support for developing markets for these traditionally non - market services has generated broad interest , and may be discussed as a possible forestry program in the upcoming farm bill .

appendix a .

titles and subtitles of the 2002 farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) appendix b .

agriculture committee membership , by stat .

