congress has recently been presented with legislative proposals to address the legacy of pollution from abandoned hardrock mines that degrades the environment throughout the united states , particularly in the west .

in the 109 th congress , four bills were introduced that sought to encourage cleanup of inactive or abandoned hardrock mining sites by so - called "good samaritan" entities: h.r .

1266 , introduced by representative mark udall , s. 1848 , by senator ken salazar , and s. 2780 , by senator james inhofe , and h.r .

5404 , by representative james duncan , identical bills introduced at the request of the administration .

in september 2006 , the senate environment and public works committee reported an amended version of s. 1848 that reflected a number of provisions in the administration bill and other modifications ( s.rept .

109-351 ) .

the 109 th congress took no further action on any of the proposals , and the following discussion describes provisions of the bills as of december 2006 .

whether these issues or specific legislation will be considered in the 110 th congress is uncertain .

mining has been conducted throughout the country for nearly 150 years , but most occurred before the advent of environmental regulation .

many historic mining operations were abandoned without being adequately reclaimed against future environmental damage .

there may be more than 550,000 of these sites on public and private lands in the united states ; there is no single inventory of sites , and thus the precise number is unknown .

although most sites do not pose environmental problems , drainage or runoff from some ( discharges including sulfate , copper , lead , arsenic , and mercury , for example ) continue to pose a threat to both surface water and groundwater .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has estimated that approximately 40% of headwaters in rivers and streams in the west have been impacted by discharges from abandoned hardrock mines , thus threatening drinking water and agricultural water supplies , increasing water treatment costs , and limiting fishing and recreation .

the number of mines that are causing or have potential to cause water - related pollution problems is unknown , but is generally believed to be a small percentage of the total: perhaps 3% - 5% of all inactive or abandoned ( iam ) sites .

but even so , 3% - 5% of 550,000 possible sites in total still represents a large number of potential sites ( 16,000 to 27,000 ) that concerns many persons .

the principal objective indicated for each of the bills was to help solve some of the problems of environmental pollution emanating from iam sites .

the core concept underlying the bills is that , in order to address the problem of pollution from iam sites , it is appropriate to encourage cleanup by voluntary entities , third parties who have no history of polluting at a particular site or legal responsibility for its pollution , but who step forward to clean up acid mine drainage or other pollution from an abandoned mine .

the bills proposed incentives in the form of reduced liability from environmental laws ( such as strict liability for cleanup costs and restoring damaged natural resources ) and less stringent environmental standards applicable to cleanup activities .

proponents, who included mining companies and industry associations , maintained that any degree of cleanup is better than inaction or the status quo , and they argued that , if not addressed in this legislation , the issues of liability exposure under environmental law and strict regulatory standards could stymie voluntary cleanups .

opponents , especially many environmental and conservation advocates , acknowledged that cleanup would benefit the environment , but they expressed concern that exemptions and relief such as these bills proposed might be the first step in dismantling key environmental legislation , because the bills were vague about standards that would apply to a good samaritan cleanup .

other stakeholders in the debate include states and the federal government .

all four bills proposed to establish a process for issuing permits to those who would be good samaritans .

under all four , permitting authority would have been vested in epa , but could have been delegated to qualified states and indian tribes .

the bills would have allowed a potential remediating party to obtain a permit authorizing it to take steps to improve water quality without being required to comply fully with water quality standards that would otherwise apply .

in addition to environmental benefits , an incentive for some good samaritans is that once a site is cleaned up , many mines would have the potential to resume mining operations that could result in economic gains .

the bills would have established a process for identifying what entities and lands are eligible , specifying goals of cleanup and conditions for permits , and issuing permits .

all four were limited to hardrock mines — gold , copper , silver , and iron ore , for example — although there are some industry and state stakeholders who favor similar good samaritan authority for cleanup of abandoned coal mines as well ( s. 2780 and h.r .

5404 , the administration proposal , and s. 1848 as reported had one provision concerning coal mine remediation ; it is discussed below on page 11 ) .

there were differences among all of the bills , as discussed below .

of the four , h.r .

1266 alone was drafted as a measure that would amend the clean water act ( cwa , 33 u.s.c .

§1251 et seq. ) .

in h.r .

1266 , the permit provision would have been part of the cwa's overall regulatory , permitting , and enforcement mechanism .

the cwa prohibits the discharge of pollutants into the nation's waters without authority under a cwa permit , and h.r .

1266 would have amended the act's principal permit provision , called the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit ( npdes , section 402 , 33 u.s.c .

§1342 ) , by adding a new subsection with requirements specific to good samaritan permits .

the administration bill , s. 2780 and h.r .

5404 , was a stand - alone bill .

it proposed good samaritan relief from requirements of the cwa and the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , or superfund , 42 u.s.c .

§9601 et seq. ) .

the fourth , s. 1848 , also a stand - alone bill , proposed that a permitting authority could provide good samaritans with relief from the clean water act and cercla , plus other specified federal environmental laws , as well as state and local laws .

proponents of good samaritan legislation have discussed many of these issues for nearly a decade , but until recently , congressional committees have given limited consideration to the concept .

in the 106 th congress , the senate environment and public works committee held a hearing on s. 1787 , a good samaritan bill introduced by senator baucus .

another good samaritan bill was introduced in the 108 th congress ( s. 1660 , senator campbell ) , but no legislative action occurred .

in the 109 th congress , three house and senate committees held hearings on good samaritan issues raised by the legislation .

the senate environment and public works committee approved a modified version of s. 1848 , incorporating some provisions of the administration's proposal and other amendments , in september 2006 ( s.rept .

109-351 ) .

testifying at the hearings were witnesses representing epa , states , hardrock mining industry companies and associations , and environmental groups .

reviewing these recent hearings and the senate hearing in the 106 th congress , it is evident that , except for epa and congressional witnesses testifying in support of their own bills , no witness endorsed any of the specific legislative approaches totally or wholeheartedly .

the proposals have been criticized as either too narrow or too broad , depending on the witnesses' perspective .

for example , some stakeholders want an expanded definition of who may be a remediating party and favor elimination of additional regulatory and legal disincentives .

but every effort to broaden the proposals' scope seemingly enlarges the complexity of the legislation and raises stronger opposition from groups who prefer a narrower approach .

this report discusses several issues that have drawn attention: eligibility for a good samaritan permit , standards applicable to a good samaritan cleanup , scope of liability protection , treatment of revenues from cleanup , enforcement and judicial review , the appropriate role for states and indian tribes , funding , terminating a permit , and sunsetting the permit program .

this discussion does not address every issue in the bills ( for example , it does not analyze procedures for issuing good samaritan permits ) , nor does it discuss general background on the problem of inactive and abandoned hardrock mine sites .

in congressional testimony in 2006 , some witnesses expressed a certain frustration about the continuing debate over good samaritan issues .

an epa witness said that the issue has been discussed for over a decade and suggested that "action , not continued debate on this issue , is the only way to clean up what has been described as a very fixable mess. .

while most witnesses at these hearings agreed on the basic point of liability relief to remove some of the obstacles to voluntary remediation of inactive and abandoned mine sites , others do not yet agree that a legislative solution like any of the 109 th congress bills is needed or appropriate .

further , as this report has described , these proposals differed in many key and controversial respects — including scope of liability protection , revenue and profit questions , and applicable standards — that may still require discussion and debate before consensus emerges .

