since oil price increases began in 2004 , the oil industry has earned increasedprofits .

these profits might have resulted from other factors in addition to theincreased price of oil .

a key factor in increased profitability might be the tightnessin the u.s. gasoline market , a factor related to the lack of enough refinery capacityto meet u.s. demand for petroleum products .

if oil and petroleum product prices are to decrease , supply will likely have toincrease relative to demand .

expanded supply results from investment in the variousstages of the oil industry production process , from exploration and development ofnew oil fields to increased refinery capacity .

if the underlying economic parametersand the regulatory environment are not encouraging , investment might not beundertaken .

historically volatile prices and profit levels coupled with a tightregulatory environment contribute to industry uncertainty .

other legitimate uses for earned profits include paying higher dividends andretiring outstanding shares , acquiring assets through merger and acquisition , andinvesting in new product areas .

these uses of profit may benefit shareholders andstrategically position the firm in the global market , but they do less to expand thesupply of oil and products on the market and thereby reduce prices for consumers .

as a result of significant time lags that tend to occur in the oil industry , it maybe too soon to know whether or not investments in the industry , if taken , will resultin the increased supply of oil and petroleum products needed to reduce prices andconsumers' costs .

in a market economy , a firm's key measure of success is its ability to earn aprofit .

profit is important to firms because it is a signal to the financial markets andinvestors that the firm is worthy of funding either through debt or equity capital .

firms that earn less profit than expected by the market have difficulty fundinginvestment opportunities with negative implications for growth .

firms thatconsistently earn less than adequate profits tend to experience slow growth,stagnation , and ultimately , failure .

profit is seemingly a simple concept .

total cost is subtracted from totalrevenue , leaving a residual , total profit .

in this approach , profit is measured indollars .

for the oil industry , the simple total revenue minus total cost approach iscomplicated by the difficulty in neatly separating the revenue - generating outputs ofthe firms from the cost - creating production inputs .

for any given oil company , crudeoil price changes may affect both the revenues and costs of the company .

if thecompany is an upstream producer and sells crude oil , the production of crude oil isrevenue generating .

however , downstream operations , notably refining andmarketing , make use of crude oil as a raw material , and for them , the acquisition ofcrude oil is a cost .

as a result , it is not always clear that an increase in the price ofcrude oil will raise , or lower , profits for firms with differing positions in the upstreamand downstream segments of the industry .

another key factor in the profit calculation is how easily the increase in thecost of crude oil can be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices forgasoline and other refined products without suffering a more than proportionatedecrease in sales .

if cost increases can be passed on to consumers , and the firm hassignificant upstream business interests , then it is more likely that an increase in theprice of crude oil will yield increased profits .

a simple way to rank companies , for comparative purposes , is by total profit .

however , this type of simple ranking is likely to provide a misleading picture of therelative performance of the companies in the oil industry .

while the total dollar value of profit is important , it may be equally importantto know the value of the resources , or assets , at a firm's disposal that were used toearn a given dollar level of profit .

the size of the firm relative to the level of totalprofit is important , especially for investment analysts .

for this reason , the mostcommonly used measures of profit in investment analysis are expressed aspercentages , or rates , independent of specific magnitudes .

the use of percentagesallows meaningful comparisons to be made between companies of different sizes anddiffering access to resources .

profit also can be measured to include or exclude special , non - recurring itemsthat may temporarily affect a company's revenues and costs .

for example , if acompany incurs substantial costs and legal penalties associated with anenvironmental cleanup due to an oil spill at one of its facilities , its profit performancefor the relevant time period might well be negatively affected .

however , profitnumbers that include the costs resulting from the spill may tell potential investorsand other interested parties little about the real , continuing , business performance ofthe company .

 ( 20 ) profits from continuing operations , excludingone - time charges ( or revenues ) , may be more informative for some purposes .

all stakeholders in a company do not necessarily have an interest in the sameconceptual definition of profit .

accountants are interested in profit calculations thatmeet generally accepted accounting practices and are consistent with the tax code .

economists use profit as a signal to judge the efficiency of resource allocationdecisions and include opportunity costs in their calculations .

 ( 21 ) potentialinvestors in the company's stocks and bonds may choose to evaluate profit from astill different perspective , comparing profit to a measure of the assets managementhad available for business purposes relative to the risk the company faced .

even once the efficacy of using a profit rate is determined , measurementissues still need to be addressed .

since profit as a rate , or percentage , must beexpressed relative to some base , an appropriate base must be specified .

threepossible bases , widely used in business analysis , are sales , assets , and net worth , orshareholder equity .

each is useful in answering particular questions about theoperation of the business , but none necessarily serves as an all - purpose profitmeasure .

the profit margin on sales uses the total sales revenue of the business as thebase and expresses profit , or net income , as a percentage of sales revenue .

profitrates expressed in this manner can answer questions as to whether increasing salesbecome more or less profitable as the business grows .

 ( 22 ) this profitmeasure can also lead analysts to basic questions as to whether the businesses' priceswere too low or too high , or whether adequate cost controls were in place as thebusiness expanded .

a variation on this profit measure results from replacing netincome in the calculation with operating income .

 ( 23 ) profits based on assets , or the return on assets , divides profit , or net income,by the value of the total assets of the business .

this measure allows analysts todetermine how well management uses the asset base of the company to generateprofits for investors .

if the asset base represents the tools available to managementto carry out business activities , the return on assets gives an indication of howeffective management has been in using those tools .

this approach has beencriticized by some because certain "intangibles" important to the functioning of thebusiness may not receive adequate weight in this measure .

a profitability rate popular with potential investors is the return on equity , orthe return on net worth .

this measure divides profit , or net income , by the value ofshareholders equity in the firm .

since the fundamental accounting identity , assets=liabilities + owners equity , must always hold , for every business , this profit rate isgenerally greater than , and at least equal to , the return on assets .

 ( 24 ) thismeasure is especially interesting to investors who might plan to buy shares of stockin the business .

while this profit measure may be revealing to potential investors,care should be exercised in its use .

if two businesses have the same asset value andthe same level of profits , differences in return on net worth can arise solely as a resultof the amount of debt financing on the firm's balance sheet , a difference purely offinancial structure , unrelated to a firm's ability to efficiently produce goods and earnrevenues from selling goods .

this can generate misleading conclusions about thestrength of the firm's performance , because the choice of financial structure for abusiness is not generally related to its current profitability from continuingoperations .

another measure , sometimes identified with profitability , is earnings pershare .

this measure divides profit , or net income , by the total number of shares ofcommon stock outstanding .

earnings per share provides the prospective maximumof dividends per share that might be paid by the firm .

however , it is not a relevantmeasure to evaluate profit .

like the return on net worth , it is affected by the capitalstructure of the company , the division between equity and debt financing .

earningsper share can also be directly affected by strategic management decisions .

firms maydecide to buy back shares of common stock and retire them , holding them as treasuryshares .

this type of strategy raises earnings per share by decreasing the number ofoutstanding shares over which any level of net income is divided .

this strategymight well be viewed negatively by financial analysts , who might interpret it as asignal that the firm does not have , or recognize , profitable investment opportunitiesavailable , and hence chooses to return to shareholders the money they had investedin the company .

an important factor in analyzing profit data is that in many cases it is moreinformative to use comparative analysis .

comparisons can be made over time , withother companies in the same industry , or with other companies that bear the samelevel of risk .

time - based comparative profit analysis may be helpful because it suggeststhe direction the company is heading , or the direction of market trends .

a particularrate of profit might be viewed as favorable if it was embedded in a trend of risingprofit rates , or unfavorable if embedded in a trend of falling profit rates .

time trendsmight also help to identify correlations between profit and other factors whichinfluence profits .

in addition , key lags that affect profit are also more likely to beidentified in a time trend .

standing alone , any rate of profit might be difficult to evaluate .

comparisonscan be drawn with other firms in the same , or closely related , lines of business todetermine whether a particular firm is a profit leader , average , or a low profit earnerwithin its industry cohort .

barring special circumstances , which should be clearlyreported in the company's financial statements , if two firms in the same line ofbusiness , with approximately the same asset base , report very different profit rates,it is possible that this differential might suggest that one or the other firm'smanagement strategy is superior .

looking at profit rates of different sized firmswithin the same industry allows the analyst to assess whether growth of the firm toa larger scale may imply any advantage or disadvantage with respect to profit .

in some cases , particularly for investment decisions , the most relevantcomparison is with firms with a comparable level of risk , independent of the line of business in which the firms are engaged .

 ( 25 ) this approach is appropriate for prospectiveinvestors because they may have less interest in what business activity a firmundertakes , than the results of that activity in terms of profits earned and risk borne .

in many cases , profits can be expressed in comparison to an index of firms designedto show average , or market , returns and risk .

