since 1952 , when a cabal of egyptian army officers , known as the free officers movement , ousted the british - backed king , egypt's military has produced four presidents ; gamal abdel nasser ( 1954-1970 ) , anwar sadat ( 1970-1981 ) , hosni mubarak ( 1981-2011 ) , and abdel fattah el sisi ( 2013-present ) .

in general , these four men have ruled egypt with strong backing from the country's security establishment .

the only significant and abiding opposition has come from the egyptian muslim brotherhood , an organization that has opposed single party military - backed rule and advocated for a state governed by a vaguely articulated combination of civil and shariah ( islamic ) law .

egypt's sole departure from this general formula took place between 2011 and 2013 , after popular demonstrations sparked by the "arab spring," which had started in neighboring tunisia , compelled the military to force the resignation of former president hosni mubarak in february 2011 .

during this period , egypt experienced tremendous political tumult , culminating in the one - year presidency of the muslim brotherhood's muhammad morsi .

when morsi took office on june 30 , 2012 , after winning egypt's first truly competitive presidential election , his ascension to the presidency was supposed to mark the end of a rocky 16-month transition period .

proposed time lines for elections , the constitutional drafting process , and the military's relinquishing of power to a civilian government had been constantly changed , contested , and sometimes even overruled by the courts .

instead of consolidating democratic or civilian rule , morsi's rule exposed the deep divisions in egyptian politics , pitting a broad cross - section of egypt's public and private sectors , the coptic church , and the military against the brotherhood and its islamist supporters .

the atmosphere of mutual distrust , political gridlock , and public dissatisfaction that permeated morsi's presidency provided egypt's military , led by then - defense minister sisi , with an opportunity to reassert political control .

on july 3 , 2013 , following several days of mass demonstrations against morsi's rule , the military unilaterally dissolved morsi's government , suspended the constitution that had been passed during his rule , and installed an interim president .

the muslim brotherhood and its supporters declared the military's actions a coup d'etat and protested in the streets .

weeks later , egypt's military and national police launched a violent crackdown against the muslim brotherhood , resulting in police and army soldiers firing live ammunition against demonstrators encamped in several public squares and the killing of at least 1,150 demonstrators .

the egyptian military justified these actions by decrying the encampments as a threat to national security .

as egyptian president abdel fattah al sisi consolidates his power amid a continuing macroeconomic recovery , egypt is poised to play an increasingly active role in the region , albeit from a more independent position vis - a - vis the united states than in the past .

although egyptian relations with the trump administration are solid , and egypt has relied on the international monetary fund ( imf ) program to guide its economic recovery , egypt seems committed to broadening its international base of support .

the united states plays a key role in that international base , but egypt also has other significant partners , including the arab gulf states , israel , russia , and france .

the egyptian government blames american criticism of its human rights record for preventing closer u.s. - egyptian ties .

from the u.s. perspective , some members of congress , u.s. media outlets , and advocacy groups document how egyptian authorities have widened the scope of a crackdown against dissent , which initially was aimed at the muslim brotherhood but has evolved to encompass a broader range of political speech .

egypt's parliament is currently considering whether to adopt a package of draft constitutional amendments that would extend presidential term limits and executive branch control over the judiciary .

if egypt's 2019 constitutional amendments are approved , president sisi will attain unprecedented power in the political system over the military and the judiciary and , if reelected , will have the potential to remain in office until 2034 .

he has inserted his older brother and oldest son into key security and intelligence positions while stymying all opposition to his rule and criticism of his government .

this consolidation of power and crackdown against dissent has taken place during a period of steady economic growth , which has not benefitted wide swaths of the population .

the state has enacted a series of austerity measures to reduce debt in compliance with imf - mandated reforms .

in the year ahead , economists anticipate gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth of 5.3% , driven by an expansion in tourism and natural gas production .

nevertheless , egyptians continue to endure double - digit inflation stemming in part from the 2016 flotation of the currency , tax increases , and reductions in food and fuel subsidies .

while it is difficult to ascertain how dissatisfied the public is with rising prices , president sisi has responded to criticisms of his economic policies , stating: "the path of real reform is difficult and cruel and causes a lot of suffering... .

but there is no doubt that the suffering resulting from the lack of reform is much worse. .

the imf has praised the egyptian government's record of reform implementation , while also highlighting the need for private sector growth "that will absorb the rapidly growing labor force and ensure that the benefits are perceived more widely. .

after several years of observers seeing egypt as more inwardly focused , several recent developments suggest an increasingly active foreign policy .

in january 2019 , egypt hosted an international forum on mediterranean gas which included european and arab countries together with israel .

a month later , president sisi was elected head of the african union for a year - long term .

in february 2019 , egypt hosted the first - ever european union - arab summit in sharm el sheikh , where officials discussed terrorism , migration , and the need for greater european - arab cooperation to counter a perceived growing chinese and russian interest in the middle east .

personnel moves and other developments in egypt highlight apparent efforts by president sisi to consolidate power with the help of political allies , including colleagues from egypt's security establishment .

in june 2018 , sisi reshuffled his cabinet , making key changes to the defense and interior ministries , among other appointments .

sisi appointed mohamed ahmed zaki , former head of the republican guard , as defense minister and mahmoud tawfik , former head of the national security service , as interior minister .

according to one account , sisi may have been rewarding zaki for his role in arresting former egyptian president mohamed morsi in 2013 .

in july 2018 , parliament passed law 161 of 2018 , providing judicial immunity to senior military commanders for military acts committed during the two - and - a - half - year period beginning with the military coup of july 2013 .

the new law grants immunity to senior commanders while potentially keeping high - ranking officers on reserve duty for life , making them ineligible to run for president .

in order for a senior commander to be prosecuted under this new law , a case would have to be first authorized by the supreme council of the armed forces ( scaf ) , which president sisi appoints .

according to one analysis , the law deters senior officers from challenging president sisi ( for example , some challenges occurred during the run - up to the 2018 presidential election ) , thereby acting "as a guarantor of president sisi's authoritarian rule , setting the stage for him to remain president for life. .

per the 2014 egyptian constitution ( article 140 ) , president sisi , who was reelected in april 2018 , may only serve two four - year terms in office ( current term ends in 2022 ) .

however , his supporters have proposed a set of amendments to the constitution which , if approved by parliament and public referendum , have the potential to make president sisi eligible for an additional two six - year terms when his current term ends in 2022 .

other proposed changes to the constitution include granting the president the authority to appoint all chief justices of egyptian judicial bodies , and the public prosecutor ; requiring that at least one - quarter of the seats in the parliament be allocated to women and reducing the number of the seats in the house of representatives from 596 to 450 ; and establishing an upper house of parliament ( senate ) consisting of 250 members , two - thirds of whom would be elected and one - third of whom would be appointed by the president .

president sisi has come under repeated international criticism for an ongoing government crackdown against various forms of political dissent and freedom of expression .

certain practices of sisi's government , the parliament , and the security apparatus have been contentious .

according to the u.s. state department's report on human rights conditions in egypt in 2017: the most significant human rights issues included arbitrary or unlawful killings by the government or its agents ; major terrorist attacks ; disappearances ; torture ; harsh or potentially life - threatening prison conditions ; arbitrary arrest and detention ; including the use of military courts to try civilians ; political prisoners and detainees ; unlawful interference in privacy ; limits on freedom of expression , including criminal "defamation of religion" laws ; restrictions on the press , internet , and academic freedom ; and restrictions on freedoms of assembly and association , including government control over registration and financing of ngos [nongovernmental organizations] .

lgbti persons faced arrests , imprisonment , and degrading treatment .

the government did not effectively respond to violence against women , and there were reports of child labor .

select international human rights , democracy , and development monitoring organizations provide the following rankings for egypt globally: other human rights issues of potential interest to congress may include the 2013 convictions of american , european , and egyptian civil society representatives ; the controversial 2017 ngo law ; the detention of american citizens in egypt ; and the treatment of coptic christians , discussed in the following sections .

for 2019 , the imf projects 5.3% gdp growth for the egyptian economy , noting that the outlook remains "favorable , supported by strong policy implementation. .

in 2016 , the imf and egypt reached a three - year , $12 billion loan agreement , $10 billion of which has been disbursed as of march 2019 .

key sources of foreign exchange ( tourism and remittances ) are up and unemployment is at its lowest level since 2011 .

in line with imf recommendations , the government has taken several steps to reform the economy , including depreciating the currency , reducing fuel subsidies , enacting a value - added tax ( vat ) , and providing cash payments to the poor in lieu of subsidizing household goods ( though many food subsidies continue ) .

egypt's energy sector also is contributing to the economy's rebound .

egypt is the largest oil producer in africa outside of the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) and the third - largest natural gas producer on the continent following algeria and nigeria .

in december 2017 , an egyptian and italian partnership began commercial output from the zohr natural gas field ( est .

30 trillion cubic feet of gas ) , the largest ever natural gas field discovered in the mediterranean sea ( see figure 3 ) .

the egyptian government also has repaid debts owed to foreign energy companies , allowing for new investments from bp and bg group .

egypt is attempting to position itself as a regional gas hub , whereby its own gas fields meet domestic demand while imported gas from israel and cyprus can be liquefied in egypt and reexported .

israeli and egyptian companies have bought significant shares of an unused undersea pipeline connecting israel to the northern sinai peninsula ( see figure 4 ) .

the pipeline will be used to transport natural gas from israel to egypt for possible reexport , as part of an earlier 10-year , $15 billion gas deal between the u.s. company noble energy , its israeli partner delek , and the egyptian company dolphinus holdings .

in january 2019 , egypt convened the first ever eastern mediterranean gas forum ( emgf ) , a regional consortium consisting of egypt , israel , jordan , the palestinian authority , cyprus , greece , and italy , intended to consolidate regional energy policies and reduce costs .

despite egypt's positive economic outlook , significant challenges remain .

inflation remains over 11% , making the cost of goods high for many egyptians .

in addition , while the fiscal deficit may be decreasing , egypt's overall public and foreign debt have grown significantly in recent years and remain high , leading the government to allocate resources ( nearly 38% of egypt's budget ) toward debt - service payments and away from spending on health and education .

economists forecast that total public debt will reach 84.8% of gdp and external debt 32% of gdp ( $101.7 billion ) in 2019 .

some observers assert that egypt's recent economic reforms , while successful in the short term , have not addressed deeper structural impediments to growth .

for example , egypt's industrial sector is heavily dependent upon imports and , as the economy expands , the demand for foreign currency increases .

according to bloomberg , "this means , the more the economy grows , the greater the pressure on dollar reserves .

it doesn't help that these were built up almost entirely through foreign borrowing , pushing egypt's foreign debt from $55 billion in 2016 to $92 billion in late 2018 .

it won't be long before the country's finances are once again in crisis. .

many experts argue that to sustain growth over the long term , egypt requires dramatic expansion of the nonhydrocarbon private sector .

for decades , egypt's military has played a key role in the nation's economy as a food producer and low - cost domestic manufacturer of consumable products ; however , due to political sensitivities , the extent of its economic power is rarely quantified .

egypt's military is largely economically self - sufficient .

it produces what it consumes ( food and clothes ) and then sells surplus goods for additional revenue .

egyptian military companies have been the main beneficiaries of the massive infrastructure contracts sisi has commissioned .

moreover , military - owned manufacturing companies have expanded into new markets , producing goods ( appliances , solar panels , some electronics , and some medical equipment ) that are cheaper than either foreign imports or domestically produced goods made by the private sector .

president sisi , who led the 2013 military intervention and was elected president in mid - 2014 , came to power promising not only to defeat violent salafi - jihadi terrorist groups militarily , but also to counter their foundational ideology , which president sisi and his supporters often attribute to the muslim brotherhood .

president sisi has outlawed the muslim brotherhood while launching a more general crackdown against a broad spectrum of opponents , both secular and islamist .

while egypt is no longer beset by the kind of large - scale civil unrest and public protest it faced during the immediate post - mubarak era , it continues to face terrorist and insurgent violence , both in the sinai peninsula and in the rest of egypt .

president trump has praised the egyptian government's counterterrorism efforts while his administration has worked to restore high - level diplomatic engagement , joint military exercises , and arms sales .

many commentators initially expected president trump to bring the united states and egypt closer together , and that largely has been the case .

the administration has withheld some foreign assistance for policy reasons on at least one occasion , however , and the united states has not had an ambassador in cairo since june 30 , 2017 .

as evidence of improved bilateral ties , the u.s. defense department notified congress in november 2018 of a major $1 billion sale of defense equipment to egypt , consisting of 10 ah - 64e apache attack helicopters , among other things .

the egyptian air force already possesses 45 less advanced versions of the apache that were acquired between 2000 and 2014 .

in january 2019 , u.s. secretary of state michael pompeo delivered a major policy speech at the american university in cairo , where he stated: "and as we seek an even stronger partnership with egypt , we encourage president sisi to unleash the creative energy of egypt's people , unfetter the economy , and promote a free and open exchange of ideas .

the progress made to date can continue. .

u.s. officials have not yet publicly criticized efforts by supporters of president sisi to advance amendments to the constitution ( see above ) to extend the possibility of sisi's continued presidency .

human rights advocates have called for western governments to withhold assistance to egypt if the amendments are approved .

according to human rights watch , "al - sisi's government is encouraged by the continued silence of its allies , and if the us , uk , and france want to avoid the destabilizing consequences of entrenching authoritarian rule in egypt , they should act now. .

on february 22 , 2019 , a bipartisan group of national security experts called on u.s. officials to "express strong concern about the amendments to the egyptian constitution now moving through a rapid approval process. .

egypt's poor record on human rights and democratization has sparked regular criticism from u.s. officials and some members of congress .

since fy2012 , members have passed appropriations legislation that withholds the obligation of fmf to egypt until the secretary of state certifies that egypt is taking various steps toward supporting democracy and human rights .

with the exception of fy2014 , lawmakers have included a national security waiver to allow the administration to waive these congressionally mandated certification requirements under certain conditions .

over the last year , the administration has obligated several tranches of fmf to egypt , including the following: in september 2018 , the administration obligated $1 billion in fy2018 fmf .

per section 7041 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) of p.l .

115-141 , the consolidated appropriations act , fy2018 , $300 million in fmf remains withheld from obligation until the secretary of state certifies that egypt is taking various steps toward supporting democracy and human rights .

in previous acts , the amount withheld had been $195 million .

fy2018 fmf for egypt remains available to be expended until september 30 , 2019 .

in august 2018 , the administration waived the certification requirement in section 7041 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of p.l .

115-31 , the consolidated appropriations act , fy2017 , allowing for the obligation of $195 million in fy2017 fmf , which occurred in september 2018 .

however , according to one report , senator patrick leahy has placed a hold on $105 million in fy2017 fmf and is seeking more information on the plight of detained egyptian - american moustafa kassem .

in january 2018 , the administration notified congress of its intent to obligate $1.039 billion in fy2017 fmf out of a total of $1.3 billion appropriated for fy2017 .

it chose not to obligate $65.7 million in fy2017 fmf .

the remaining $195 million had been withheld until a national security waiver was issued in august 2018 ( see above ) .

for fy2019 , the president requested a total of $1.381 billion in foreign assistance for egypt , the same amount requested for the previous year .

nearly all of the requested funds for egypt are for the fmf account .

for fy2020 , the request is nearly identical from previous years , as the president is seeking a total of $1.382 billion in bilateral assistance for egypt .

the fy2019 omnibus ( p.l .

116-6 ) provides the following for egypt: a total of $1.419 billion in bilateral u.s. foreign assistance for egypt , of which $1.3 billion is in fmf , $112.5 million in esf , $3 million in nadr , $2 million in incle , and $1.8 million in imet ; and a reauthorization of esf to support future loan guarantees to egypt ; p.l .

116-6 sets the following conditions for egypt: as in previous years , it requires that funds may only be made available when the secretary of state certifies that the government of egypt is sustaining the strategic relationship with the united states and meeting its obligations under the 1979 egypt - israel peace treaty .

as in previous years , the act withholds esf that "the secretary determines to be equivalent to that expended by the united states government for bail , and by nongovernmental organizations for legal and court fees , associated with democracy - related trials in egypt until the secretary certifies and reports to the committees on appropriations that the government of egypt has dismissed the convictions issued by the cairo criminal court on june 4 , 2013 , in public prosecution case no .

1110 for the year 2012 and has not subjected the defendants to further prosecution or if convicted they have been granted full pardons . .

this last condition ( bolded ) was added in 2019 to account for the acquittal of the 43 foreign defendants in case 173 ( see above ) .

as in previous years , the fy2019 omnibus also includes a limitation on esf , stating that no fy2018 esf or prior - year esf "may be made available for a contribution , voluntary or otherwise , to the civil associations and foundations support fund , or any similar fund , established pursuant to law 70 on associations and other foundations working in the field of civil work [informally known as the ngo law]. .

as in previous years , the act also includes a provision that withholds $300 million of fmf funds until the secretary of state certifies that the government of egypt is taking effective steps to advance , among other things , democracy and human rights in egypt .

the secretary of state may waive this certification requirement , though any waiver must be accompanied by , among other things , an assessment of the government of egypt's compliance with united nations security council resolution 2270 and other such resolutions regarding north korea .

there has been some concern in the administration and congress over egypt's alleged weapons procurement from north korea in recent years .

p.l .

115-245 , the department of defense ( dod ) and labor , health and human services , and education appropriations act , 2019 and continuing appropriations act , 2019 , specifies that the secretary of defense may provide egypt with funds from the counter - isis train and equip fund ( ctef ) to enhance its border security .

to date , egypt has not received security assistance from dod - managed accounts .

between 1946 and 2016 , the united states provided egypt with $78.3 billion in bilateral foreign aid ( calculated in historical dollars — not adjusted for inflation ) .

the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt ushered in the current era of u.s. financial support for peace between israel and its arab neighbors .

in two separate memoranda accompanying the treaty , the united states outlined commitments to israel and egypt , respectively .

in its letter to israel , the carter administration pledged to "endeavor to take into account and will endeavor to be responsive to military and economic assistance requirements of israel. .

in his letter to egypt , former u.s. secretary of defense harold brown wrote the following: in the context of the peace treaty between egypt and israel , the united states is prepared to enter into an expanded security relationship with egypt with regard to the sales of military equipment and services and the financing of , at least a portion of those sales , subject to such congressional review and approvals as may be required .

all u.s. foreign aid to egypt ( or any foreign recipient ) is appropriated and authorized by congress .

the 1979 egypt - israel peace treaty is a bilateral peace agreement between egypt and israel , and the united states is not a legal party to the treaty .

the treaty itself does not include any u.s. aid obligations , and any assistance commitments to israel and egypt that could be potentially construed in conjunction with the treaty were through ancillary documents or other communications and were — by their terms — subject to congressional approval ( see above ) .

however , as the peace broker between israel and egypt , the united states has traditionally provided foreign aid to both countries to ensure a regional balance of power and sustain security cooperation with both countries .

in some cases , an administration may sign a bilateral "memorandum of understanding" ( mou ) with a foreign country pledging a specific amount of foreign aid to be provided over a selected time period subject to the approval of congress .

in the middle east , the united states has signed foreign assistance mous with israel and jordan .

currently , there is no u.s. - egyptian mou specifying a specific amount of total u.s. aid pledged to egypt over a certain time period .

congress typically specifies a precise allocation of most foreign assistance for egypt in the foreign operations appropriations bill .

egypt receives the bulk of foreign aid funds from three primary accounts: foreign military financing ( fmf ) , economic support funds ( esf ) , and international military education and training ( imet ) .

the united states offers imet training to egyptian officers in order to facilitate u.s. - egyptian military cooperation over the long term .

since the 1979 israeli - egyptian peace treaty , the united states has provided egypt with large amounts of military assistance .

u.s. policymakers have routinely justified this aid to egypt as an investment in regional stability , built primarily on long - running military cooperation and sustaining the treaty — principles that are supposed to be mutually reinforcing .

egypt has used u.s. military aid through the fmf to ( among other things ) purchase major u.s. defense systems , such as the f - 16 fighter aircraft , the m1a1 abrams battle tank , and the ah - 64 apache attack helicopter .

for decades , fmf grants have supported egypt's purchases of large - scale conventional military equipment from u.s. suppliers .

however , as mentioned above , the obama administration announced that future fmf grants may only be used to purchase equipment specifically for "counterterrorism , border security , sinai security , and maritime security" ( and for sustainment of weapons systems already in egypt's arsenal ) .

it is not yet clear how the trump administration will determine which u.s. - supplied military equipment would help the egyptian military counter terrorism and secure its land and maritime borders .

overall , some defense experts continue to view the egyptian military as inadequately prepared , both doctrinally and tactically , to face the threat posed by terrorist / insurgent groups such as sinai province .

according to a former u.s. national security council official , "they [the egyptian military] understand they have got a problem in sinai , but they have been unprepared to invest in the capabilities to deal with it. .

to reorient the military toward unconventional warfare , the egyptian military needs , according to one assessment , "heavy investment into rapid reaction forces equipped with sophisticated infantry weapons , optics and communication gear ... backed by enhanced intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance platforms .

in order to transport them , egypt would also need numerous modern aviation assets. .

in addition to substantial amounts of annual u.s. military assistance , egypt has benefited from certain aid provisions that have been available to only a few other countries .

for example early disbursal and interest - bearing account : between fy2001 and fy2011 , congress granted egypt early disbursement of fmf funds ( within 30 days of the enactment of appropriations legislation ) to an interest - bearing account at the federal reserve bank of new york .

interest accrued from the rapid disbursement of aid has allowed egypt to receive additional funding for the purchase of u.s. - origin equipment .

in fy2012 , congress began to condition the obligation of fmf , requiring the administration to certify certain conditions had been met before releasing fmf funds , thereby eliminating their automatic early disbursal .

however , congress has permitted egypt to continue to earn interest on fmf funds already deposited in the federal reserve bank of new york .

the excess defense articles ( eda ) program provides one means by which the united states can advance foreign policy objectives — assisting friendly and allied nations through provision of equipment in excess of the requirements of its own defense forces .

the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) manages the eda program , which enables the united states to reduce its inventory of outdated equipment by providing friendly countries with necessary supplies at either reduced rates or no charge .

as a designated "major non - nato ally," egypt is eligible to receive eda under section 516 of the foreign assistance act and section 23 ( a ) of the arms export control act .

over the past two decades , u.s. economic aid to egypt has been reduced by over 90% , from $833 million in fy1998 to a request of $75 million for fy2019 .

beginning in the mid to late 1990s , as egypt moved from an impoverished country to a lower - middle - income economy , the united states and egypt began to rethink the assistance relationship , emphasizing "trade not aid. .

congress began to scale back economic aid both to egypt and israel due to a 10-year agreement reached between the united states and israel in the late 1990s known as the "glide path agreement," which gradually reduced u.s. economic aid to egypt to $400 million by 2008 .

u.s. economic aid to egypt stood at $200 million per year by the end of the george w. bush administration , whose relations with then - president hosni mubarak suffered over the latter's reaction to the administration's democracy agenda in the arab world .

during the final years of the obama administration , distrust of u.s. democracy promotion assistance led the egyptian government to obstruct many u.s. - funded economic assistance programs .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , the department of state and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) reported hundreds of millions of dollars ( $460 million as of 2015 ) in unobligated prior year esf funding .

as these unobligated balances grew , it created pressure on the obama administration to reobligate esf funds for other purposes .

in 2016 , the obama administration notified congress that it was reprogramming $108 million of esf that had been appropriated for egypt in fy2015 but remained unobligated for other purposes .

the administration claimed that its actions were due to "continued government of egypt process delays that have impeded the effective implementation of several programs. .

in 2017 , the trump administration also reprogrammed fy2016 esf for egypt .

u.s. economic aid to egypt is divided into two components: ( 1 ) usaid - managed programs ( public health , education , economic development , democracy and governance ) ; and ( 2 ) the u.s. - egyptian enterprise fund .

both are funded primarily through the economic support fund ( esf ) appropriations account .

