on july 28 , 2006 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

4 , the pension protection act , by a vote of 279-131 .

the bill was passed by the senate on august 3 by a vote of 93-5 and was signed into law by the president as p.l .

109-280 on august 17 , 2006 .

the pension protection act is the most comprehensive reform of the nation's pension laws since the enactment of the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa , p.l .

93-406 ) .

it establishes new funding requirements for defined benefit pensions and includes reforms that will affect cash balance pension plans , defined contribution plans , and deferred compensation plans for executives and highly compensated employees .

prompted by the default in recent years of several large defined benefit pension plans and the increasing deficit of pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) , the bush administration in january 2005 advanced a proposal for pension funding reform , which was designed to increase the minimum funding requirements for pension plans and strengthen the pension insurance system .

the administration pointed out several weaknesses of the rules that were then in place: sponsors of underfunded plans were not required to make additional contributions , called deficit reduction contributions , as long as their plans were at least 90% funded .

because the interest rates used to calculate current pension plan liabilities were averaged over a four - year period and asset values used to calculate minimum funding requirements could be averaged over five years , neither plan assets nor liabilities were measured accurately .

plans that were underfunded were sometimes able to amortize their funding shortfalls over periods as long as 30 years .

some sponsors of underfunded pensions were able to avoid making contributions to their plans for several years because they had made contributions beyond the required minimum in the past .

the use of these so - called "credit balances" led to greater underfunding of pension plans , according to the administration's analysis .

the pbgc was created by congress in 1974 to insure defined benefit pension plans of private - sector employers .

the possibility that the termination of defined benefit pension plans with large unfunded liabilities might eventually lead to the insolvency of the pbgc lent a particular urgency to the effort to mandate improved pension plan funding .

although the pbgc receives no appropriations from congress , it is generally acknowledged that if the agency were to become financially insolvent—threatening the retirement income of the 44 million americans who have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans—congress would have little choice but to step in and engineer a financial bailout of the agency .

in 2000 , the pbgc recorded a $9.7 billion surplus , but several years of falling interest rates and declining stock prices and the termination of several large , underfunded pension plans led to a rapid deterioration in the pbgc's financial position .

nine of the ten largest pension plan claims for pbgc insurance occurred between 2001 and 2005 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

these nine claims accounted for 63% of the total dollar value of claims made on the pbgc since the agency began operating in 1975 .

by 2005 , the pbgc had a funding deficit of $22.7 billion , only slightly lower than the record deficit of $23.3 billion that the agency posted in 2004 .

in 2005 , major pension reform bills were introduced in both the senate and the house of representatives .

in the senate , senator charles grassley , chairman of the finance committee , introduced s. 1783 , the pension security and transparency act .

in the house , representative john boehner , then chairman of the committee on education and the workforce , introduced h.r .

2830 , the pension protection act , which subsequently was renumbered as h.r .

4 .

the legislation ultimately passed by the house and senate and signed into law by the president on august 17 , 2006 , was based mainly on these two bills , with the final version being the result of conference negotiations between the house and senate that began in march 2006 and continued through july .

this report summarizes the main provisions of the pension protection act ( ppa ) as they affect single - employer defined benefit plans , multiemployer defined benefit plans , and defined contribution plans .

since the passage of the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) in 1974 , federal law has required companies that sponsor defined benefit pension plans for their employees to prefund the pension benefits that the plan participants earn each year .

if a plan is underfunded , the plan sponsor must amortize ( pay off with interest ) this unfunded liability over a period of years .

the pension protection act ( ppa ) establishes new rules for determining whether a defined benefit pension plan is fully funded , the contribution needed to fund the benefits that plan participants will earn in the current year , and the contribution to the plan that is required if previously earned benefits are not fully funded .

in general , the new rules become effective in 2008 , but many provisions of the law will be phased in over several years .

multiemployer plans are collectively bargained plans maintained by several employers , usually within the same industry , and a labor union .

multiemployer defined benefit plans are subject to funding requirements that differ from those for single - employer plans .

most of the funding requirements for multiemployer plans that were in effect before enactment of the ppa remain in effect under the new law .

the ppa establishes a new set of rules for improving the funding of multiemployer plans that the law defines as being in "endangered" or "critical" status .

these new requirements will remain in effect through 2014 .

the ppa establishes new requirements for multiemployer plans that are seriously underfunded .

a plan's actuaries will have 90 days after the start of the plan year to certify the funding status of the plan for that year and to project its funding status for the following six years .

if the plan is underfunded , it will have 30 days after the actuarial certification to notify participants and approximately eight months to develop a funding schedule to present to the parties of the plan's collective bargaining agreement .

the schedule must be designed to meet the statutory funding requirements before the end of the funding improvement period .

for multiemployer plans in "critical status," the law makes changes in the anti - cutback rules of erisa to give plans the right to eliminate or reduce some benefit payment options and early retirement benefits for plan participants who have not yet retired .

the law also establishes new disclosure requirements for multiemployer plans .

