on august 16 , 2004 , president bush unveiled one of the most sweeping changes to the numbersand locations of military overseas basing facilities since the beginning of the cold war .

announcing aplan that had been under study for approximately three years , the department of defense would movethousands of personnel from installations in europe and asia to bases within the united states .

simultaneously , the military would shift its approach away from huge bases such as ramstein air forcebase , which has all of the comforts of the u.s. - - family housing , supermarkets , convenience stores,theaters , and so forth , to reliance on more austere facilities in central asia , africa , and the middle eastthat would be less elaborate and lack most of these benefits .

in 2004 , the congress chartered thecommission on the review of overseas military facility structure of the united states ( also known asthe overseas basing commission ) to provide an independent assessment of the dod overseas basingneeds .

 ( 1 ) the dod plan could prompt budget and oversight decisions for the second session of the109th congress .

these might include approval , modification , or rejection of the dod proposal .

congress could also have to consider appropriations requests for construction of infrastructure atnew overseas or expanded continental united states ( conus ) locations , as well as fund increasedimpact aid to local communities .

congress would have to oversee new acquisition programs formobility and logistics capabilities ( such as airlift ) needed for the strategy .

congress may alsoconsider whether the plan will be executable given the results of the 2005 round of the baserealignment and closure ( brac ) process .

finally , the senate may consider new or revised treatieswith new basing partners submitted for its advice and consent .

the overseas basing commission pointedly emphasized the importance of congressionaloversight of the overseas basing realignment process .

some of the issues congress may wish toconsider include the following .

does the igpbs have adequate linkage to an overarching strategic framework agreed uponby all key government parties in the national security strategy process ? .

while most may agree thata revision of the overseas basing structure left from the cold war is overdue , some would argue thatdeveloping a re - basing strategy without completing the defense department's quadrennial defensereview and achieving buy - in across government agencies and with congress is premature .

thesemoves may have major impacts across many aspects of u.s. foreign and security policy .

the lackof overarching strategy and analysis may also be construed by some to miss vital linkages inexecution timing and schedule , which could lead to implementation pitfalls in the future .

are the defense department's cost projections for the overseas realignment accurate ? .

willprojected savings outweigh the cost of realignment and associate systems procurement ? .

the dodand the overseas basing commission disagree on these points .

others might also contend thatproposing a re - basing strategy before completing the 2005 base realignment and closure round andthe mobility capabilities study could result in mismatches of supporting infrastructure or mobilityassets .

the consequence could be a shift of these unfunded requirements onto the services , whichare already under pressure from the cost of ongoing combat operations .

is it feasible to conduct the basing realignment moves given the deployment tempo drivenby ongoing military operations in iraq and afghanistan ? .

units returning from combat deployments,only to immediately pack up families and relocate , can put immense burdens on an already stressedforce .

this burden is exacerbated if the bases receiving new troops lack sufficient supportinginfrastructure .

can the services permanently sustain the long term pace of frequent deploymentsrequired by the strategy ? .

at some undetermined point , members may experience enough degradedquality of life for their families , and endure such frequent separations , that retention or recruitingbegin to suffer .

what will be the effect of the re - basing on the relationship with long term u.s. allies , suchas germany , where a drawdown is proposed ? .

lack of presence could find the united statesreducing its voice in european or asian affairs , and finding it harder to motivate internationalcoalitions or support when needed .

have sufficient legal arrangements , such as status of forcesagreements and overflight rights , been negotiated in advance of the arrival of u.s. forces in new hostnations ? .

the overseas basing commission argued that the preliminary diplomatic legwork had notbeen fully accomplished .

do the political climates in the new host nations support u.s. values ofdemocracy and human rights ? .

while some nations , such as romania , have actively sought a u.s.presence , others , such as uzbekistan , have ended those arrangements as soon as they begin to annoyor lose their profitability .

is the re - basing proposal affected by standing treaties to which the u.s.is a state party , such as the conventional forces in europe treaty ? .

early evidence may indicate thatdod and the state department need to further examine potential treaty impacts .

