the social security program pays benefits to retired or disabled workers and their family members and to the family members of deceased workers .

as of march 2019 , there were 63.3 million social security beneficiaries .

approximately 70% of those beneficiaries were retired workers and 13% were disabled workers .

the remaining beneficiaries were the survivors of deceased insured workers or the spouses and children of retired or disabled workers .

social security is financed primarily by payroll taxes paid by covered workers and their employers .

the program is also credited with federal income taxes paid by some beneficiaries on a portion of their benefits , reimbursements from the general fund of the treasury for various purposes , and interest income from investments held by the social security trust funds .

social security tax revenues are invested in u.s. government securities ( special issues ) held by the trust funds , and these securities earn interest .

the tax revenues exchanged for the u.s. government securities are deposited into the general fund of the treasury and are indistinguishable from revenues in the general fund that come from other sources .

because the assets held by the trust funds are u.s. government securities , the trust fund balance represents the amount of money owed to the social security trust funds by the general fund of the treasury .

funds needed to pay social security benefits and administrative expenses come from the redemption or sale of u.s. government securities held by the trust funds .

the secretary of the treasury ( the managing trustee of the social security trust funds ) is required by law to invest social security revenues in securities backed by the u.s. government .

the purchase of u.s. government securities allows any surplus social security revenues to be used by the federal government for other ( non - social security ) spending needs at the time .

this trust fund financing mechanism allows the general fund of the treasury to borrow from the social security trust funds .

in turn , the general fund pays back the trust funds ( with interest ) when the trust funds redeem the securities .

the process of investing social security revenues in securities and redeeming the securities as needed to pay benefits is ongoing .

the social security trust funds are both designated accounts within the u.s. tr easury and the accumulated holdings of special u.s. government obligations .

both represent the funds designated to pay current and future social security benefits .

the social security program is financed primarily by revenues from federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) taxes and self - employment contributions act ( seca ) taxes .

fica taxes are paid by both employers and employees , but it is employers who remit the taxes to the u.s. treasury .

employers remit fica taxes on a regular basis throughout the year ( eg , weekly , monthly , quarterly or annually ) , depending on the employer's level of total employment taxes ( including fica and federal personal income tax withholding ) .

the fica tax rate of 7.65% each for employers and employees has two components: 6.2% for social security and 1.45% for medicare hospital insurance .

the seca tax rate is 15.3% for self - employed individuals , with 12.4% for social security and 2.9% for medicare hospital insurance .

the respective social security contribution rates are levied on covered wages and net self - employment income up to $132,900 in 2019 .

self - employed individuals may deduct one - half of the seca taxes for federal income tax purposes .

seca taxes are normally paid once a year as part of filing an annual individual income tax return .

in 2018 , social security payroll taxes totaled $885.1 billion and accounted for 88.2% of the program's total income .

in addition to payroll taxes , the social security program receives income from other sources .

first , certain social security beneficiaries must include a portion of their social security benefits in taxable income for the federal income tax , and the social security program receives a portion of those taxes .

in 2018 , revenue from the taxation of benefits totaled $35.0 billion , accounting for 3.5% of the program's total income .

second , the program receives reimbursements from the general fund of the treasury for a variety of purposes .

general fund reimbursements totaled $0.2 billion , accounting for less than 0.1% of the program's total income .

finally , the social security program receives interest income from the u.s. treasury on its investments in special u.s. government obligations .

interest income totaled $83.3 billion , accounting for 8.3% of the program's total income .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) processes the tax returns and tax payments for federal employment taxes and federal individual income taxes .

all of the tax payments are deposited in the u.s. treasury along with all other receipts from the public for the federal government .

within the u.s. treasury , there are numerous accounts established for internal accounting purposes .

although all of the monies within the u.s. treasury are federal monies , the designation of an account as a trust fund allows the government to track revenues dedicated for specific purposes ( as well as expenditures ) .

in addition , the government can affect the level of revenues and expenditures associated with a trust fund through changes in the law .

social security program income and outgo are accounted for in two separate trust funds authorized under title ii of the social security act: ( 1 ) the federal old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) trust fund and ( 2 ) the federal disability insurance ( di ) trust fund .

under current law , the two trust funds are legally distinct and do not have authority to borrow from each other .

this is important given projections showing that the asset reserves held by the oasi fund will be depleted in 2034 , whereas the asset reserves held by the di fund will be depleted in 2052 .

following the depletion of trust fund reserves ( 2052 for di and 2034 for oasi ) , continuing income is projected to cover 91% of di scheduled benefits and 77% of oasi scheduled benefits .

in the past , congress has authorized temporary interfund borrowing and payroll tax reallocations between oasi and di to address funding imbalances .

this crs report discusses the operations of the oasi and di trust funds on a combined basis , referring to them collectively as the social security trust funds .

on a combined basis , the trust funds are projected to remain solvent until 2035 , at which point continuing income is projected to cover 80% of program costs .

 ( for a discussion of the status of the di trust fund , see crs report r43318 , the social security disability insurance ( di ) trust fund: background and current status . ) .

the social security trust funds can be viewed as trust funds , similar to any private trust funds , that are to be used for paying current and future benefits ( and administrative expenses ) .

by law , the social security revenues credited to the trust funds ( within the u.s. treasury ) are invested in non - marketable u.s. government obligations .

these obligations are physical ( paper ) documents issued to the trust funds and held by ssa .

when the obligations are redeemed , the u.s. treasury must issue a check ( a physical document ) to the social security trust funds for the interest earned on the obligations .

unlike a private trust that may hold a variety of assets and obligations of different borrowers , the social security trust funds can hold only u.s. government obligations .

the sale of these obligations by the u.s. government to the social security trust funds is federal government borrowing ( from itself ) and counts against the federal debt limit .

the requirement that the social security trust funds purchase u.s. government obligations serves several purposes , such as offering a mechanism for the social security program to recoup the surplus revenues loaned to the rest of the government ; paying interest so that the loan of the surplus revenues does not lose value over time ; ensuring that the social security trust funds ( and not other government accounts ) receives credit for the interest earnings ; ensuring a level of return ( interest ) to the social security trust funds ; and providing a means outside of the securities market for the u.s. government to borrow funds .

the accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds represent the sum of annual surplus social security revenues ( for all past years ) that were invested in u.s. government obligations , plus the interest earned on those obligations .

as a result of surplus social security revenues from 1984 to 2009 and the interest income credited to the social security trust funds , the accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds totaled about $2.9 trillion at the end of calendar year 2018 .

it is the accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds ( or the trust fund balance ) that many people refer to when discussing the social security trust funds .

table 3 shows the accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds for the historical period 1957 to 2018 .

table 4 shows the projected accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds for the 2019 to 2034 period , as projected by the social security trustees in the 2019 annual report ( under the intermediate assumptions ) .

the social security trustees project that in 2020 the program's total cost will exceed its total income .

under intermediate assumptions , this relationship is projected to continue until the trust funds are depleted in 2034 .

the social security trustees project that , on average over the next 75 years ( 2019 to 2093 ) , program costs will exceed income by an amount equal to 2.78% of taxable payroll ( on average , costs are projected to exceed income by at least 20% ) .

the gap between income and costs , however , is projected to increase over the 75-year period .

for example , in 2035 , the cost of the program is projected to exceed income by an amount equal to 3.15% of taxable payroll ( costs are projected to exceed income by about 19% ) .

by 2093 , the cost of the program is projected to exceed income by an amount equal to 4.11% of taxable payroll ( costs are projected to exceed income by about 24% ) .

for illustration purposes , the trustees project that the social security trust funds would remain solvent throughout the 75-year projection period if , for example , revenues were increased by an amount equivalent to an immediate and permanent payroll tax rate increase of 2.70 percentage points ( from 12.40% to 15.10% ; a relative increase of 21.8% ) ; or benefits scheduled under current law were reduced by an amount equivalent to an immediate and permanent reduction of ( 1 ) about 17% if applied to all current and future beneficiaries , or ( 2 ) about 20% if applied only to those who become eligible for benefits in 2019 or later ; or some combination of these approaches were adopted .

as part of the annual congressional budget process , the level of federal debt ( the federal debt limit ) is established for the budget by congress .

the federal debt limit includes debt held by the public , as well as the internal debt of the u.s. government ( i.e. , debt held by government accounts ) .

borrowing from the public and the investment of the social security trust funds in special u.s. government obligations both fall under the restrictions of the federal debt limit .

this means that the balance of the social security trust funds has implications for the federal debt limit .

the accumulated holdings of the social security trust funds represent funds designated to pay current and future benefits .

when current social security tax revenues fall below the level needed to pay benefits , however , these funds become available only as the federal government raises the resources needed to redeem the securities held by the trust funds .

the securities are a promise by the federal government to raise the necessary funds .

in past years , when social security was operating with annual cash flow surpluses , social security's surplus revenues were invested in u.s. government securities and used at the time to pay for other federal government activities .

social security's past surplus revenues , therefore , are not available to finance benefits directly when social security is operating with annual cash flow deficits , as it does today .

the securities held by the trust funds must be redeemed for social security benefits to be paid .

stated another way , when social security is operating with a cash flow deficit , the program relies in part on the accumulated holdings of the trust funds to pay benefits and administrative expenses .

because the trust funds hold u.s. government securities that are redeemed with general revenues , there is increased reliance on the general fund of the treasury .

with respect to reliance on the general fund when social security is operating with a cash flow deficit , it is important to note that social security does not have authority to borrow from the general fund .

social security cannot draw upon general revenues to make up for any current funding shortfall .

rather , social security relies on revenues that were collected for the program in previous years and used by the federal government at the time for other ( non - social security ) spending needs , plus the interest earned on its trust fund investments .

social security draws on its own previously collected tax revenues and interest income ( accumulated trust fund holdings ) when current social security tax revenues fall below current program expenditures .

as the trustees point out , over the program's history , social security has collected approximately $21.9 trillion and paid out $19.0 trillion , leaving asset reserves of $2.9 trillion at the end of 2018 .

the accumulated trust fund holdings of $2.9 trillion represent the amount of money that the general fund of the treasury owes to the social security trust funds .

the general fund could be said to have fully paid back the social security trust funds if the trust fund balance were to reach zero ( i.e. , if all of the trust funds' asset reserves were depleted ) .

the trustees project that the asset reserves held by the social security trust funds will be depleted in 2035 .

at that point , the program will continue to operate with incoming receipts to the trust funds .

incoming receipts are projected to be sufficient to pay about 80% of scheduled benefits through the end of the projection period in 2093 ( under the intermediate assumptions of the 2019 annual report ) .

title ii of the social security act , which governs the program , does not specify what would happen to the payment of benefits in the event that the trust funds' asset reserves are depleted and incoming receipts to the trust funds are not sufficient to pay scheduled benefits in full and on time .

two possible scenarios are ( 1 ) the payment of full monthly benefits on a delayed basis or ( 2 ) the payment of partial monthly benefits on time .

the following table shows the key dates projected for the social security trust funds by the social security board of trustees ( based on their intermediate set of assumptions ) in each of their annual reports from 1983 to 2019 .

