the 108 th congress established a new recreation fee program for the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) and the four major federal land management agencies — the national park service ( nps ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and bureau of land management ( blm ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) , and the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the federal lands recreation enhancement act ( flrea ) authorizes the agencies to charge and collect fees at federal recreational lands and waters .

the act authorizes different kinds of fees , outlines criteria for establishing fees , and prohibits charging fees for certain activities or services .

the agencies can spend the revenue collected without further appropriation , with most of the money retained at the collection site , and the collections can be used for specified purposes .

the act also authorizes an interagency pass that can be used at federal recreation sites throughout the nation , as well as regional multi - entity passes .

the program is to terminate 10 years after enactment — on december 8 , 2014 .

this new recreation fee program supersedes an earlier one , the recreational fee demonstration program ( "fee demo" ) , which began in 1996 as a three - year trial but was extended several times .

that program had allowed the four land management agencies , but not reclamation , to test the feasibility of charging fees to generate revenues for improvements at recreation sites .

while the number of fee sites was limited initially , the agencies ultimately were allowed to establish any number of fee sites , set fee levels , and retain and spend the revenue collected without further appropriation .

at least 80% of the revenue had to be retained and used at the site where it was generated , and agencies had wide latitude to spend the funds on purposes specified in law .

the extent to which fees should be charged for recreation has been controversial for decades , and the fee demo program had both supporters and critics .

it was supported in part for generating revenue ; providing flexibility in setting fees and using revenues ; having the direct beneficiaries of recreation pay more for benefits ; deterring criminal activity , such as littering and vandalism ; and ameliorating damage where it did occur .

however , the fee demo program was criticized as doubly taxing the recreating public ; resulting in unfair and confusing fees in some areas ; promoting commercial development that damaged federal lands ; and discriminating against lower - income people , rural residents , and low - impact recreation .

still other criticisms pertained to program implementation , including the high cost of fee collection and a lack of consistency in implementation within and across agencies .

the current recreation fee program is expected to continue to provide incentives for agency managers to charge and use fees for onsite improvements .

prior to fee demo , the agencies had little incentive to develop , monitor , and evaluate fee collection since most fees went to the general fund of the treasury ; the agencies could not retain them for resource improvements or management activities .

flrea monies , like fee demo collections , are intended to supplement appropriations .

in general , recreation fees have represented a small portion of each agency's overall financing , with the bulk of agency monies coming from appropriated funds .

the agencies anticipate collecting about $265 million in fees in fy2011 , with nps collections accounting for about two - thirds of the total .

while the fees collected are small relative to total agency funding , the agencies have noted their importance in making improvements at federal recreation sites .

congress had considered whether to let the fee demo program expire , extend it , or make it permanent , and how to structure any extended or permanent program .

central to the debate was which agencies or types of lands to include in a fee program , and how to determine fee amounts , collect fees , and spend collections .

in enacting the flrea , congress created a 10-year program , and extended it to reclamation .

congress sought to eliminate some of the concerns with fee demo , in part by simplifying and standardizing the types of fees , authorizing an interagency recreation pass , and providing for public input in establishing fee locations and amounts .

the balance of this report first provides an overview of key provisions of the flrea .

they include the types of fees allowed , use of fee receipts , public input in determining fees , and the authority for a national recreation pass .

the report next focuses on issues related to the implementation of the flrea .

they involve the use of advisory committees to provide input on fees , the establishment of the national recreation pass , the extent of agency participation in the recreation fee program , and the collection and use of fee receipts .

interagency policy guidance on many aspects of flrea is contained in a handbook issued in june 2006 .

the implementation handbook establishes common definitions of terms in the flrea and overarching policy guidelines to implement the law .

in addition , doi and the fs jointly issued guidelines for public involvement in establishing new fee areas and informing the public of how recreation fee revenues are used .

further , each of the agencies has issued its own guidance on the intention , requirements , and implementation of the recreation fee program .

the blm and fs are using both pre - existing and new recreation racs to make recommendations on creating , altering , and eliminating recreation fees on both fs and blm lands .

the agencies are collaborating in their use of these advisory bodies by having both agencies use existing blm resource advisory councils in some areas , one existing fs advisory board , and five new fs - chartered recreation racs in other areas .

based on the recommendations of three state governors , there are no racs in alaska , nebraska , and wyoming .

forest service recreation racs have 11 members: five represent recreation users ; three represent outfitter - guides and environmental groups ; and three represent state tourism , indian tribes , and local governments .

the blm recreation racs have 15 members: five represent commercial land uses ( eg , livestock grazing , timber , oil and gas , and off - highway vehicles ) ; five represent environmental organizations , historic and cultural interests , wildlife , wild horses and burros , and dispersed recreation ; and five represent elected officials and governmental agencies , indian tribes , academia , and the general public .

together , rac members have provided economic , social , and environmental perspectives on fee issues .

under the flrea , a rac may make fee recommendations to the respective secretary if supported by a majority of each category of members ( as specified in the law ) and if there is documented public support .

most agency fee initiatives have received positive recommendations after rac review .

however , agencies have reconsidered a number of fee proposals based on rac input and sought additional public views on fee initiatives based on rac suggestions .

in other cases , racs have assisted the agencies with preliminary or conceptual fee proposals and influenced how the agencies developed their proposals .

the america the beautiful – the national parks and federal recreational lands pass applies to access to , and use of , recreation sites of the five participating agencies .

in developing the pass , a key issue was how much to charge , and the agencies contracted with a university for a pricing analysis .

the standard version of the pass became available to the general public in january 2007 for a cost of $80 .

there are three other versions of the pass , for volunteers , seniors , and persons with disabilities .

the standard annual pass is the most widely used .

the volunteer pass is free to volunteers who work at recreation sites for 500 hours over any time period .

both the standard annual and volunteer passes are valid for a 12-month period , and cover entrance fees and standard amenity fees .

the senior pass is a lifetime pass for those aged 62 or older , for a $10 fee .

the access pass is a free , lifetime pass for persons with permanent disabilities .

both the senior and access passes cover entrance fees and standard amenity fees , and discounts on some expanded amenity fees .

all passes cover admission of the pass holder ( s ) and other passengers ( in a non - commercial vehicle ) at sites where fees are charged by the vehicle , and four adults at sites that charge per person fees .

the america the beautiful pass supersedes a variety of passes issued by agencies previously , such as the national parks pass .

legislation has been introduced in the 111 th congress ( h.r .

1354 ) to make the pass available to veterans for a cost of $10 annually .

the nps administers the interagency pass program on behalf of the participating agencies .

the agencies developed standard operating procedures to sell and accept the passes consistently .

the procedures cover identification requirements , pass validation , and use of third - party vendors ( such as rei ) to sell passes , among other issues .

in addition to third - party vendors , the passes are available from recreation sites that charge an entrance fee or a standard amenity fee , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) online or by phone , and other associations and groups .

one issue is how to distribute revenues from the sale of the pass among the agencies over the long term .

in the short term , revenues from pass sales at sites remain with the agency that collects them .

revenues collected centrally , for instance through sales of passes on the internet , are used for administrative costs of the program and repaying the nps for startup costs of the new pass , with additional revenue split among the five agencies .

in the future , the distribution of revenues from centralized sales will take into account use of the pass .

how to track use of the pass , particularly at blm and fs sites that may be remote and unstaffed , continues to be a challenge .

the agencies conducted a detailed analysis of the extent to which sites charging recreation fees under the former fee demo program met the criteria and prohibitions of the flrea for charging entry , standard amenity , and expanded amenity fees .

the agencies instructed units to make changes where necessary .

the nps and fws made little change , as both agencies were authorized under fee demo to charge entrance fees and continue to have authority to charge entrance fees under flrea .

currently , about half of the 392 nps units charge an entrance fee , while about 35 of the 450 fws refuges that are open to the public charge an entrance fee .

these agencies also charge amenity fees at some sites .

for instance , the fws currently charges entrance or other fees ( eg , for hunting ) under flrea at 112 refuges or other locations .

most blm areas were in compliance with the requirements of flrea when it was enacted , and continue to charge fees as before .

however , some adjustments were made .

for instance , some sites added amenities , such as picnic tables , to be in compliance with flrea provisions .

blm currently manages about 3,600 recreation sites , of which approximately 300 charge amenity fees .

the fs made the most changes as a result of the flrea .

the agency initially dropped fees at 437 sites , including numerous trailheads and picnic areas , because they did not have the amenities required by the law .

the fs currently manages about 17,500 developed recreation sites , of which 4,185 collect fees under the flrea .

most of these sites are campgrounds .

taken together , a majority of these four agencies' sites are not charging a recreation fee .

in determining entrance fees , the nps is using a standardized fee structure nationwide .

this structure groups national park units into four categories based on type of designation ( eg , national park , national battlefield , national seashore ) and other factors .

the same entrance fee is charged at each park unit in a category .

for instance , for category 2 units , namely , national seashores , recreation areas , monuments , lakeshores , and historic parks , the entrance fee is $7 per person , $10 per motorcycle , $15 per vehicle , and $30 per annual pass .

the fws typically charges daily entrance fees of $5 per vehicle and $15 for a refuge - specific annual pass .

for particular activities , such as hunts , fees are based on a market analysis .

fws seeks consistency of fees within regions , based on related state and private fees .

blm sets fees based on the amenities available at recreation sites , using low , moderate , and high categories .

the fs bases fees on local market rates and a variety of factors including amenities available , site condition , and operation and maintenance costs .

the average fees at fs sites are approximately $6 for day use and $9 for overnight use .

fs use of high - impact recreation area ( hira ) designations for charging fees has been controversial .

while the flrea does not mention hiras , the agencies have agreed to define an hira as an area of concentrated recreational use that includes a variety of developed sites providing a similar recreation opportunity .

further , it is a contiguous area composed of places , activities , or special , natural , or cultural features that is the focal point of recreation and that has clear access points and boundaries .

the fs views it as more convenient for users to pay fees for use of these areas rather than to pay separate fees at each of their sites .

the agency notes that collections are used for upkeep of facilities in the areas .

some of the hiras have been criticized by recreationists as broad designations for large tracts of land lacking in the amenities required by the flrea .

the fs examined the use of fees at its hiras in 2007-2008 , and expects to present its findings to the racs .

the fs currently is considering fee changes in some hiras and is developing new directives on these areas , which will be made available for public comment .

the agency anticipates that some fee changes could result .

while the flrea also applies to reclamation , the agency is charging a fee under flrea at only one site .

the majority of reclamation's 289 developed recreation sites are managed by partner organizations , and the agency concluded that these non - federally managed sites will not participate in the flrea program .

other reclamation recreation areas are managed by other federal agencies , and these agencies determine whether the areas charge fees under the flrea .

of reclamation's 289 developed recreation sites , 33 are managed exclusively by the agency .

reclamation determined that only six of these sites it manages directly would meet the criteria to charge amenity fees .

in reviewing whether and to what extent these areas should participate , reclamation examined whether the costs of implementing and participating in the program would exceed expected revenues .

reclamation also assessed its authority to charge recreation fees under another authority that was not repealed by the flrea — the federal water project recreation act .

the agency concluded that it would not be cost effective for the other five qualifying sites to participate in the flrea .

in fy2009 , the five agencies collected a total of $258.4 million in recreation receipts under the flrea .

the nps takes in the most revenue , and the nps and fs together collected more than 90% of the fy2009 revenues .

specifically , nps collections were $171.0 million , or 66% of the five - agency total , while the fs collected $64.7 million , which was 25% of the total .

the other agency collections were blm , $17.5 million ( 7% ) ; fws , $4.8 million ( 2% ) , and reclamation , $0.5 million ( < 1% ) .

table 1 below identifies the receipts for the agencies over the past three fiscal years .

the average cost to the four agencies of collecting recreation fees declined from 21% of gross fees in fy2002 to 15% in fy2009 .

the decline is attributed to technological improvements , increased revenue , and definitional changes , among other factors .

the cost to each agency varied considerably during fy2009 .

specifically , the cost to the blm was 2% ; to the fs , 9% ; to the fws , 15% ; and to the nps , 19% .

the blm cost is significantly lower because of the reliance on technology , rather than personnel , to collect fees .

the nps cost remains the highest in part because of the higher collection costs of many smaller park units .

they tend to collect relatively little revenue or have more complex logistics ( eg , staffed entrance fee stations ) .

the agencies have different procedures for selecting projects to be funded with flrea revenues .

for blm , fws , and fs , most projects are approved at the local units , usually within a few weeks of being suggested by unit staff .

nps projects are reviewed by nps local units , regions , and headquarters , before submission for doi or congressional approval .

this process can take a year or more .

while it may help ensure consistency with the flrea and accountability in use of funds , the process also may delay the implementation of projects and contribute to balances of unobligated revenues .

fees collected during a fiscal year , and carried over from previous years , are available for obligation by the agencies .

the agencies have identified total recreation fees available for obligation in fy2009 , and the amount that was obligated in fy2009 .

the agencies report having obligated fy2009 funds for a variety of purposes , including operation , maintenance , and capital improvement projects .

the nps reports that , of $441.0 million available for obligation in fy2009 , $222.6 million was obligated .

of those obligations , $119.7 million ( 54% of total obligations ) was for asset repairs and maintenance .

this category is comprised of capital improvements , routine / annual maintenance , and deferred maintenance .

deferred maintenance , also called the maintenance backlog , is defined as maintenance that "was not performed when it should have been or was scheduled to be and which , therefore , is put off or delayed for a future period. .

a focus of congress and the administration over the past decade has been on quantifying and reducing agency maintenance backlogs .

another $35.0 million ( 16% ) of the nps funds obligated went towards interpretation and visitor services , $34.0 million ( 15% ) was for the costs of collecting recreation fees , and the remaining $33.9 million ( 15% ) was for other purposes .

the blm reports that , of $28.6 million available for obligation in fy2009 , $16.7 million was obligated .

the largest portion of the funds obligated — $5.2 million ( 31% of total obligations ) — was for activities including interpretation and visitor services .

for asset repairs and maintenance , blm obligated $4.4 million ( 26% ) .

another $2.8 million ( 17% ) went towards law enforcement and recreation , and the remaining $4.3 million ( 26% ) was directed to other activities .

the fws reports that , of $10.1 million available for obligation in fy2009 , $4.3 million was obligated .

of those obligations , the fws obligated $1.6 million ( 37% of total obligations ) on asset repairs and maintenance .

another $1.2 million ( 28% ) of the obligations was used for visitor services , while the remaining $1.5 million ( 34% ) was for other programs .

the fs reports that , of $94.8 million available for obligation in fy2009 , there were $61.2 million in total expenditures .

the agency reports expenditures of $23.6 million for "facilities maintenance," which is 39% of total expenditures .

another $14.1 million ( 23% ) of expenditures was for visitor services , with $11.4 million ( 19% ) for fee management agreement and reservation services and the remaining $12.1 million ( 20% ) for other purposes .

table 2 below identifies recreation fees available for obligation and obligated by the four agencies during fy2009 .

in the case of the fs , expenditures are noted .

the table specifies the amount of obligations for asset repairs and maintenance , including deferred maintenance , because of the congressional and administrative focus on this activity .

for the four agencies , a total of $574.4 million in recreation fees was available for obligation in fy2009 .

of that amount , $304.8 million was obligated by the agencies .

asset repairs and maintenance collectively comprised $149.3 million ( 49% ) of the obligations .

this activity received the largest portion of total agency obligations in fy2009 .

obligations for all other purposes were $155.5 million ( 51% ) .

information on collection and obligation of recreation fees for other years , similar to that presented here for fy2009 , is available in the interagency triennial report to congress on the flrea program .

specifically , the report has data for fy2006-fy2008 for the participating agencies .

two agencies , the nps and fws , have projected how they would spend their recreation fee revenues during the five - year period from fy2009 to fy2013 .

priorities for the two agencies include maintenance and visitor services .

the blm , fs , and reclamation did not similarly publish five - year projections .

the nps expects to dedicate the largest share of its funds to reducing the agency's backlog of deferred maintenance .

specifically , the nps expects to spend a total of $1.04 billion over five years ( from fy2009 to fy2013 ) , with $425.0 million ( 41% ) on deferred maintenance .

agencies report annual estimates of the deferred maintenance of their facilities .

doi estimates deferred maintenance for the nps for fy2009 at between $8.23 billion and $12.11 billion , with a mid - range figure of $10.17 billion .

fifty - five percent of the total deferred maintenance was for roads , bridges , and trails ; 19% was for buildings ; and 26% was for other structures .

the nps projects spending other portions of the $1.04 billion as follows: $200.0 million ( 19% ) on visitor services , $185.9 million ( 18% ) on direct costs / costs of collection , $72.5 million ( 7% ) on non - deferred maintenance , $70.0 million ( 7% ) on habitat restoration , and $82.0 million ( 8% ) on other purposes .

the fws anticipates spending $28.4 million over the five - year period .

the largest share , $12.1 million ( 43% ) , would be used for visitor services .

for deferred maintenance , the fws projects spending $5.4 million ( 19% ) over five years .

for fy2009 , doi estimates deferred maintenance for the fws at between $2.44 billion and $3.59 billion .

the fws anticipates spending other portions of the $28.4 million as follows: $3.5 million ( 12% ) for direct costs / costs of collection ; $2.8 million ( 10% ) for non - deferred maintenance ; $1.7 million ( 6% ) for administrative , overhead , and indirect costs ; and $3.0 million ( 11% ) for other purposes .

the recreation fee program historically has had a large balance of unobligated funds .

these revenues accumulated under the former fee demo program as well as the current program under flrea .

typically , all of the fees collected during a year are not spent during that year .

questions have arisen as to why the agencies have not used available monies more quickly .

reasons include a need to carry over funds for the next year's operations and for large projects ; insufficient staff at some units to administer and implement projects ; and the time needed for environmental analysis , design , and engineering .

fy2009 marked the first year in which more than half of available recreation revenues were obligated by the four agencies .

annual obligations have increased from 20% of total funds available in fy1997 , the outset of the former fee program , to 53% in fy2009 .

also during this period , revenues and obligations have increased considerably in absolute terms .

in fy1997 , total funds available for obligation were $55.3 million , of which $11.0 million were obligated .

in fy2009 , $574.4 million were available for obligation , of which $304.8 million were obligated .

that left a combined unobligated balance of recreation fees totaling $269.6 million in fy2009 — 47% of all available revenue .

figure 1 depicts the total recreation revenues available for obligation and the total obligated since the inception of the former fee demo in fy1997 .

for each fiscal year , the first bar shows the total funding available for obligation , comprised of the recreation fees collected during the fiscal year ( the bottom part of the bar ) and the unobligated balance of recreation fees carried over from the previous fiscal year ( top part of the bar ) .

the second bar shows the funding that was obligated in each fiscal year .

the percent of recreation funds obligated by the four agencies increased from 46% in fy2008 to 53% in fy2009 , primarily due to enhanced nps efforts to reduce its large balance of unobligated funds .

for instance , the agency implemented a recreation fee comprehensive plan covering all fee projects over five years .

park units provide annual updates to include a timeline for project completion .

for the first time in fy2009 , nps obligated more than half of the monies available for obligation ( 50.5% ) .

an nps goal is to reduce its unobligated balance further , from $218.4 million in fy2009 , to approximately $150 million by september 30 , 2010 , and $80 million by january 1 , 2011 .

to achieve this goal , the agency is limiting the percent of revenue that park units can carry over from year to year .

parks that do not achieve the carryover standard will be penalized .

for instance , as of january 1 , 2011 , park units will lose their carryover funds if the unobligated carryover balance exceeds 35% of annual recreation revenues .

the nps also is taking actions to speed up the use of the 20% of recreation revenues available to be used agency - wide .

for example , funds are to be allocated to projects by december 31 each year .

if the funds are not fully obligated by december 31 of the following year , they will be reallocated to other projects .

the fws is the only one of the four agencies that obligated less than half of the funds ( 42% ) available during fy2009 .

the agency has issued guidance for sites to increase the rate of obligations to at least 50% , and has projected obligations for fy2010 and fy2011 at between 62% and 63% .

blm obligated 58% of available fy2009 funds , while the fs had the highest rate of obligation at 65% .

