appropriations for epa's clean water and other programs for fy2007 were considered but not finalized in 2006 .

the president's budget requested $687.6 million for grants to capitalize clean water state revolving funds ( srfs ) which fund local wastewater treatment projects , 22% less than fy2006 funding .

on may 18 the house passed h.r .

5386 , providing epa appropriations , and agreed to the clean water srf funding level requested by the president .

the senate appropriations committee approved the same amount for the srf program when it approved h.r .

5386 in june .

final action on h.r .

5386 and most other fy2007 appropriations bills for domestic agencies and departments did not occur before congress adjourned sine die in december , thus delaying this legislative activity to the beginning of the 110 th congress .

in 2003 , epa promulgated revised rules that govern waste discharges from large animal feeding operations to the nation's waters .

those revised rules were challenged by multiple parties , and in 2005 , a federal court issued a ruling that upheld major parts of the rules , vacated other parts , and remanded still other parts to epa for clarification .

in june 2006 , epa proposed revisions to the rules in response to the court's decision and expects to promulgate revised regulations by june 2007 .

in 2005 , congress enacted comprehensive energy policy legislation , h.r .

6 ( p.l .

109-58 ) ; one provision ( section 323 ) provides a permanent exemption from stormwater runoff rules for the construction of exploration and production facilities by oil and gas companies or the roads that service those sites .

epa promulgated a rule to implement this provision of p.l .

109-58 in june 2006 .

the federal water pollution control act , or clean water act , is the principal law concerned with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , and estuaries .

originally enacted in 1948 , it was totally revised by amendments in 1972 ( p.l .

92-500 ) that gave the act its current form and spelled out ambitious programs for water quality improvements that are now being put in place by industries and cities .

congress made certain fine - tuning amendments in 1977 ( p.l .

95-217 ) and 1981 ( p.l .

97-117 ) and enacted comprehensive amendments in 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

the act consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities in order to meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants , and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment construction .

industries were to meet pollution control limits first by use of best practicable technology and later by improved best available technology .

cities were to achieve secondary treatment of municipal wastewater ( roughly 85% removal of conventional wastes ) , or better if needed to meet water quality standards .

both major parts are supported by research activities authorized in the law , plus permit and penalty provisions for enforcement .

programs are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , while state and local governments have the principal day - to - day responsibility for implementing the law .

the last major amendments to the law were contained in the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

these amendments culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and were the most comprehensive amendments to it since 1972 .

they recognized that , despite much progress , significant water quality problems persisted .

among its many provisions , the 1987 legislation ( 1 ) established a comprehensive program for controlling toxic pollutant discharges , beyond that already provided in the act , to respond to so - called "toxic hot spots" ; ( 2 ) added a program requiring states to develop and implement programs to control nonpoint sources of pollution , or rainfall runoff from farm and urban areas , plus construction , forestry , and mining sites ; ( 3 ) authorized a total of $18 billion for wastewater treatment assistance under a combination of the act's traditional construction grants program and a new program of grants to capitalize state revolving funds ; ( 4 ) authorized or modified a number of programs to address water pollution problems in diverse geographic areas such as coastal estuaries , the great lakes , and the chesapeake bay ; and ( 5 ) revised many of the act's regulatory , permit , and enforcement programs .

meeting the nation's needs to build , upgrade , rebuild , and repair wastewater infrastructure is a significant element in achieving the clean water act's water quality objectives .

the act's program of financial aid for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction is a key contributor to that effort .

since 1972 congress has provided more than $76 billion to assist wastewater treatment construction , but funding needs remain very high: an additional $181 billion nationwide for all types of projects eligible for funding under the act , according to the most recent needs survey estimate by epa and the states , published in august 2003 .

in september 2002 , epa released a study called the gap analysis that assesses the difference between current spending for wastewater infrastructure and total funding needs ( both capital and operation and maintenance ) .

in that report , epa estimated that , over the next two decades , the united states needs to spend nearly $390 billion to replace existing wastewater infrastructure systems and to build new ones .

funding needs for operation and maintenance ( not eligible for clean water act funding ) are an additional $148 billion , the agency estimated .

according to the gap analysis , if there is no increase in investment , there will be about a $6 billion gap between current annual capital expenditures for wastewater treatment ( $13 billion annually ) and projected spending needs .

the study also estimated that , if wastewater spending increases by 3% annually , the gap would shrink by nearly 90% ( to about $1 billion annually ) .

at issue has been what should be the federal role in assisting states and cities , especially in view of such high projected funding needs .

debate over the nature of the nation's efforts regarding wastewater infrastructure was a central and controversial part of the 1987 amendments to the act .

the amendments extended through fy1990 the traditional title ii program of grants for sewage treatment project construction , under which the federal share was 55% of project costs .

the 1987 law initiated a program of grants to capitalize state water pollution control revolving funds ( srfs ) , or loan programs , in a new title vi .

states are required to deposit an amount equal to at least 20% of the federal capitalization grant in the fund established under title vi .

under the revolving fund concept , monies used for wastewater treatment construction would be repaid by loan recipients to the states ( repayment was not required for grants under the title ii program ) , to be recycled for future construction in other communities , thus providing an ongoing source of financing .

the expectation in 1987 was that the federal contributions to srfs would assist in making a transition to full state and local financing by fy1995 .

although most states believe that the srf is working well , early funding and administrative problems have delayed the anticipated shift to full state responsibility .

thus , srf issues have been prominent on the clean water act reauthorization agenda in recent congresses .

srf monies may be used for certain types of financial activity , including loans for as much as 100% of project costs ( at or below market interest rates , including interest - free loans ) , to buy or refinance cities' debt obligation , or as a source of revenue or security for payment of principal and interest on a state - issued bond .

srf monies also may be used to provide loan guarantees or credit enhancement for localities .

loans made by a state from its srf are to be used first to assure progress towards the goals of the act and , in particular , on projects to meet the standards and enforceable requirements of the act .

after states achieve those requirements of the act , srf monies also may be used to implement nonpoint pollution management and national estuary programs .

table 1 summarizes wastewater treatment funding under title ii ( traditional grants program ) and title vi ( capitalization grants for revolving loan programs ) .

one issue of continuing interest is impacts on small communities .

these entities in particular have found it difficult to participate in the srf loan program , since many are characterized by narrow or weak tax bases , limited or no access to capital markets , lower relative household incomes , and higher per capita needs .

they often find it harder to borrow to meet their capital needs and pay relatively high premiums to do so .

meeting the special needs of small towns , through a reestablished grant program , other funding source , or loan program with special rules , has been an issue of interest to congress .

congressional oversight of wastewater / srf issues has focused on several points , including the fact that many small communities have found it difficult to participate in the srf loan program , and the lack of funds for high - cost categories of projects such as correcting combined sewer overflows .

although there has been some criticism of the srf program , and debate continues over specific concerns ( such as small community impacts ) , the basic approach is well supported in congress and elsewhere .

congress used the clean water srf as the model when it established a drinking water srf in 1996 ( p.l .

104-182 ) .

the 1987 amendments added a new section 319 to the act .

it required states to develop and implement programs to control nonpoint sources of pollution , or rainfall runoff from farm and urban areas , as well as construction , forestry , and mining sites .

previously , they had largely focused on controlling point sources , while helping states and localities to plan for management of diverse nonpoint sources .

yet , as industrial and municipal sources have abated pollution , uncontrolled nonpoint sources have become a relatively larger portion of remaining water quality problems — perhaps contributing as much as 50% of the nation's water pollution .

thus , the addition of section 319 to the act was intended to strengthen the law regarding this major contributor to water pollution , which previously had received limited attention .

at issue today is what progress is being made to manage nonpoint source pollution and what additional efforts may be needed involving section 319 or other public and private activities .

some observers are critical of the largely voluntary nature of the section 319 program , consisting of "all carrot but no stick," while others argue that the types of individual land management decisions that are needed to manage nonpoint source pollution cannot be regulated in the same ways that industrial sources are controlled .

states were required to identify waters not expected to meet water quality standards because of nonpoint source pollution and to implement plans for managing pollution from runoff .

federal grants totaling $400 million were authorized to cover as much as 60% of the costs of implementing a state's management plan .

the funding issue has become more urgent as states moved from assessment and plan development to management , since congress intended that section 319 funds be used primarily to implement nonpoint pollution controls on the ground .

epa has urged states to use a portion of monies that they receive under section 106 of the act ( water quality program assistance grants ) for nonpoint source activities .

but , doing so utilizes money otherwise needed for core state efforts , such as permit issuance , monitoring , enforcement , etc .

several concerns have been raised about the section 319 program .

in the 1972 clean water act , congress recognized that , in many cases , pollutant controls implemented by industry and municipalities would be insufficient to attain water quality standards , due in part to pollutant contributions from unregulated sources .

thus , section 303 ( d ) of the clean water act requires states to identify water segments that remain impaired even after application of pollution control technology and develop "total maximum daily loads" ( tmdls ) that set the maximum amount of pollution that a water body can receive without violating water quality standards .

if a state fails to do so , epa is required to develop a priority list for the state and make its own tmdl determination .

most states have lacked the resources to do tmdl analyses , which involve complex assessment of point and nonpoint sources and mathematical modeling , and epa has both been reluctant to override states and has also lacked resources to do the analyses .

thus , for many years there was little implementation of the provision that congress enacted in 1972 .

at issue today is continuing controversy over implementation of this program which is intended to address uncontrolled sources of water quality impairment and efforts to revise the rules and requirements for it .

in recent years , national and local environmental groups have filed lawsuits in 38 states against epa and states for failure to fulfill requirements of the act .

of the suits tried or settled to date , 22 have resulted in court orders requiring epa to develop tmdls expeditiously .

epa and state officials have been concerned about diverting resources from other high - priority water quality activities in order to meet the courts' orders .

in 1996 , epa created an advisory committee to solicit advice on the tmdl problem .

recommendations from the advisory committee formed the basis of program changes that epa proposed in august 1999 .

this proposal set forth criteria for states , territories , and authorized indian tribes to identify impaired waters and establish all tmdls within 15 years .

it proposed more comprehensive assessments of waterways , detailed cleanup plans , and timetables for implementation .

the 1999 proposal was highly controversial because of issues such as burdens on states to implement a revised tmdl program and potential impacts on some agriculture and forestry sources which are not now subject to cwa regulations .

the controversies also drew congressional attention , and 13 congressional hearings were held during the 106 th congress by four separate house and senate committees .

public and congressional pressure on epa to revise or withdraw the tmdl proposal entirely was great .

several bills to modify epa's tmdl proposals or delay implementation of final rules were introduced , but none was enacted .

tmdl issues also were addressed in fy2001 appropriations bills .

in july 2000 , congress approved an fy2001 military construction and emergency supplemental appropriations bill that included a provision to prevent epa from spending any funds in fy2000 or fy2001 to finalize or implement new tmdl rules .

president clinton signed the bill , in spite of the tmdl restriction , which the administration opposed ( p.l .

106-246 ) .

however , the epa administrator signed the new rules two days before the president signed the bill but delayed the effective date until october 2001 , when the limitation in p.l .

106-246 would expire .

epa's signing of the rule before the rider took effect led to more criticism .

the fy2001 appropriations act providing funds for epa , p.l .

106-377 , included report language mandating studies by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) and epa on the scientific basis of the tmdl program and on the potential costs to states and businesses of implementing the revised tmdl rules .

the nas report , examining the role of science in the tmdl program , was issued in june 2001 .

it did not specifically analyze the july 2000 revised regulations .

the nas panel concluded that scientific knowledge exists to move forward with the tmdl program and recommended that epa and states use adaptive implementation for tmdl development .

in many cases , the report said , water quality problems and solutions are obvious and should proceed without complex analysis .

in other cases , solutions are more complex and require a different level of understanding and something like phased implementation .

a house transportation subcommittee held a hearing on the nas report in june 2001 .

in august 2001 , epa issued a draft report on costs of the 2000 tmdl program .

it estimated that average annual costs to states and epa of developing tmdls could be $63-$69 million , while implementation costs for pollutant sources could be between $900 million and $4.3 billion per year , depending on states' actions .

the general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) reported in 2002 that inconsistent monitoring , data collection , and listing procedures used by states to identify impaired waters have hindered efforts to develop effective tmdl programs .

the bush administration announced in october 2001 that it would delay the effective date of the 2000 rule until april 30 , 2003 , to allow for further review .

that announcement came after a federal court granted the administration's request for a similar 18-month suspension of litigation which challenged the regulation ( nearly a dozen interest groups sued epa over various parts of the tmdl rule ) .

a house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee held an oversight hearing in november 2001 concerning epa's plans to revise the rule .

most recently , on march 19 , 2003 , epa withdrew the july 2000 tmdl rule ( 68 federal register 13607 ) .

epa officials said that additional time beyond may 2003 was needed to decide whether and how to revise the current program and that allowing the rule to take effect would have disrupted ongoing review efforts .

in the interim and continuing for the present time , current program requirements under existing regulations issued in 1992 and court - sanctioned tmdl schedules remain in place .

having withdrawn the 2000 rule , epa has reportedly been considering other options , including initiating an entirely new rule , but no specific plans have been announced .

in mid - 2002 , epa developed a draft revised rule that it informally circulated among interest groups and federal agencies for many months , but no formal proposal has occurred .

one epa view , widely reported , is that a new rule is not essential , because epa believes that states are and will continue to improve the pace at which tmdls are established , even under existing rules .

most environmentalists say that , short of retaining the 2000 rule , the best action would be to leave the 1992 rules in place , because , despite flaws , those rules are preferable to a new rule that might significantly weaken the program .

states , cities , and industry groups have urged epa to develop a new rule with more flexibility than either the 1992 regulations or the 2000 revisions .

a number of other issues affecting efforts to achieve the goals and objectives of the clean water act continue to receive attention , as well .

although the 1987 clean water act amendments dealt extensively with financial aid issues , funding questions have continued to arise and be addressed in the context of appropriations .

goplerud , c. peter .

"water pollution law: milestones from the past and anticipation of the future. .

natural resources & environment .

v. 10 , no .

2 , fall 1995. pp .

7-12 .

loeb , penny .

"very troubled waters. .

u.s. news & world report , v. 125 , no .

12 , september 28 , 1998: 39 , 41-42 .

u.s. congressional budget office .

future investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure .

washington , november 2002 .

58 p. u.s. environmental protection agency .

the national water quality inventory: 2000 report .

washington , september 2002 .

"epa - 841-r - 2-001. .

u.s. government accountability office .

key epa and state decisions limited by inconsistent and incomplete data .

 ( gao / rced - 00-54 ) march 2000 .

73 p. — — water infrastructure: information on financing , capital planning , and privatization .

 ( gao - 02-764 ) august 2002 .

79 p. — — improved epa guidance and support can help states develop standards that better target cleanup efforts .

 ( gao - 03-308 ) january 2003 .

74 p .

