the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) has helped over 3.69 million afghan refugees return to afghanistan since march of 2002 , marking the largest assisted return operation in unhcr's history .

in addition , more than a million refugees have returned to afghanistan without availing themselves of unhcr's assistance ( also known as "spontaneous returns" ) bringing the total number of returnees to 4.8 million or more .

almost all of these afghans have returned from neighboring iran and pakistan , where the vast majority of afghan refugees have lived for well over two decades ( see table 1 ) .

issues of particular concern to the 110 th congress are 1 ) continuing and sustaining refugee returns as part of afghanistan's overall reconstruction ; 2 ) developing funding strategies for the next phase of afghanistan's remaining refugees ; and 3 ) examining the refugee situation in light of border security issues , particularly with regard to pakistan's recently announced plan to lay land mines and build a fence along its border with afghanistan .

in the long term , the impact of afghan migration trends may need to be better understood in light of its potential impact on political arrangements in south asia .

afghans began fleeing their country in april 1978 , when the marxist people's democratic party of afghanistan ( pdpa ) , overthrew the government of muhammad daoud ( who had himself seized power from his cousin afghan king zahir shah in a bloodless coup in 1973 ) .

the trickle of refugees accelerated when the soviet union invaded in december 1979 , ostensibly to restore order to the country as the pdpa became increasingly splintered .

while political infighting was certainly a problem , some observers also noted that afghanistan's leadership had begun irking moscow by making decisions without soviet approval .

the soviet attempt to subjugate the afghans was at times particularly brutal , including the alleged use of torture and collective punishment .

by the beginning of 1981 , some 3.7 million refugees had fled to iran and pakistan .

smaller numbers of refugees continued to flee afghanistan for the next decade , as the soviets fought an insurgency mounted by a loosely allied group of mujahideen , or holy warriors .

in 1988 , the soviet union agreed to withdraw from afghanistan , and unhcr and the international assistance community prepared for the massive repatriation of refugees .

large - scale returns did not begin until 1992 , however , when the soviet - installed leader najibullah was finally forced from power .

no sooner had some million and a half refugees returned , however , than kabul descended into armed disorder as various mujahideen factions began fighting for control of the capital and the surrounding area .

a new wave of people was displaced ( possibly up to a million ) , a majority of whom remained within afghanistan's borders as internally displaced people ( idps ) .

after a year - long siege , the taliban took kabul in 1996 , and had gained control of most of the country by 1998 .

although they brought a measure of peace to the areas they captured , many afghans , especially the educated , fled the taliban's particularly austere vision of islamic propriety , with its severe restrictions on women's activities , education , and social and cultural life .

a final wave of refugees numbering 200,000 to 300,000 left afghanistan during the u.s. - led invasion of october 2001 .

with the defeat of the taliban a month later , unhcr led consultations with the three governments centrally involved in the afghan refugee issues — pakistan , iran , and afghanistan — and began planning for another mass repatriation .

beginning in 2002 , unhcr along with afghanistan , established separate tripartite agreements with pakistan and iran to provide a legal and operational framework for voluntary repatriations from each country .

these agreements have been renewed several times since then .

the working assumption at the time was that there were approximately 2 million refugees in pakistan and 1.5 million in iran .

almost everyone was caught off - guard , when subsequently 2.15 million afghans returned in 2002 , and yet most of the camps in pakistan ( and to some extent the cities in iran ) continued to house large numbers of afghan refugees .

it turned out that there were far more afghans living in pakistan than most analysts had thought .

although the numbers of returns declined in subsequent years , it can be seen from table 1 that through 2005 the pace remained very strong .

unhcr estimates that , as of december 2006 , perhaps 2.46 million registered and unregistered afghans are currently living in pakistan and more than 900,000 in iran .

who among these afghans is a refugee and who is not is a matter of debate in each country .

still , perhaps as many as 3.5 million registered and unregistered afghans still live in exile .

in pakistan , 80 percent of those remaining have been there for more than two decades ; 50 percent were born in exile .

the united states government ( usg ) has provided humanitarian assistance to afghan refugees since the early 1980s .

funding for afghan refugees declined rapidly since it peaked after the u.s. - led invasion in october 2001 .

almost all assistance has been provided through the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account , and has been programmed by the department of state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) .

this funding is used not only for the protection and care of refugees in countries of asylum , but also for the reintegration of afghan returnees in afghanistan .

table 2 presents usg assistance to afghan refugees and returnees since the u.s. - led invasion in october 2001 .

since the majority of prm funding is provided to regional projects , it is not possible to provide a breakdown of assistance by country .

even after four years of exceptionally high refugee return numbers , the population of afghan refugees in pakistan and iran remains the second - highest in the world .

if recent returnees — also central to prm's mandate — are added to this number , afghans represent by far the largest population of refugees and returnees in the world .

funding for afghan refugees has , however , diminished both overall and as a percentage of prm's total annual budget since fy2002 .

the united states thus faces the challenge of maintaining its crucial assistance in this area of the world despite competing priorities .

this challenge may become even more difficult in the near future , because maintaining the successful repatriation program is likely to become more , not less , expensive as time goes on .

this is because the refugees remaining in pakistan and iran have fewer resources in and ties to afghanistan than those who returned earlier .

they have also , on average , spent far more time outside of afghanistan than earlier returnees ( see figure 2 ) .

as time goes on , it becomes increasingly more difficult — and expensive — to encourage remaining refugees to voluntarily return to afghanistan .

thus , as funding is declining , its importance may be increasing .

a related issue may be whether pakistan and iran would be receptive to encouragement to grant citizenship to afghans who do not want to return to afghanistan .

another factor influencing the success of the repatriation program is the sustainability of previous returns to afghanistan — that is , the degree to which returnees are being adequately anchored in their communities , whether they are receiving health care , education , and opportunities to make a living .

integration of returnees increasingly is examined in both studies and reports and getting the attention of policymakers .

the success of the repatriation program thus depends on the success of the overall reconstruction effort in afghanistan , including the extent to which returned refugees ( and idps ) are integrated into reconstruction efforts .

there is already evidence that many afghan returnees do not remain in afghanistan ; traffic across the pakistani border in particular — in both directions — is heavy .

to a certain extent , and as noted above , this is a historical pattern that pre - dates not only the repatriation program but the refugee crisis as well .

a cause for concern may emerge , however , if it is concluded that many of the afghans crossing back into pakistan and iran are doing so because they could not sustain themselves in afghanistan .

a renewed outward flow of afghans , in addition to signaling the possible inadequacies of the reconstruction effort in afghanistan , could increase tensions with host countries .

both the goi and the gop , indicate some possible flexibility on the future of afghan migration , but have nevertheless made clear that they believe the refugee crisis in afghanistan is over , and that there is no excuse for afghans to remain in their countries on humanitarian grounds .

future study of the reasons for afghan population movements is required in order to determine their reasons for migration .

it remains to be seen what effect the pakistani government's recently announced plans for controlling and securing the afghan border , through the construction of fences and planting of landmines , will have on refugee movements .

humanitarian groups have voiced their concerns and condemned the plan .

pakistan is not a signatory to international conventions banning the use of landmines and the government says the plan is a necessary step to increase border security .

president hamid karzai apparently also objected strongly to the announcement not only for political and humanitarian reasons , but because he does not believe the plan will be effective in preventing terrorists from crossing the border into afghanistan .

in the longer term , the governments of afghanistan , pakistan , and iran may need to come to new political arrangements concerning the migration of afghans in south asia .

new research indicates that afghan labor migration may prove beneficial to both afghanistan — in the form of remittances — and to countries of asylum — in the form of labor .

indeed , experts have noted that such migration is nothing new ; many afghans have for a long time migrated seasonally in search of livelihood opportunities .

it remains to be seen what role the united states might take on this issue .

despite its economic advantages , establishing such a "labor migration regime" in south asia may prove politically difficult on the pakistani and iranian domestic fronts .

segments of both the goi and gop have indicated that they believe afghans are a net drain on the economy .

maintaining security along the border with afghanistan is also a concern .

afghans in pakistan are blamed for a good deal of lawlessness in the country , and there are few down sides for authorities to engage in this kind of scapegoating .

ultimately , however , afghans will likely continue to live and work outside of afghanistan , regardless of the legality of doing so ; understanding and regulating as much of this migration as possible may be one way to ensure that it is done so in a secure , humane , and effective manner .

