this is a comparison of the law of the united states ( u.s. ) and united kingdom ( uk ) relating to the authority to investigate terrorism .

it focuses primarily upon the procedures for conducting searches and seizures including the interception of communications , arresting and detaining suspected terrorists , and control orders restricting the activities of suspected terrorists .

the most obvious difference between the laws of the two countries is that in the uk approval of extraordinary authority including the issuance of warrants often remains an executive function and in the united states the task more often falls to the courts .

in addition , authority in the united states only roughly approximates at best the power of uk officials to arrest and detain suspected terrorists and to subject them to control orders .

on the other hand , u.s. officials appear to enjoy greater flexibility in the use of intercepted communications for evidentiary purposes .

many of the differences can be understood in light of the reach of the fourth amendment to the united states constitution .

the fourth amendment condemns unreasonable governmental searches and seizures .

it applies where there is a justifiable expectation of privacy and does not apply there is not .

it does not apply to consensual searches nor to the overseas search of the property of foreign nationals with no substantial connection to the united states .

the amendment begins with the presumption that a search or seizure is unreasonable unless conducted pursuant to a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate and upon a showing of probable cause to believe a crime has been committed .

there are many circumstances , however , in which a search or seizure will be considered reasonable notwithstanding the absence of a warrant or of probable cause or of both .

thus , border inspections require neither warrant nor suspicion , nor does a procedure which allows officers to stop and search parolees .

incident to a valid arrest , law enforcement officers may search a suspect without probable cause to believe the suspect possesses evidence or a weapon .

they may arrest a suspect without a warrant when they have probable cause to believe he has committed a felony , and may conduct a brief investigative stop with less than probable cause when , given all of the circumstances , they have "a particularized and objective basis for suspecting"an individual is engaged in or about to engage in criminal activity .

when acting in the interests of certain special needs , such as highway safety or student health and safety , government officials may engage in warrantless , suspicionless searches .

when acting solely in the name of national security , government officials may not engage in warrantless searches and seizures relating to a suspected domestic terrorist .

whether and to what extent they enjoy greater latitude when focused on the activities of foreign powers and their agents is less clear .

the statutory basis for stop and searches by the police in the uk is contained in the police and criminal evidence act 1984 , which provides the police can stop and search and individual if they have reasonable suspicion that a crime has been , is being , or is about to be committed .

statistics show that under the provisions of this act the police stopped black people six times more frequently than white people and asian people two times more frequently .

the police were provided with broader authority to stop and search people under the terrorism act 2000 that permits officers , with authorization from a senior officer , to stop and search anyone to prevent terrorism .

statistically , asian and black people are respectively four and five times more likely to be stopped than white people under this act .

these statistics , combined with the code issued under the police and criminal evidence act and the home office stop and search interim guidelines provide that while the police must "not discriminate against members of minority ethnic groups when they exercise these powers ... [t]here may be circumstances where it is appropriate for officers to take account of a person's ethnic background when they decide who to stop in response to a specific terrorist threat ( for example , some international terrorist groups are associated with particular ethnic groups , such as muslims ) . .

this code of practice has given rise to the claim that the british police use ethnic and religious profiling in their policing , a claim that both the government and the police have actively worked to dismiss .

the government has noted that the enactment of the recent anti - terrorism laws led to "a palpable increase in stopping and searching of people of asian origin in particular. .

the government expressed concern that tensions with the muslim community in particular are not exacerbated , because it is believed that the isolation and the stigmatization , perceived , or otherwise , contributes towards the disenfranchising of muslims , providing extremists with the opportunity to recruit these individuals .

an expert witness in a panel reviewing the use of anti - terrorism stop and search powers has noted "one of the biggest dangers of counter - terrorism policing must be that it will grow the very terrorism which it seeks to defeat. .

against this background , in the wake of the london bombing in july 2005 , the chief constable of british transport police ( btp ) publicly stated: "we should not waste time searching old white ladies .

[searches are] going to be disproportionate .

it is going to be young men , not exclusively , but it may be disproportionate when it comes to ethnic groups. .

the government quickly distanced itself from this remark noting that intelligence - led stop and searches should be utilized rather than stereotyping ethnic minorities because "tackling terrorism is absolutely dependent on the confidence of these communities to feel that they can come forward , give information and be part of the fight against this threat. .

in the united states as noted earlier , the fourth amendment permits parolees to be stopped and searched without warrant or suspicion .

and law enforcement officers may conduct a brief investigative stop when given the circumstances they have "a particularized and objective basis for suspecting" that criminal activity is afoot .

nevertheless invidious racial , ethnic , or religious discrimination in law enforcement is unlawful , and the consideration of such factors standing alone "and sometimes even in tandem with other factors , does not generate reasonable suspicion for a stop. .

police powers in the uk under the terrorism act 2000 are wide - ranging and there are concerns over opportunities for abuse .

the act permits investigations into the resources of proscribed organizations and the commission , preparation , or instigation of acts that are offenses under the act .

police can arrest individuals without a warrant based on a reasonable suspicion that they have been involved in the preparation , instigation , or commission of acts of terrorism , regardless of whether police believe the suspect is committing or has committed a crime .

the government justified this "pre - emptive power of arrest" by stating that the delay in collecting sufficient information for an arrest warrant would , in some cases , be too late to prevent the terrorist act .

there are no federal statutory provisions in the united states comparable to the british authority to arrest suspected terrorists .

under the fourth amendment , the hallmarks of a reasonable arrest are probable cause and a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate .

the amendment does allow warrantless arrests based on probable cause under some circumstances and permits brief investigative stops and border inspections without a warrant and less than probable cause , but there is nothing the equivalent of a "pre - emptive power of arrest. .

the government in the uk has faced the difficult task of balancing the rights of individuals , which now have extensive statutory protection under the human rights act 1998 , with the security of the state .

the incorporation of the european convention on human rights [the echr] into the domestic law of the uk by the human rights act 1998 altered the legal climate of the uk and resulted in the specific prohibition of detention for the sole purpose of preventing a crime being specifically prohibited , save in certain circumstances prescribed by law .

while the echr is not a new doctrine of law , but merely sets out the rights that individuals in britain have long enjoyed under the common law , the impact of the echr on the domestic laws of the uk is evident .

cases challenging british laws are noticeable and ever increasing in number .

the uk has had lengthy experience in indefinitely detaining those suspected to be terrorists without trial in northern ireland .

under the prevention of terrorism ( temporary provisions ) act 1984 ( pta ) , the secretary of state could authorize the detention of a person for up to seven days .

in 1988 the european court of human rights ruled that this was a breach of article 5 ( 3 ) of the echr unless it was judicially authorized , resulting in the government derogating from that article in order to lawfully retain this provision of the pta .

the use of these powers was controversial and in response to increasing violence .

the result of the internment of almost 2,000 predominantly catholic men was greater civil disturbances and a "diminished respect for the rule of law in northern ireland. .

it was widely reported that the use of internment was "among the best recruiting tools the ira ever had. .

it was against this background and experience that the government had to decide the most effective , least controversial , and least likely to succumb to legal challenges in which to address individuals whom the government suspects to be international terrorists or threats to national security , but whom it cannot deport .

this issue was tackled during the drafting of the ta , when alternative options to derogation from the echr were considered .

it was finally decided that individuals could be detained for up to forty - eight hours after arrest without charge .

critics of the ta regarded this provision as providing for "incommunicado detention" and unnecessary because previously individuals detained under similar provisions were rarely charged with a terrorist offense .

despite this criticism the period of detention permitted under the ta has been extended by successive acts — from forty - eight hours to fourteen days by the criminal justice act 2003 and from fourteen days to twenty - eight days by a highly contentious provision in the terrorism act 2006 .

the detention under this provision , for an initial period of forty - eight hours , is then reviewed by a judicial authority and is then renewable for seven day periods up to a maximum of twenty - eight days , with a senior judge considering applications for detainment for the final fourteen days .

in order to continue the period of detention the judicial authority must be satisfied that it is necessary either to obtain or preserve relevant evidence or permit completion of an examination or analysis of any relevant matter with a view to obtaining evidence .

the investigation connected with the detention must also be conducted diligently and expeditiously .

other areas of controversy under the detention powers are that police superintendents can impose a delay on the detained person without notifying others of the person's detention or allowing them to consult with a solicitor if there are reasonable grounds to believe that it would interfere with other investigations .

in the united states , authorities must advise an individual in custody of his right to have attorney present during interrogation and to have one appointed if he is unable to afford one .

a person in custody may waive his right to the presence of counsel , but questioning must stop if the individual asks to speak to an attorney before continuing .

as to the detention of suspected terrorists , american law affords no counterpart , but the operation of the material witness statute may have the same effect in some instances .

federal law permits authorities to arrest a suspected terrorist with or without a warrant if they have probable cause to believe that he has committed a federal felony .

it also permits the issuance of an arrest warrant if there is probable cause to believe that a person is a material witness to a federal offense and will not be available when needed to testify either before the grand jury , at a trial , or in any other criminal proceeding .

although an individual's proximity to a crime may make him both a legitimate witness and a legitimate suspect , the courts have said that a material witness warrant may not be used as a substitute for a criminal arrest warrant .

those arrested under federal authority must be taken before a magistrate "without unreasonable delay. .

a delay of longer than 48 hours of an individual arrested without a warrant is presumptively unreasonable as a matter of constitutional law , and a delay of a period as short as two hours may be considered unreasonable if the delay is attributable to criminal investigation rather than processing of an arrestee .

both those arrested on criminal charges and those arrested as material witnesses are eligible for release under federal bail laws .

under the bail laws an individual arrested will either be: released on personal recognizance ; released subject to certain conditions including the execution of a bail bond ; temporarily detained pending parole revocation , deportation or exclusion ; or detained pending trial .

an individual charged with one or more of the terrorist offenses listed in 18 u.s.c .

2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) and punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of 10 years or more may be held for a hearing to determine whether any combination of conditions will be sufficient to assure public safety and his appearance at later proceedings .

in such cases , there is a rebuttable presumption that no combination of conditions will reasonably assure public safety or the later appearance of an individual arrested for various terrorist offenses .

although the terrorist presumption only applies to those charged with terrorist offenses , material witnesses may nonetheless be detained if the court determines no combination of conditions will assure public safety and the later appearance of the witness .

various approaches to solve the problem of balancing the human rights of the individuals with the need to protect the public and national security were investigated .

after acknowledging the limits of the laws in which it could act , the government considered various options to replace the preventive detention scheme , including permitting the entry in court of intercepted or wiretapped evidence or entering into memorandums of understanding between the uk and certain governments to ensure that , if the detainees were deported to their home countries , they would not be subject to the death penalty or torture upon their arrival .

the government ultimately decided that certain aspects of the preventive detention scheme could be achieved through control orders that would apply to both foreign and british nationals and be supplemented by memoranda of understanding with monitoring bodies , ensuring these countries compliance with the terms of these agreements .

in arriving at this decision , the secretary of state reasoned that: there are cases in which we remain unable to prosecute .

however , that does not mean that we should do nothing to forestall suspected terrorists or to prevent them from planning , assisting or otherwise supporting those willing to carry out attacks .

the government have therefore decided to replace the part 4 powers [of the atcsa] with a new system of control orders .

we intend that such orders be capable of general application to any suspected terrorist irrespective of nationality or , for most controls , of the nature of the terrorist activity [whether international or domestic] and that they should enable us to impose conditions constraining the ability of those subject to the orders to engage in terrorist - related activities .

control orders would be used only in serious cases .

the controls imposed would be proportionate to the threat that each individual posed .

such orders would be preventive and designed to disrupt those seeking to carry out attacks [whether here or elsewhere] or who are planning or otherwise supporting such activities .

they would be designed to address directly two of the law lords' concerns: discrimination and proportionality .

control orders were implemented through the prevention of terrorism act 2005 , with the aim of protecting the public from the risk of terrorism by preventing individuals named in such orders from becoming involved in , or assisting , a terrorism - related activity when prosecution of the individual for that activity , or a criminal offense is not possible .

the orders are preventive in nature and designed to disrupt the activity of individuals where intelligence shows them to be a threat by imposing "obligations on individuals suspected of being involved in terrorism - related activity [whether domestic or international] ... [to] restrict or prevent the further involvement by individuals in such activity. .

the 2005 act provides for two types of orders: those that do not derogate from the uk's obligations under the echr [hereinafter "non - derogating orders"] and those that do derogate from the echr through imposing obligations that are incompatible with an individuals right to liberty [hereinafter "derogating orders"] .

to create the most restrictive form of order , which requires derogation from the uk's obligations under the echr , the secretary of state must file an application with the high court .

upon receipt of the application , the high court must hold a preliminary hearing , which may occur without notifying the named individual or allowing him to make representations before the court , to determine whether there is a prima facie case to grant the order .

the court has authority to grant an order at this stage if a number of criteria are met , including that there is material present that can be relied upon to establish the individual is or has been involved in terrorism related activity and it is reasonable to impose obligations on the individual to protect the public from the risk of terrorism .

if the court makes the derogating order in preliminary hearing , it is then required to hold a full inter partes hearing to either confirm , revoke or modify the obligations of the order .

these orders can be made for up to twelve months at a time , and remade after that time period by the secretary of state , provided the derogation from the echr continues .

the orders are tailored to the particular risk imposed by each individual upon the advice of the security service and can be modified to adjust to the changing risks that the individual might pose and subject suspected terrorists to conditions similar to bail or probation , such as electronic tagging , curfews , restrictions on communications or the use of certain facilities such as the internet , and from associating with other individuals .

the obligations that can be imposed in the orders are not restricted solely to the activities that caused the original suspicion that the person was or had been involved in terrorism - related activity , but can be any obligation aimed to prevent involvement in any terrorism - related activity .

there are many instances in which the courts hear cases without the presence of the individual named in the order , or his legal representative .

if the individual subject to an order contravenes any obligations imposed by the order , he can be arrested without a warrant and , if found guilty of an offense , may be imprisoned for a period of up to five years and / or fined upon conviction on indictment .

the introduction of control orders was inevitably subject to considerable criticism , notably that it was the biggest threat to the civil liberty of british citizens and extension of the state's executive powers in over 300 years because , in certain circumstances , a citizen may be deprived of their liberty without knowledge of the evidence presented against them .

individuals criticized the structure of the british legal system , and questioned why the government did not remove the legal constraints that prevent the prosecution of individuals for existing criminal and terrorist offenses in the courts in the first instance , such as restrictions on the use of intercept evidence in the courts .

the labour government responded to these suggestions by stating that an extensive review had concluded that the use of intercepted evidence would only produce a "modest" increase in the number of prosecutions for serious criminal offenses but none for terrorists and argued that: there is a widespread misconception that if we could only adduce intercept as evidence , we would be able to prosecute those detained .

however , the review of intercept as evidence found no evidence to support this ... [the] government do not intend to change the existing arrangements .

intercept provides only part of the intelligence against individuals ... it does not stand alone .

some of the material that we have in these cases is inadmissible , and other material , while technically admissible , could not be adduced without compromising national security , damaging relationships with foreign powers or intelligence agencies , or putting the lives of sources at risk .

due to the highly political and sensitive nature of the subject matter of the 2005 act , as well as the circumstances in which the bill was pushed through parliament , a sunset clause was inserted that the provisions within the 2005 act governing control orders will expire twelve months after the bill was passed .

the secretary of state may , after consulting with the person appointed to review the act , the intelligence services commissioner and the director - general or the security service , lay an order before parliament that must be approved by a resolution of each house of parliament to revive the act for an additional period of 12 months .

to ensure that the 2005 act is not subject to abuse , nor contravenes individual human rights without check , the secretary of state is required to prepare a report every three months concerning his use of control orders and appoint an individual to review the operation of the act .

the report is also to cover the implications on the act of any proposals put forth by the secretary of state for any law relating to terrorism , as well as the extent of the secretary of state's use of non - derogating control orders in urgent cases without the permission of the court .

the system of control orders has already been subject to an adverse ruling by the high court , with the judge stating that the orders are "an affront to justice" and "conspicuously unfair. .

the government is appealing this decision and has stated "the ruling will not limit the operation of the act ... [and] we will not be revoking either the control order which was the subject of this review , nor any of the other control orders currently in force on the back of this judgement .. .

nor will the judgment prevent the secretary of state from making control orders on suspected terrorists where he considers it necessary to do so in the interests of national security in future. .

as of may 2006 there have been twenty one control orders issued , and twelve remain in force .

the government continues to face the unenviable and difficult task of balancing the rights of individuals and maintaining democracy whilst protecting it .

inevitably , any legislation aimed at preventing individuals from engaging in a terrorist act rather than punishing individuals for committing such an act will be subject to considerable criticism .

it is not within the realm of "traditional justice" to punish an individual for an act not yet committed overtly .

the government has maintained that the threat it is facing is not a traditional threat , and its use of preventive measures is necessary to maintain order and national security from an amorphous threat .

the london times has criticized the uk's use of these provisions by drawing a parallel with: totalitarian states [that] have traditionally resorted to house detention as a way to silence dissent without the bad publicity of criminal proceedings , so creating a form of extralegal limbo that indicates guilt on the part of a suspect without having to go to the trouble of obtaining a conviction ... charles clarke has argued that house arrest is preferable to detention in belmarsh , but that is only a difference of circumstance , not of essence .

the home secretary has continued to reiterate the paradoxical challenge that the current situation creates and has stated that he is striving to: protect national security and ensure the safety and security of this country .

in doing so , i need to consider how we balance the rights of individuals against those of society ; how we ensure safety and security within a democracy without undermining the values that are at the very heart of it .

the united states does not appear to recognize a procedure comparable to the uk's control orders .

the procedure is reminiscent of the conditions that may be imposed either under federal bail laws or the laws governing federal probation .

control orders , however , are available when there is insufficient evidence upon which to base a prosecution , while bail is predicated upon arrest based on a determination that there is probable cause to believe that the person has committed a crime and probation is predicated upon conviction .

law enforcement and the security services in the uk have a broad variety of methods at their disposal to investigate crimes .

these methods include the interception of communications , electronic data , and various forms of surveillance .

the use of these methods are subject to a lengthy and complex legislative regime contained in the regulation of investigatory powers act 2000 ( ripa ) , the police act 1997 , and the intelligence services act 1994 ; and supplemented by the protections in the european convention on human rights .

additional provisions are supplied in the covert surveillance code of practice and the interception of communications code of practice , which the secretary of state is required to publish under the ripa .

the ripa regulates most forms of surveillance and the interception of communications in the uk .

it was enacted to update the laws on the interception of communications and brings them into line with technological advances .

the ripa was also enacted in anticipation of the effects of the human rights act 1998 , which granted individuals an enforceable right to family life and privacy and in response to a number of adverse rulings from the european court of human rights .

the european court of human rights found that the lack of regulation of surveillance activities was in breach of article 8 of the european convention on human rights ( echr ) , because the interference with the complainants' right to private life had not occurred with a procedure prescribed by law .

despite concerns over the lack of judicial involvement during the drafting of these laws , the issuance of warrants in the uk remains an executive act ; with the government previously "explicitly reject[ing] the suggestion that the issue of a warrant should be a judicial act. .

in the united states , law enforcement and intelligence agencies enjoy broad authority to investigate individuals and activities .

that authority , however , is limited by court rule , and by statutory and constitutional safeguards designed to prevent unwarranted intrusions and abuse .

the authority includes the power to conduct searches and seizures ; to intercept wire , oral and electronic communications ; to demand access to stored communications and communications records ; to install and use pen registers and trap and trace devices ; and to issue administrative subpoenas including those in the form of "national security letters. .

while law enforcement and intelligence investigators may work cooperatively , neither foreign intelligence surveillance act's ( fisa ) interception nor its physical search authority may be invoked solely for the purpose of a criminal investigation unrelated to a foreign intelligence offense .

the ripa provides for the lawful acquisition and disclosure of communications data in specified circumstances .

the definition of communications data was subject to a great deal of parliamentary debate as the requirements to obtain authorization , and the list of those who can request an authorization , are not as stringent as for surveillance or the interception of communications .

communications data does not include the content of the communication , but the information that relates to the use of a communication service , such as telephone records ( including the number called , duration of the call ) ; internet records ( including sites visited , the sender , recipient , date and time of email messages ) ; and information on the individual using the service held by the operator , such as subscriber information .

an authorization to obtain communications data can only be obtained if it is necessary: in the interests of national security or the economic well being of the uk ; for the purposes of preventing or detecting crime or preventing disorder ; in the interests of public safety ; for assessing or collecting of any tax , duty , levy or other imposition ; or to protect public health or , in an emergency , to prevent the death , injury or damage to an individual's physical or mental health , or mitigate such damage .

the class of officials who can grant authorization to obtain communications data is much broader than in the other areas of surveillance , and authorization can be "granted internally by an official in the relevant public authority [with] no limitation on those who may apply for authorization. .

a controversial aspect of the ripa is the requirement that providers of public communications services must maintain the capability to intercept communications and retain communications data .

communications providers , particularly internet service providers , considered that maintaining such a capability would be costly and infringe upon the privacy of their customers .

the ripa does place a duty on the secretary of state to make contributions , where appropriate , to the costs incurred by postal and telecommunications operators when complying with an order to retain or disclose communications data .

the atcsa further expanded these duties , requiring communications service providers to retain communications data after the period necessary for business purposes for national security and crime prevention so that it can be accessed under the regulation of investigatory powers act when necessary .

the provision has been criticized as giving police the ability to obtain a "complete dossier on private life. .

these requirements appear to soon become standard and more stringent with the passage of an eu directive , spearheaded by the uk , which mandates communications providers not just provide the ability to retain but actually retain communications data for up to two years as a law enforcement aid .

the comparable provisions under the laws of the united states permit law enforcement and intelligence access to such communications data — and in some instances to stored communications content — under several schemes .

the procedural requirements for law enforcement access to stored wire or electronic communications and transactional records deal with two kinds of information — often in the custody of the telephone company or some other service provider rather than of any of the parties to the communication — communications records and the content of electronic or wire communications .

law enforcement officials are entitled to access: with the consent of the one of the parties ; on the basis of a court order or similar process under the procedures established in title iii / ecpa ; in certain emergency situations ; or under one of the other statutory exceptions to the ban on service provider disclosure .

section 2703 , which affords law enforcement access to the content of stored wire and electronic communications , distinguishes between recent communications and those that have been in electronic storage for more than six months .

government officials may gain access to wire or electronic communications in electronic storage for less than 6 months under a search warrant issued upon probable cause to believe a crime has been committed and the search will produce evidence of the offense .

the government must use the same procedure to acquire older communications or those stored in remote computer storage if access is to be afforded without notice to the subscriber or customer .

if government officials are willing to afford the subscriber or customer notice or at least delayed notice , access may be granted under a court order showing that the information sought is relevant and material to a criminal investigation or under an administrative subpoena , a grand jury subpoena , a trial subpoena , or court order .

under the court order procedure , the court may authorize delayed notification in ninety day increments in cases where contemporaneous notice might have an adverse impact .

government supervisory officials may certify the need for delayed notification in the case of a subpoena .

traditional exigent circumstances and a general inconvenience justification form the grounds for delayed notification , i.e .

: danger to life or physical safety of an individual ; flight from prosecution ; destruction of or tampering with evidence ; intimidation of potential witnesses ; or seriously jeopardizing an investigation .

comparable , if less demanding , procedures apply when the government seeks other customer information from a service provider ( other than the content of a customer's communications ) .

the information can be secured: with a warrant ; with a court order ; with customer consent ; with a written request in telemarketing fraud cases ; or with a subpoena in some instances .

most customer identification , use , and billing information can be secured simply with a subpoena and without customer notification .

intelligence investigators have access to customer communications data under two procedures .

first , there is the fisa business record or tangible item authority .

prior to the usa patriot act senior fbi officials could approve an application to a fisa judge or magistrate for an order authorizing common carriers , or public accommodation , storage facility , or vehicle rental establishments to release their business records based upon certification of a reason to believe that the records pertained to a foreign power or the agent of a foreign power .

the usa patriot act and later the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act temporarily rewrote the procedure .

in its temporary form , it requires rather than authorizes access ; it is predicated upon relevancy rather than probable cause ; it applies to all tangible property ( not merely records ) ; and it applies to the tangible property of both individuals or organizations , commercial and otherwise .

it is limited , however , to investigations conducted to secure foreign intelligence information or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities .

recipients are prohibited from disclosing the existence of the order , but are expressly authorized to consult an attorney with respect to their rights and obligations under the order .

they enjoy immunity from civil liability for good faith compliance .

they may challenge the legality of the order and / or ask that its disclosure restrictions be lifted or modified .

the grounds for lifting the secrecy requirements are closely defined , but petitions for reconsideration may be filed annually .

the decision to set aside , modify or let stand either the disclosure restrictions of an order or the underlying order itself is subject to appellate review .

as addition safeguards , congress: insisted upon the promulgation of minimization standards ; established use restrictions ; required the approval of senior officials in order to seek orders covering the records of libraries and certain other types of records ; confirmed and reenforced reporting requirements ; and directed the justice department's inspector general to conduct an audit of the use of the fisa tangible item authority .

the second , and perhaps more likely , avenue affords access to communications records through a "national security letter. .

the national security letter procedure allows senior federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) officials and the heads of fbi field offices to request service providers to supply the name , address , length of service , and local and long distance toll billing records of a person or entity upon certification that the information is relevant to an investigation to protect against international terrorism or espionage .

the letter may include a ban on disclosure of the fact the information has been requested , and the letter's demands are judicially enforceable and reviewable .

addition safeguards include periodic reports to congress and an audit by the department of justice's inspector general .

