the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 wassigned into law on january 5 , 2006 ( p.l .

109-162 ) .

the act reauthorizes many of the agencies andprograms under the department of justice's ( doj's ) jurisdiction .

it also includes several provisionsthat builds upon previous efforts to restructure the office of justice programs ( ojp ) and improvesits administration of numerous grant programs to assist state , local , and tribal governments , as wellas nonprofit organizations with preventing and controlling crime .

since 1999 , congress has expressed an interest in the organizational structure of the doj'sojp .

for example , in the omnibus appropriations act for fy1999 , ( 1 ) congress noted the "dramaticgrowth" of ojp and questioned its responsiveness to the needs of state , local , and tribal governments .

at issue was the apparent duplication of efforts between ojp's grant programs ( as well as grantprograms administered by other offices in doj ) and the various bureaus within ojp that werecharged with administering grants .

congress stressed the need for a management structure thatwould allow "for greater centralization of accountability and responsibility for obligation of all ojpfunds. .

 ( 2 ) to achieve thisgoal , congress required ojp to develop a plan that would streamline the various grant programsunder its jurisdiction .

 ( 3 ) a subsequent appropriations act further required ojp to submit a restructuring plan .

 ( 4 ) in addition , both the government accountability office ( gao ) and doj's office of inspectorgeneral ( oig ) have reported on issues facing ojp and the management of its grant programs .

bothgao and oig found that the current organizational structure of ojp may not be adequate to ensureits grant monitoring problems are resolved ( see discussion below ) .

at issue for congress is whether there needs to be an independent office that has oversightauthority over ojp's grant programs and the degree to which that office would enhance or duplicatethe efforts that are currently being performed by ojp's grant managers , the national institute ofjustice and the oig .

additionally , should a stand - alone office be responsible for providing state,local , and tribal governments , as well as nonprofit organizations with training on ojp and other dojgrant programs compliance ? .

and would such an office be duplicative of other functions alreadyexisting within doj ? .

this report opens with a description of the current makeup of ojp .

it then discusses someof the issues facing ojp that have been identified by gao and the oig that have led to the currentcongressional proposal to restructure the office .

a description of the violence against women anddepartment of justice reauthorization act of 2005 is discussed and analyzed within the context ofrestructuring ojp .

this report , however , does not discuss the violence against women act ( vawa ) provisions .

 ( 5 ) the report concludes with a discussion of possible issues and questions that could be raised withrespect to the act's restructuring ojp .

in 1984 , congress created ojp by passing the justice assistance act of 1984 .

 ( 6 ) the assistant attorneygeneral ( aag ) for justice programs oversees ojp , which has approximately 700 employees .

 ( 7 ) ojp is the main agency withindoj that awards grants to states , local government , and nonprofit organizations to help develop thecountry's capacity to prevent and control crime , improve criminal justice systems , increaseknowledge about crime and assist victims of crime .

 ( 8 ) ( there are other offices within doj that also award grants,specifically the violence against women office and the community oriented police office. ) .

the aag assures that ojp's policies reflect those of the president , the attorney general , andcongress .

 ( 9 ) the aagcoordinates the efforts of ojp's five bureaus and two program offices , ensuring ojp's mission is met .

ojp's five bureaus are the bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , the national institute of justice ( nij ) , the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , the bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , and the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) .

ojp's two program offices are the communitycapacity development office ( ccdo ) and the office of the police corps and law enforcementeducation .

doj's oig is responsible for oversight of doj activities and programs , including ojp'sadministration of several federal law enforcement assistance programs .

the oig audit divisionperforms "financial and performance audits of organizations , programs and functions within thedepartment. .

 ( 33 ) performance audits conducted by oig's audit division review economy , efficiency andprogrammatic issues .

the oig also has an evaluation and inspection division that provides the attorney general with an alternative method to the traditional audit for evaluating the effectivenessof doj programs and activities .

the evaluations and inspection division's work usually results inways for doj to streamline operations , eliminate unnecessary regulations , and minimize inefficientand ineffective procedures .

since the 1990s , both gao and oig have reported on the following issues facing ojp withrespect to the administration of its grant programs: lack of monitoring and grantee compliance ; lack of outcome - based evaluations ; failure to adequately review grant applications ; and failure to undertake more aggressive and timely corrective action on auditfindings .

 ( 34 ) .

the act authorizes appropriations for doj for fy2006 through fy2009 .

among otherthings , the act authorizes appropriations for the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program and codifies the community capacity development office ( ccdo ) .

the act alsoreauthorizes and restructures grant programs under the cops office as well as grant programs underthe vawo .

one of the more controversial titles of the act seeks to make doj grant programs moreefficient by creating an office of audit , assessment and management .

doj currently has twocomponents that are supposed to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of its programs: grantmanagers and the oig .

ojp grant managers , who are located in each of ojp's bureaus and programoffices , are charged with monitoring the grants made by their office and the oig is charged withpromoting economy and efficiency within doj .

 ( 52 ) the role of ojp grant managers and the oig in monitoring theeffectiveness and efficiency of doj programs is discussed in greater detail below .

in addition tocreating a new audit office , the act would also codify and restructure the ccdo .

while the administration has previously taken steps to restructure ojp , there remainoutstanding issues regarding ojp grant program evaluations and compliance monitoring .

at issuefor congress is whether ojp has done enough to fully correct the identified deficiencies in itsmanagement and oversight of its grant programs or whether another level of oversight is necessaryto streamline ojp grant programs and improve efficiency through greater monitoring of programs ? .

the gao and the oig reports raise questions about whether the current organizational structure ofojp is capable of properly managing its grant programs .

are grant managers at ojp accountable forthe performance of the grants they manage ? .

has ojp done enough to train grant managers toaddress the issues reported by the gao and the oig when monitoring their grants ? .

has theadministration taken the steps necessary to ensure that grantees are held accountable for submittingtheir reports and producing results ? .

in exercising its oversight role , congress may want to explore how federal funds are overseenand the findings of the oig and the gao are addressed .

the creation of the office of audit,assessment and management may raise questions about possible duplication of efforts .

the actappears to give the office of audit , assessment and management many of the same oversightresponsibilities that ojp's grant managers , nij and the oig are already charged with .

congress maychoose to consider the following: could proper oversight of federal funds be achieved with improvements toojp's current structure ? .

how will the office of audit , assessment and management responsibilitiesbe separate from those of ojp , the oig and nij ? .

does the creation of oaam provide the program evaluations that would bethe basis for a more fundamental realignment of ojp grant programs as well as improve compliancewith grant program requirements ? .

would a stand - alone community capacity development office ( ccdo ) maderesponsible exclusively for providing state , local , and tribal governments , as well as non - profitorganizations with training on ojp and other doj grant programs compliance be separate from thosefunctions already being provided by other entities ? .

