the american battle monuments commission ( abmc ) is responsible for the maintenance and construction of u.s. monuments and memorials commemorating the achievements in battle of u.s. armed forces since the nation's entry into world war i ; the erection of monuments and markers by u.s. citizens and organizations in foreign countries ; and the design , construction , and maintenance of permanent military cemetery memorials in foreign countries .

the commission maintains 24 military memorial cemeteries and 25 monuments , memorials , and markers in 15 countries , including three memorials on u.s. soil .

the abmc was responsible for the planning and construction of the world war ii memorial on the mall in washington , dc .

though the national park service assumed responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the memorial at its dedication , the abmc retains a fiduciary responsibility for the remaining public contributions given for its construction .

the abmc has undertaken the construction of an interpretive center at the normandy american cemetery , normandy , france , to commemorate the world war ii allied invasion of france on june 6 , 1944 , and the subsequent land battles in europe .

the commission is scheduled to open the facility on june 6 , 2007 .

the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims was established by the veterans' judicial review act of 1988 .

the court is an independent judicial tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the board of veterans' appeals .

it has the authority to decide all relevant questions of law ; interpret constitutional , statutory , and regulatory provisions ; and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an action by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

it is authorized to compel action by the va .

it is authorized to hold unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful and set aside decisions , findings , conclusions , rules and regulations issued or adopted by the department of veterans affairs or the board of veterans' appeals .

the court currently occupies leased facilities near judiciary square in the district of columbia and is searching for a permanent location .

the court's major operational initiative is its transition to an electronic case filing system , which is also funded through this appropriation .

the secretary of the army is responsible for the administration , operation and maintenance of arlington national cemetery and the soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery .

in addition to its principal function as a national cemetery , arlington is the site of approximately 3,100 non - funeral ceremonies each year and has approximately 4,000,000 visitors annually .

the armed forces retirement home account provides funds to operate and maintain the armed forces retirement home in washington , dc ( also known as the united states soldiers' and airmen's home ) , and the armed forces retirement home in gulfport , mississippi ( originally located in philadelphia , pa , and known as the united states naval home ) .

these two facilities provide long - term housing and medical care for approximately 1,600 needy veterans .

the appropriation is not drawn from the general treasury , but rather comes from a special trust fund that is maintained through gifts , bequests , and a $0.50 per month assessment on the pay of active duty enlisted military personnel and warrant officers .

the gulfport campus , encompassing a 19-story living accommodation and medical facility tower , was severely damaged by hurricane katrina at the end of august , 2005 , and is not currently in use .

four hundred fourteen of the 583 residents then occupying the facility were transferred to the washington , dc , location immediately after the storm .

appendix a .

consolidated funding tables appendix b .

additional resources budget crs report rl30002 , a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 98-720 , manual on the federal budget process , by [author name scrubbed] and allen schick ( pdf ) .

selected websites house committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.house.gov / senate committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.senate.gov / house committee on armed services http: / / www.house.gov / hasc / senate committee on armed services http: / / armed - services.senate.gov / house committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.house.gov / senate committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.senate.gov / commission on review of overseas military facility structure of the united states ( overseas basing commission ) http: / / www.obc.gov / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml crs multimedia library http: / / www.crs.gov / products / multimedia / multimedialibrary.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov / defense base closure and realignment commission ( brac commission ) http: / / www.brac.gov government accountability office http: / / www.gao.gov / .

