on june 22 , 2006 , the senate appropriations committee , during markup of its fy2007 agriculture spending measure , adopted by voice vote an amendment ( section 755 of h.r .

5384 ) to facilitate travel related to licensed sales of agricultural and medical goods to cuba .

there is no similar provision in the agriculture appropriations bill passed by the house .

on june 14 , 2006 , the house by voice vote approved an amendment to prohibit the use of appropriated funds to enforce a u.s. department of treasury regulation prescribing how sales of u.s. agricultural products to cuba are to be paid .

this provision is included as section 950 of h.r .

5576 , the transportation - treasury appropriations act for fy2007 .

this rule as issued in february 2005 by treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) , which administers the financial and related rules governing u.s. agricultural export sales to cuba .

it clarified the meaning of the term "payment of cash in advance. .

it requires that payment be received by the exporter or the seller's agent prior to the goods being shipped from the u.s. port rather than before title and control is transferred to the cuban buyer .

this provision is identical to one that both the house and the senate included in the fy2006 transportation - treasury appropriations bill , which was dropped by conferees in response to a veto threat ( for background , see "legislative developments — 109 th congress — debate over cash in advance payment definition" ) .

falling agricultural exports and declining commodity prices in the late 1990s led farm groups and agribusiness firms to urge the executive branch to drop , and calls for congress to pass legislation to exempt , food from u.s. economic sanctions against certain countries .

the clinton administration on april 28 , 1999 , announced it would lift prohibitions on u.s. commercial sales of most agricultural commodities and food products to three countries — iran , libya , and sudan .

moreover , it indicated that it would not include these products in announcing future sanctions on other countries .

the administration's decision reflected its view that food should not be used as a foreign policy tool and officials' acknowledgment that u.s. sanctions policy had hurt the u.s. farm economy .

on july 27 , 1999 , the u.s. department of treasury issued country - specific export licensing regulations to exempt commercial sales of food and medical products by u.s. companies that meet specified conditions and safeguards to iran , libya , and sudan .

licenses are issued by the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

regulations issued june 19 , 2000 , to implement a white house decision announced in september 1999 now permit sales of agricultural products to north korea without an export license .

licensed agricultural sales to cuba under a policy announced in may 1999 were restricted only to private and non - governmental entities ( but were broadened under a statutory change that went into effect in july 2001 ) .

for the two years that the clinton administration's policy was in effect , treasury approved licenses that resulted in u.s. sales of corn to iran , durum wheat to libya , and hard red winter wheat to sudan .

also , president clinton , in issuing executive orders in 1999 to impose u.s. economic sanctions on serbia and the taliban in afghanistan , specifically exempted commercial sales of food and medical products from prohibitions imposed on all u.s. exports to these destinations .

congressional efforts to expand this policy to also cover sales to cuba and to remove uncertainties in executive branch implementation of u.s. sanctions policy resulted in passage of the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 ( title ix of h.r .

5426 , as enacted by p.l .

106-387 on october 28 , 2000 ; referred to below as tsra ) .

tsra codified the lifting of u.s. sanctions on commercial sales of food , agricultural commodities , and medical products to iran , libya , north korea , and sudan , and extended this policy to cuba ( see below ) .

such sales are now subject to export licensing procedures laid out in administrative regulations .

in a significant policy change , congress has future veto power on a president's proposal to impose a unilateral agricultural or medical sanction .

farm organizations , agricultural commodity associations , and agribusiness firms , since the 1980 grain embargo on the soviet union , have favored changing u.s. policy to exempt export sales of agricultural commodities , food products , and agricultural inputs from the broad economic sanctions currently imposed on targeted countries .

they argued that prohibitions hurt only u.s. farmers and business , undermine this country's reputation as a "reliable supplier," and do not change targeted countries' behavior .

in recent years , these groups joined with firms in the pharmaceutical and manufacturing sectors to call for a comprehensive review of the economic impact of these sanctions and for limits on the executive branch's use of sanctions to restrict trade .

opposition to exempting sales of agricultural commodities and food products from u.s. sanctions policy has been somewhat more diffuse .

opponents argued that current law gives the president sufficient flexibility to permit food to be shipped for humanitarian reasons , and that u.s. foodstuffs , if sold , could be misused by foreign governments or not made available to those in need .

some objected to the loosening of trade restrictions with certain countries , such as cuba .

coming largely from the foreign policy and defense community , they viewed sanctions as a "legitimate and effective" policy tool , and drew little distinction between prohibiting sales of food and prohibiting exports of all other products .

though sales to iran , libya , and sudan under the clinton administration's 1999 exemption policy were small relative to their total agricultural imports , u.s. farmers , commodity groups , and agribusiness eyed cuba as a promising market .

calling for a broadening of u.s. policy to exempt food from sanctions in cuba , they argued that u.s. agriculture had lost out to foreign competitors in making sales to a sizable , nearby market .

total cuban agricultural imports averaged about $800 million annually in the 2000-2002 period , according to the food and agriculture organization .

leading commodities imported in 2002 were rice , chicken meat and products , wheat and flour , whole dry milk , lentils and corn .

food and agricultural imports in recent years have represented 17% of total cuban merchandise imports , and have declined as a share of total imports since the early 1990s .

top suppliers in 2002 ( as cuba took advantage of the u.s. embargo exemption under tsra ) based on preliminary data were canada , the united states , france , china , and brazil .

in addition , cuba's tourism industry reportedly imports an additional $100 to $250 million in food products to cover the needs of visiting tourists .

u.s. agricultural interests argued that exempting agricultural exports from the u.s. embargo on cuba would result in an opening that yields substantial sales .

various studies projected annual sales could range from $100 million to over $1 billion , depending on the time frame looked at and the extent of liberalization that occurred in u.s. - cuban trade .

these interests also held that such a policy change will give u.s. exporters ( particularly of rice and wheat ) a competitive edge if cuba takes advantage of its proximity to buy from its nearest supplier in order to save the cost of transporting commodities and food from its more distant current suppliers ( france , canada , argentina ) .

cuba reportedly could save up to $100 million in transportation costs if officials decided to buy primarily from u.s. agricultural exporters .

expectations in 2000 of large immediate u.s. sales to the island were viewed as unrealistic , according to other analysts .

analysts pointed to cuba's limited financial resources , its reliance on barter and credit transactions to finance agricultural imports , its denial of access to u.s. government programs and to all u.s. public and private financing , and the possible application of other restrictive rules under current embargo regulations that could hamper such sales .

they also suggested that it was uncertain that cuba would purchase from the united states , pointing out there may be pressure to maintain trade ties with some of its "socialist partners" supplying such key commodities as rice , as well as resistance to relying on just one single supplier .

some also observed that the cuban government may not have been prepared for , or interested in taking advantage of , this possible u.s. trade opening .

top cuban officials , including castro himself , initially rejected the enacted measure .

they strongly criticized its financing , travel , and other prohibitions as "unworkable" and "insulting. .

they viewed it as a tightening rather than an easing of the embargo , and stated that cuba will not buy any u.s. product with such conditions in place .

members introduced several bills and amendments in 2001 and 2002 to revise u.s. policy on how food products are handled in sanctions regimes .

most sought to repeal the export financing and travel prohibitions imposed on cuba by tsra ; conferees dropped one such provision included in the senate's 2002 farm bill .

the bush administration continued to reiterate that any bills with provisions that relax the cuban trade embargo would be vetoed .

two bills revisited the broader issue of the parameters and process to be followed to exempt agricultural sales from u.s. sanctions policy .

bush administration efforts to amend tsra in light of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks were reflected in compromise language included in anti - terrorism legislation .

proposals varied in approach and in scope .

h.r .

173 and section 335 of s. 1731 ( the senate agriculture committee's farm bill ) simply would have repealed the prohibition on private u.s. financing of agricultural sales to cuba .

seven measures ( section 2 ( h ) of h.r .

174 ; h.r .

797 / s. 402 ; section 3 ( f ) of h.r .

798 / s. 400 ; titles i and ii of h.r .

2138 / s. 1017 ; section 1 ( f ) of h.r .

2662 ; s. 171 ; and s. 239 ) were broader in their coverage , proposing to drop 3 provisions in tsra .

these are ( 1 ) the requirement that eligible exports to cuba be licensed in advance , ( 2 ) the prohibitions on u.s. government assistance / financing of food and medical product sales and on private financing of agricultural sales to cuba , and ( 3 ) the prohibition on tourist travel to cuba .

some bills would have repealed specific provisions ; s. 239 broadly stated that irrespective of tsra , "the prohibition or restriction on trade or financial transactions with cuba shall not apply" to the export of agricultural and medical products , or to travel related to the sale or delivery of these products , to cuba .

additional language found only in h.r .

797 / s. 402 ; h.r .

798 / s. 400 ; and s. 239 effectively would have repealed the current restriction that ships entering cuba cannot enter a u.s. port for six months .

this would allow such vessels to transport u.s. agricultural and medical shipments to cuba .

some bills would have retained restrictions or prohibitions on agricultural / medical product exports to cuba to meet broader export control and national security objectives .

in most of these bills , the referenced provisions were part of broader legislative efforts to modify or terminate some or all aspects of the u.s. embargo on cuba .

among other recommendations offered to change u.s. policy toward cuba , the bipartisan house cuba working group on may 15 , 2002 , proposed ( 1 ) allowing the private financing of u.s. agricultural and medical exports , and ( 2 ) repealing the statutory ban on any ship that visits cuba from calling on an american port for 180 days .

the bush administration "strongly opposed" the senate - passed farm bill provision ( section 355 of s. 1731 ) that would have repealed the prohibition on private u.s. financing of u.s. sales of agricultural commodities to cuba .

the administration based its stance on its view that cuba continues to deny basic civil rights to its citizens and rejects global efforts to combat terrorism .

reflecting this perspective , senator bob smith during floor debate offered an amendment to require the president to certify to congress that cuba's government is not involved in supporting acts of international terrorism before the cuba - specific prohibition is repealed .

a second - degree amendment offered by senator torricelli to also require presidential certification that all convicted felons living in cuba have been returned to the united states before the prohibition is removed fell , when the senate on december 18 , 2001 tabled the smith amendment ( 61-33 ) .

the senate provision was a contentious issue in the subsequent farm bill conference held to resolve differences with the house measure , which did not contain a comparable provision .

with reports surfacing that the house leadership would make the final decision on this matter , representative dooley ( one conferee from the house agriculture committee ) on april 17 , 2002 , offered a motion to instruct house conferees to accept the senate position .

following debate on the motion on april 18 , the house on a roll call vote of 273-143 agreed to this motion to instruct ( non - binding on conferees ) on april 23 .

in final action , senate conferees receded to the house position , leaving the private financing prohibition in place .

representative jerry moran on july 23 , 2002 , proposed an indirect approach to relax the prohibitions and stipulations on private commercial agricultural and medical product sales to cuba .

his amendment ( section 646 to h.r .

5120 , fy2003 treasury appropriations ) , accepted by voice vote , would have effectively cut off funding for one year to treasury's ofac for administering only those tasks involving the private financing prohibition and current shipping restrictions , among other cuban embargo regulations that apply to agricultural and medical product sales .

it would not apply to tsra's licensing requirements that cover agricultural sales to cuba , because they are administered by commerce's bis which is not funded by the treasury appropriations bill .

final action on this measure did not occur before congress adjourned .

in the 108 th congress , house and senate leadership dropped the ofac provision in h.j.res .

2 , the omnibus spending bill that also funded treasury operations in fy2003 , in sending this measure to the floor for action in january 2003 .

on may 20 , 2002 , in a major cuba policy speech , president bush reiterated his opposition to any repeal of the prohibition on private financing of agricultural sales , stating it "would just be a foreign aid program in disguise , which would benefit the current regime. .

bush stated he would veto legislation that relaxes the embargo in any way until the cuban government introduced a series of specified reforms .

secretary of state powell and treasury secretary o'neill followed up in a july 11 , 2002 , letter to house appropriators to state they would recommend a presidential veto of any bill that eased restrictions on trade and travel to cuba .

one measure seeking to amend tsra was broader in the range of countries to be covered .

s. 171 would have repealed the tsra's prohibition on u.s. government assistance and financing of sales not just with respect to cuba , but also with respect to iran , libya , north korea , and sudan .

three legislative initiatives to address broad u.s. policy on the issue of exempting agricultural exports from export control or sanctions regimes .

title iv of s. 149 , as introduced , proposed to exempt agricultural commodities , medicine , and medical supplies from export controls imposed for foreign policy reasons .

language specified that this exemption would not apply to any such items subject to national security export controls imposed under title ii of this bill or listed on the u.s .

munitions list , nor to their export to a country against which an embargo is in effect under the trading with the enemy act ( cuba and north korea ) .

second , during senate banking committee markup on march 22 , 2001 , all of title iv was deleted .

concerned the executive branch might exercise the bill's broad authorities in ways that undercut tsra's intent to exempt food and medical products from unilateral sanctions , senator roberts succeeded in including language in a manager's amendment that addressed this issue .

third , section 603 ( as adopted by the senate in early september 2001 ) stated that s. 149 does not authorize export controls on food for national security purposes .

it also stated that such controls cannot be used to restrict food exports for foreign policy reasons , unless congress in advance approves such action following tsra's provisions , and explicitly stated that nothing in s. 149 authorized the exercise of authority to restrict agricultural and medical product exports contrary to any tsra provision .

the package of anti - terrorism measures ( p.l .

107-56 ; h.r .

3162 ) signed into law on october 26 , 2001 amended some tsra provisions .

the compromise struck between the bush administration and key senators modified one circumstance under which tsra's food / medical exemption would not apply , codified that agricultural and medical product sales to the taliban - controlled area of afghanistan are subject to tsra's export licensing requirements that apply to cuba and to governments of other countries determined to be sponsors of international terrorism , and expressly allows eligible export sales to be made also to any other entity in syria or north korea without the need for an exporter to secure a license .

other provisions stated that no tsra provision limits the application of criminal or civil penalties on those who unlawfully engage in the export of agricultural and medical products to designated foreign organizations , groups , persons , or entities , nor affects the statutory prohibitions against providing material support or resources to designated foreign terrorist organizations .

members introduced seven measures , and offered amendments to spending bills , to relax tsra's cuba - applicable provisions in the 2003-2004 period .

conferees dropped two provisions in fy2005 spending bills that would have relaxed tsra restrictions .

none of the measures introduced pertinent to cuba were enacted during the 108 th congress .

h.r .

187 proposed to repeal tsra's prohibition on the use of private financing for agricultural and medical product exports to cuba .

h.r .

188 and s. 403 were broader in scope , repealing the private financing prohibition , ban on travel , and licensing requirement provisions , among numerous provisions intended to end the u.s. trade embargo on cuba .

h.r .

1698 and h.r .

3422 would have repealed or superseded all tsra provisions that apply to cuba , respectively .

h.r .

4457 / s. 2449 proposed to terminate tsra's restrictions with respect to cuba ( among other features of the u.s. embargo on cuba ) unless congress passes a resolution to renew them .

opponents of liberalizing trade with cuba introduced h.r .

3670 to penalize u.s. exporters and others who sell products or services to cuba if such trade is explicitly conditioned on their lobbying congress to remove trade and travel restrictions on cuba .

the bill's intent is to address a u.s. farm organization reportedly agreeing in a memorandum of understanding to press congress to engage with cuba and to seek repeal of these restrictions in return for cuban purchases of $15 million worth of agricultural products from indiana - based businesses .

other members indicated their intent to introduce related bills , or offer amendments , to amend tsra to ( 1 ) allow farm machinery sales to cuba on a cash - only basis , and ( 2 ) repeal u.s. travel restrictions ( viewed by u.s. agricultural groups among others as a way for cuba to generate dollar earnings to purchase u.s. food products ) .

in mid - november 2003 , conferees on the fy2004 agriculture appropriations measure ( h.r .

2673 ) , part of the fy2004 omnibus spending package , dropped a senate amendment ( section 760 of s. 1427 ) that would have facilitated the process of securing permission to travel to cuba under tsra to promote and sell u.s. agricultural and medical products there .

the amendment was added by voice vote on july 17 , 2003 , during senate appropriations committee markup of this spending bill ; senator dorgan's intent was to address such situations as ofac's decision in june 2003 to deny the license application of a firm seeking to organize a food and agribusiness exhibition in havana in january 2004 .

the white house opposed this provision , arguing that it would weaken current sanctions imposed against the cuban government .

its position , laid out in its "statement of administration policy" on s. 1427 , is that "travel to cuba should be further policed to ensure that those traveling [there] are doing so for legal purposes and not simply using legal categories to disguise travel for other purposes. .

an identical provision was included in the fy2005 agriculture appropriations bill ( section 776 of s. 2803 ) .

introduced by senator dorgan during markup , this amendment was adopted by the senate appropriations agriculture subcommittee by voice vote on september 8 .

language would require the treasury's ofac to give "general licenses" for u.s. exporters and others seeking to travel there on eligible business .

current policy requires them to apply for a "specific license" for each prospective trip .

amendment supporters argued that the bush administration has used the rules to delay or to refuse to issue travel licenses to those seeking to make farm sales in cuba .

seeking to head off a possible similar initiative in the house in june when its agriculture appropriations was considered , the administration stated the bill would be vetoed if this provision was included .

administration officials argued the current licensing process "helps to ensure that travel to cuba serves appropriate purposes and that sales to cuba are done within the boundaries of the law. .

just before conferees completed work in november 2004 , the director of the white house office of management and budget signaled that including in the omnibus appropriations measure ( h.r .

4818 ) any provision to weaken existing sanctions against cuba ( such as restrictions on commercial exports of agricultural and medical goods ) would result in a presidential veto .

in final action , appropriators dropped this provision from the bill .

an amendment to the fy2005 transportation / treasury spending bill ( section 649 of h.r .

5025 ) , adopted by the house during floor debate on september 22 , 2004 , would have prohibited the use of appropriated funds to implement any u.s. - imposed sanction on private commercial sales of agricultural commodities to cuba .

representative waters , its sponsor , stated that tsra's financing restrictions on these sales "make trade ... unnecessarily expensive , bureaucratic and complicated" and argued that with their removal , small businesses would be in a better position to increase u.s. market share .

an opponent acknowledged that since u.s. agricultural sales are now legal , exporters have indicated they like to be paid under the current policy in place .

allowing financing for such sales would simply "reward the dictatorship," he argued .

conferees also dropped this provision from the same fy2005 omnibus spending package considered during the november 2004 lame duck session .

concerned that some reported late payments from cuba constituted a form of financing and possibly violated tsra's financing prohibition , treasury's ofac on november 12 , 2004 , instructed u.s. banks to stop all transfers of cuban payments to u.s. exporters while it investigated recent sales transactions .

ofac subsequently released some payments on a case - by - case basis , which allowed banks to forward funds to exporters .

the bush administration also indicated plans to announce new rules on the payment issue by late december 2004 .

in letters to the secretary of treasury and secretary of state in late november and early december 2004 , some members of congress questioned or expressed opposition to the administration's plans .

they noted that the change being considered to require a seller to receive payment before a shipment leaves a u.s. port would be much more restrictive than current practice and would "impede" agricultural sales to cuba .

one senator argued that a more restrictive rule would constitute a new sanction that in itself would require congressional approval under tsra provisions in order to take effect .

separately , a coalition of agricultural groups and businesses in a december 8 , 2004 , letter to president bush stated that u.s. exporters have "followed explicitly both the letter and spirit of the law" in selling food products to cuba .

they argued the proposed restrictive guideline would "run counter to the norms of international trade," which simply require payment to be received prior to the shipment's release to the buyer ( eg , payment before transfer of title to the buyer , even if the ship is docked in havana ) .

to signal continued opposition to the administration's intent to change the timing of payment for u.s. agricultural product sales to cuba and to amend certain tsra provisions , some members of the house and senate introduced identical measures ( h.r .

719 / s. 328 ) in early february 2005 .

section 5 would clarify that "payment of cash in advance" means payment by the purchaser ( eg , the cuban government ) and the seller's receipt of such payment , before the product's title and control is transferred and released , respectively , to the purchaser .

h.r .

1339 / s. 634 would only redefine this term , using language identical to section 5 in h.r .

719 / s. 328 .

with treasury's publication on february 25 , 2005 , of the rule to require payment before shipment from a u.s. port ( with an effective date of march 25 ) , some members responded they would explore all available options to change this policy or to block senate consideration of significant treasury nominees .

one legislative initiative to accomplish this ( in s.amdt .

281 and s.amdt .

282 ) is pending in senate consideration of s. 600 ( foreign affairs authorization act for fy2006 and fy2007 ) .

also added as an amendment to the fy2006 transportation - treasury appropriations bill ( section 945 of h.r .

3058 as passed by the house , and section 721 as passed by the senate ) was a prohibition on using funds to implement ofac's rule .

with the white house threatening to veto the bill if included , conferees dropped this provision in the enacted measure .

this occurred after almost 40 house members urged conferees to retain it .

five of the 23 senate conferees signed the conference report , noting their opposition to dropping the cuba trade language .

on june 14 , 2006 , identical language was added by voice vote as an amendment to the fy2007 transportation - treasury appropriations bill ( section 950 of h.r .

5576 ) .

farm groups and agribusiness firms in a letter to four house members on june 27 , 2005 , called for restoring the option to allow receipt of payment before title is transferred .

they presented data on the decline in u.s. agricultural sales this year compared to 2004 because of the ofac rule , and detailed the loss of sales of rice and other commodities to such other countries as vietnam and china .

ofac's announcement on july 29 , 2005 , allowing for the shipment of goods once the seller's agent ( if located in a third country ) receives payment from the cuban buyer .

this could make it slightly easier for some u.s. sellers to make sales , according to some analysts .

others question whether this clarification will make any difference .

opponents of the rule have signaled their intent to continue to work with congress to overturn it .

this slight shift in policy prompted senator baucus to lift his hold on six treasury nominees , who were then confirmed by the senate later that day .

though exports in the first four months after ofac's rule change ( april to july 2005 ) were below 2004 levels , exports since august 2005 have been higher in all months but one compared to year - earlier levels .

this may be attributable to ofac's rule modification in late july 2005 and a reported willingness by alimport to work with u.s. exporters under these new payment procedures .

for more information , please see the following crs product: crs report rl32730 , cuba: issues for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

