on june 28 , 2006 , the bush administration announced its proposal to sell 36 f - 16 c / d block50 / 52 falcon combat aircraft to pakistan at an estimated case value of $3 billion .

three other f - 16related sales to pakistan were also proposed on june 28 .

these sales include f16 a / b mid - lifeupdate modification kits to upgrade existing pakistani f - 16 aircraft bought during presidentreagan's first term ; engine modifications and structural upgrades for existing f - 16s , and variousmissiles , munitions and associated hardware to be utilized on the pakistani f - 16s .

 ( 1 ) some believe that these salesare partly an effort to reward the pakistani government for the role it has played in support ofu.s. - led anti - terrorism efforts , and this consideration is noted in the text of the formal notificationof the f - 16 sales .

from the date ( june 28 , 2006 ) when congress was formally notified of the proposed f - 16sales to pakistan , congress has 30 calendar days within which to review the proposed sales , andexpress its will in accordance with statutory procedures set out in section 36 of the arms exportcontrol act ( aeca ) .

should congress chose to block the pakistani sales , it must act to do so withinthe prescribed 30 days through the enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval .

otherwise , thepresident is authorized to proceed with the sales .

 ( 2 ) .

it is currently unclear what long - term effects a potential sale of combat aircraft to south asiamight have on u.s. political relations with pakistan and india , or the political relationship betweenthem .

the bush administration's decision to resume f - 16 sales to pakistan after a 16-year hiatuswas first announced at a march 2005 press conference by unnamed senior state department officials .

at that conference , the administration unveiled a "new strategy" for south asia that includes anintention to help india "become a major world power in the 21st century. .

administration officialsalso said the united states welcomes india's interest in the possible purchase of f - 16 or f / a - 18warplanes and is ready to discuss the sale of "transformative systems in areas such as command andcontrol , early warning , and missile defense. .

 ( 5 ) two days before the state department's march 2005 statements,twenty members of the house wrote to president bush urging him to not license the sale of f - 16aircraft to pakistan as such a sale would "undermine our long - term strategic interests in south asia"and "squander an opportunity" to continue building positive relations with india .

 ( 6 ) meanwhile , indian primeminister manmohan singh expressed "great disappointment" at the u.s. decision , saying the move"could have negative consequences for india's security environment," but he later softened hiscriticism and welcomed an apparent u.s. willingness to expand cooperation with india .

fifteenmonths later , when the bush administration formally notified congress of a potential sale of f - 16sto pakistan , an indian external affairs ministry statement said the step "is not conducive toimproving ties between india and pakistan. .

 ( 7 ) justifications for the decision to resume f - 16 sales include a u.s. interest that pakistan "feelsecure" and a perception that a substantive u.s. defense relationship with both pakistan and indiawill stabilize "the balance" between them .

in june 2006 , the white house said the planned f - 16 sale"demonstrates our commitment to a long - term relationship with pakistan. .

 ( 8 ) some believe the decision isa reward to president gen. musharraf and the pakistani military for their post - 9 / 11 cooperation withu.s. - led counterterrorism efforts , and see renewed exports as potentially increasing u.s. leveragein islamabad while eroding anti - american sentiments there .

such leverage could include increasedpakistani cooperation in the areas of counterterrorism and nonproliferation .

 ( 9 ) it may be that the timing ofthe june 2006 notification was influenced by developments in u.s. - india relations .

washington andnew delhi are moving forward with a landmark civil nuclear cooperation initiative .

islamabadclaims the initiative will cause a power imbalance in the region and it repeatedly has requested asimilar arrangement with washington .

the bush administration rejects such requests and also hasnot moved to provide pakistan with a defense cooperation pact similar to that made with india in2005 .

 ( 10 ) some analysts see the decision to resume f - 16 sales to pakistan as disruptive of regionalstability and efforts to resolve disputes there .

this concern was articulated by india's external affairsminister in april 2005: "[m]ilitary assistance , particularly when unrelated to counterterrorismefforts , conveys a political signal both within pakistan and vis - a - vis india - pakistan relations .

... itconsequently has repercussions for our dialogue that is currently at a sensitive stage. .

 ( 11 ) some in congress voicesimilarly grounded opposition in more explicit terms: at a june 2005 house hearing on u.s. southasia policy , one lawmaker said , "f - 16s is how you fight india .

it's not how you fight terrorists .

thisis outrageous. .

the sentiment was echoed by several other members in attendance .

however , twonongovernmental experts appearing before the house panel approved of such sales as importantsymbolic gestures that would likely result in much - needed improvement in u.s. - pakistanrelations .

 ( 12 ) several critics have contended that renewed f - 16 sales may strengthen nondemocratic forcesin islamabad .

though the bush administration has made spreading democracy a cornerstone of itsforeign policy , pakistan continues to be governed by an army general who came to power througha military coup , and the state department has noted that pakistan's democratic institutions remainweak .

 ( 13 ) in h.rept.109-486 ( june 2006 ) , the house appropriations committee expressed concern about pakistan's "lackof progress on improving democratic governance and rule of law. .

furthermore , some pakistanicommentators wonder why islamabad plans to spend billions of dollars on weapons of allegedlyquestionable utility while the country's social services and infrastructure are in dire need ofimprovements .

 ( 14 ) thisperspective gained additional traction in the wake of pakistan's catastrophic october 2005earthquake , when islamabad chose to postpone and eventually scale down the number of f - 16s itwould seek to purchase .

as noted above , congressional concerns about pakistan's nuclear proliferation activities arelongstanding .

some opponents of resumed f - 16 sales argue that the united states should notprovide sophisticated weapons to a country that has been a source of significant horizontal nuclearweapons proliferation .

legislation introduced which reflects this concern in the 109th congressincludes h.r .

1553 and s. 12 ( sec .

232 ) , which prohibit aid or militaryequipment to pakistan unless the president certifies that pakistan is cooperating with u.s. nuclearnon - proliferation efforts .

in 2004 , pakistani metallurgist abdul qadeer khan , known as the founderof pakistan's nuclear weapons program and a national hero , confessed to involvement in an illicitnuclear smuggling network that sold crucial nuclear weapons technology and uranium - enrichmentmaterials to north korea , libya , and iran .

to date , pakistan refuses to allow any direct access tokhan by non - pakistani investigators and , in may 2006 , the islamabad government declared the khaninvestigation "closed. .

some in congress remain skeptical , however , and a house panelsubsequently held a hearing to further discuss the issue .

at that hearing , non - governmental expertsurged that u.s. and international investigators be given direct access to khan , in particular to learnmore about assistance given to iran's controversial nuclear program .

 ( 15 ) .

the importance of the proposed transfer of new f - 16s and the upgrade of pakistan's legacyf - 16s can be viewed in the context of pakistan's conventional military confrontation with india , itsnuclear confrontation with that country , and its struggle with terrorists and insurgents .

india dominated the air when it last clashed with pakistan in 1971 .

according to someaccounts , pakistani air strikes were largely ineffective , and air support of ground forces was"non - existent. .

 ( 16 ) indiacurrently enjoys a significant quantitative advantage over pakistan's air force .

it has 21 more fightersquadrons than pakistan and a larger number ( 124 ) of modern aircraft .

india operates an aircraftcarrier with short - take off and vertical landing fighters .

in terms of quality , the f - 16 block 50 / 52aircraft appears to be roughly equivalent to india's most advanced combat aircraft , the russian - madesu - 30 .

 ( 17 ) unlike pakistan , however , india supports its combat aircraft with aerial refueling , electroniccountermeasures , and modern airborne warning and control aircraft .

 ( 18 ) the sale of 36 f - 16s topakistan and the upgrade of existing f - 16s would increase that country's number of modern combataircraft but would still not bring it close to parity with india .

if india were to add f - 16s or f / a - 18sto its inventory , the disparity in aviation capabilities between the two countries would grow evenmore .

some express concern that pakistan could use its new f - 16s to deliver nuclear weapons .

theoverall potential impact on nuclear deterrence and stability in south asia of additional pakistanif - 16s , however , appears unclear .

first , because the 32 f - 16s that pakistan already fields are believedto be nuclear capable , additional f - 16s don't appear to introduce new capabilities but may expandexisting ones .

second , pakistan also fields nuclear - capable ballistic missiles .

some believe thatballistic missiles add instability to the security equation because they are high priority targets , andconsequently the pressure to use them early in a conflict can be great .

 ( 19 ) thus , if additionalnuclear - capable f - 16s were to replace existing nuclear - capable ballistic missiles in pakistan'sarsenal , some may argue that additional f - 16s could reduce nuclear instability .

some suggest that pakistan could use f - 16s against terrorists and insurgents .

it appears thatf - 16s could be used in such operations , but they could also be considered "over - designed" for thesetasks .

the block 50 / 52 variant that is being proposed for export is the most advanced version of thef - 16 flown by u.s. military forces .

it incorporates advanced weapons and avionics for air - to - aircombat that appear unnecessary for counterinsurgency operations .

less expensive and lesssophisticated aircraft such as attack helicopters , unmanned aerial vehicles , and combat search andrescue aircraft would appear to have greater utility in combating insurgents and other non - state actorsthan supersonic fighter aircraft .

 ( 20 ) according to the indian defense minister , "the f - 16 and otherlethal weapons are not required for fighting terrorism and are used in full - fledged wars .

givenpakistan's track record , we fear that such weapons will be directed toward india. .

 ( 21 ) .

combat aircraft are considered "essential for conducting surprise attacks or initiatinglarge - scale offensive operations. .

 ( 22 ) therefore , the transfer of combat aircraft can be a significantpolicy decision , especially to a region with known tensions and territorial disputes .

the sale of f - 16 block 50 / 52 aircraft to pakistan , will upgrade its inventory of this fighter,but may not completely fulfill its perceived need for a highly advanced , current generation , combatfighter .

while financing the purchase of two different fighter aircraft could be problematic forpakistan , some in pakistan are reportedly concerned about the potential for future military salescutoffs by the u.s. given the history of difficulties pakistan has had with the united states overproliferation issues .

they argue against limiting future aircraft procurement to the united states .

further , the proposed sale of f - 16s appears to offer no opportunities for off - sets or co - productionwhich limits the long - term benefit to pakistan's aerospace industry .

consequently , pakistan continuesa relationship with china , including testing of china's advanced j - 10 fighter , and co - developmentwith china of the jf - 17 fighter .

pakistan has been negotiating a possible purchase of the swedishjas gripen multi - role fighter .

should the united states sell the f - 16 to pakistan , sweden wouldreportedly offer to sell the gripen .

thus , it seems unlikely that the united states will becomepakistan's principal supplier of advanced combat aircraft .

 ( 23 ) the reported u.s. willingness to sell f - 16s or f / a - 18s to india may mitigate that country'sdisappointment with any renewed u.s. arms sales to pakistan and neutralize any increase inpakistan's military capability .

india may also use the prospect of the purchase of u.s. fighters asleverage in negotiations with its primary military supplier , russia , to obtain more sophisticatedsystems , better financing , or additional licensed production options for its domestic defense industry .

should india choose to purchase u.s. fighters , it may seek not just the aircraft and support services,but some form of co - production or co - assembly options - - a prospect that would raise policyquestions for the united states regarding the release of military technology , and how suchinformation might be used by india .

this is particularly important given india's ambitions to developa significant aerospace production capability and its past and present aerospace acquisitions fromrussia , france , the united kingdom , and israel .

 ( 24 ) .

much of the commentary following the june 28th announcement centered on how a potentialsale of aircraft to pakistan , and possibly to india , would be beneficial to industry .

the potentialbenefits most frequently mentioned were extending the production life of u.s. aircraft with limiteddomestic prospects and improving u.s. industry's position vis - a - vis other rivals in an increasinglycompetitive military export market .

after decades of successful production , the f - 16 production lineappears to be approaching its end .

as currently projected , the f - 16 production line - - whichemploys approximately 5,000 workers - - could close in 2008 .

a sale of 36 or more f - 16s to pakistancould keep the line open for another year .

 ( 25 ) the larger prize , however , is a potential sale to india and the consequent opening of a marketlong - closed to u.s. industry .

india is seeking a larger number of combat aircraft than pakistan - - 126- - and has a much larger inventory of combat aircraft , approximately 700 , that it will eventually needto replace .

u.s. companies are contending with competitively priced russian and european aircraftfor a share of the global military aircraft market .

penetrating the indian market , and beatingeuropean competitors , could , many believe , help u.s. companies compete in other aircraft exportmarkets .

also , it is argued that aircraft sales to india could prove a "tip of the iceberg" for all typesof military exports to that country .

india has embarked on a long - term plan to upgrade its armamentsand strengthen its military , and some say that "high on its list are early warning and missile defensesystems , nuclear fuel and technologies and space - related technologies. .

 ( 26 ) questions remain about the potential domestic u.s. benefit from these prospective sales .

while preserving u.s. jobs appears clearly beneficial , the number of jobs preserved and the valueof those jobs remains unclear .

india would likely demand that the majority of aircraft be producedin india .

this would increase jobs in india and reduce jobs in the united states .

also , some say notall jobs are equal in terms of their benefit to the u.s. industrial base .

producing for india andpakistan the exact same aircraft that is currently being produced in the united states would preserveassembly line - type jobs .

many argue this would do little to advance innovation or make u.s.industry more competitive .

only if the exported aircraft require noteworthy design and engineeringchanges , they say , would these skills be developed to benefit the of industrial base .

