the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states and the subsequent attacks on european countries such as the united kingdom and spain have prompted both sides of the atlantic to reinvigorate their respective efforts to ensure homeland security and combat terrorism .

however , u.s. and european approaches to these issues differ .

while the united states has embarked on a wholesale reorganization of its domestic security and border protection institutions , european countries have largely preferred to work within their existing institutional architectures to combat terrorism and respond to other security challenges and disasters , both natural and man - made .

this report examines homeland security and counterterrorist measures in six selected european countries: belgium , france , germany , italy , spain , and the united kingdom .

none of these european countries currently has a single ministry or department equivalent to the u.s. department of homeland security .

in most of these countries , responsibility for different aspects of homeland security and counterterrorism is scattered across several ministries , and inter - governmental cooperation plays a key role in addressing threats and challenges to domestic security .

in some countries , such as the uk , germany , and belgium , responsibility for homeland security affairs is also split among federal and regional or state governments .

the approaches of many european countries to protecting their publics and infrastructure have grown out of decades of experience in dealing with domestic terrorist groups , such as the ira in the uk , the basque terrorist movement eta in spain , or the anarchist red army faction in germany .

even after the terrorist attacks of the last few years , european countries have continued to view combating terrorism primarily as a task for law enforcement and intelligence authorities .

some critics suggest that many european countries have been slow to bolster domestic protection efforts , reduce societal vulnerabilities , strengthen border controls and transport security , and push the defense of european territory as far out as possible .

others contend that european governments have sought to integrate counterterrorism and preparedness programs into existing emergency management efforts , thereby providing greater flexibility to respond to a wide range of security challenges with often limited personnel and financial resources .

european parliamentary systems influence government decisions regarding homeland security policy and budgetary priorities .

in the uk , for example , the government has a parliamentary majority and as a result , the government's proposed budgetary levels are not usually contested in the same way as they often are in the united states .

a strong executive in france largely directs homeland security efforts with minimal parliamentary oversight .

spending priorities in the different countries vary , but most have devoted increased funds over the last several years to intelligence and law enforcement efforts against terrorism .

funding for measures to strengthen transport security , improve emergency preparedness and response , counter chem - bio incidents , and protect critical national infrastructure are more difficult to determine and compare among the countries , given that responsibility for these various issues is often spread among the budgets of different government ministries .

all of the countries discussed in this report are members of the european union ( eu ) , which in the years since september 11 has sought to boost police and judicial cooperation among its 25 member states , bolster external border controls , and harmonize immigration and asylum policies .

some analysts believe , however , that the eu should take a more active role in ensuring european homeland security , given the eu's largely open borders and the accession of central european countries that border less stable regions such as the balkans .

they also argue that more extensive eu efforts to coordinate homeland security affairs would help bring order and greater coherence to the myriad of government institutions engaged in protecting domestic security within each eu member state , and encourage common security and budgetary priorities among all members .

some have proposed that the eu should establish at a minimum a "homeland security czar" similar to its recently appointed counterterrorism coordinator .

other experts are skeptical that member states would be willing to cede greater sovereignty to the union in the area of domestic security , which is central to national authority .

similar to the united states , european countries are also struggling to find the appropriate balance between measures to improve security and respect civil liberties .

in the uk , there has been vigorous debate on such issues .

germany , spain , and italy have traditionally guarded civil liberties strongly in light of their histories with authoritarian regimes , but recent terrorist activity has prompted greater discussion of strengthening measures to ensure domestic security .

while france has long championed civil liberties such as free speech and freedom of religion , french society also emphasizes the need for public order and has taken steps to enhance security since september 11 .

some u.s. policymakers and members of congress are taking an increasing interest in how european countries are organizing and managing homeland security issues and emergency preparedness and response , in light of both recent terrorist activity and hurricane katrina , which devastated the u.s. gulf coast in august 2005 .

in seeking to protect u.s. interests at home and abroad , many u.s. officials recognize that the actions or inaction of the european allies can affect u.s. domestic security , especially given the u.s. visa waiver program , which allows nationals of many european states to travel to the united states without a visa or other checks on their identities .

some experts suggest that greater u.s. - european cooperation in the field of homeland security is necessary in order to better guarantee security on both sides of the atlantic .

the united kingdom does not have one department responsible for all aspects of homeland security and counterterrorism .

responsibility for these issues is scattered across several government departments , and the uk's approach is based on long - standing inter - governmental cooperation and collaboration , which grew out of the uk's decades of experience in dealing with northern ireland - related terrorism .

uk policy toward terrorism and other security challenges is largely coordinated by inter - departmental committees of ministers and other government officials ; specific uk ministries or departments have the lead on different issues ( see below for detailed information on the uk's security institutions and structures ) .

the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states have focused greater uk attention on the threats posed by international terrorists and acted as a spur for uk authorities to enhance emergency planning and response capabilities .

in april 2004 , the british government unveiled a new comprehensive , cross - departmental counterterrorism strategy ( known as contest ) centered on the "4ps" of prevent , pursue , protect , and prepare .

prevention work seeks to address the underlying causes of terrorism both at home and abroad ; pursuit efforts aim to disrupt terrorist organizations and their ability to operate ; protection measures focus on protecting the public , critical national infrastructure , and key sites at particular risk ; preparedness work aims to enable the uk to respond and recover from the consequences of a terrorist attack .

the "4ps" seek to give greater coherence to uk counterterrorism measures and take advantage of existing expertise and resources throughout the uk government .

some observers view the uk approach to ensuring domestic security , combating terrorism , and protecting the british public and infrastructure as emphasizing "dual - use measures" that seek to integrate counterterrorism and preparedness programs into existing emergency management and response efforts .

they argue that an advantage of this approach is that departments , agencies , and first responders maintain their skills on a day - to - day basis , and society benefits from these resources daily , but many of these same skills and resources can also be used in response to a terrorist incident .

as a result , they assert that such "dual - use" mechanisms are also cost - effective , avoiding excessive or exclusive focus on the challenges posed by unconventional weapons that could draw scarce resources away from the more basic but essential activities of law enforcement , intelligence , or border controls .

the uk's emergency response system and capabilities were put to the test on july 7 , 2005 , when four young british muslims attacked london's metro and bus lines , killing 52 people ( plus the four bombers ) , and injuring over 700 .

despite the fatalities and the damage to the london metro system , many assess that the government and emergency services responded competently and effectively in the immediate aftermath of the crisis .

as a result , the impact of the attacks on the daily life of the city and general population was marginal .

the british government believes that its inter - governmental / committee approach to homeland security provides it with maximum flexibility to respond to a wide range of challenges and disasters , both natural and man - made .

given that the uk's government bureaucracy is relatively small , at least in comparison to that of the united states , this inter - governmental approach also allows for a rationalization of people and resources .

a former cabinet minister , david blunkett , has asserted that "we believe this arrangement of central coordination , accountable to ministers , coupled with department responsibility for delivery is the best resilience structure .

it engages a wider pool of expertise , avoids the need for a huge new bureaucracy at the center , while at the same time has a clear chain of command. .

other british experts and officials , however , criticize the uk's inter - departmental system , arguing that it is poorly coordinated , with too many overlapping lines of authority .

some , including the opposition conservative ( tory ) party , have proposed creating a uk ministry equivalent to the u.s. department of homeland security .

although the labour government of prime minister tony blair has previously rejected this idea , a number of commentators believe that the government may be reconsidering .

in february 2006 , uk chancellor of the exchequer ( or treasury secretary ) [author name scrubbed] pledged to examine the case for a single security budget in the uk's upcoming 2007 spending review .

some view this statement as an indication of the government's new "open - mindedness" toward the possibility of forming a new homeland security ministry .

as noted above , there is currently no single uk - equivalent to the u.s. department of homeland security .

various government leaders , ministries , and departments play a role in different aspects of uk domestic security efforts and countering terrorism .

the uk cabinet is the supreme , collective decision - making body in the uk government , chaired by the prime minister .

much of the work of the cabinet is delegated to ministerial cabinet committees and subcommittees .

the cabinet office supports the uk ministerial committee system by coordinating policy and strategy across government departments , and as such , has a role in bringing together department ministers , officials , and others involved in homeland security affairs and counterterrorism .

the cabinet secretariat , which sits in the cabinet office , largely manages the day - to - day business of the cabinet committees and is divided into six individual secretariats that support the different cabinet committees .

the defense and overseas policy ( dop ) ministerial committee and two of its subcommittees — on international terrorism , and protective security and resilience — play key roles in forging long - term uk domestic security and counterterrorism policies .

the intelligence services ministerial committee reviews policy on the security and intelligence services , including their counterterrorist efforts .

in the event of an actual terrorist incident , a cabinet - level emergency crisis management body — known as cobr ( for the cabinet office briefing room in which it meets ) — is convened to coordinate the government's immediate emergency response ; cobr brings together the prime minister and other cabinet ministers and officials .

the civil contingencies committee ( ccc ) is heavily involved in longer - term emergency preparedness and response ; it coordinates and continually reviews the preparation of plans for ensuring the prompt and effective delivery of supplies and services during an emergency .

in july 2001 , the uk government established a new civil contingencies secretariat ( ccs ) within the cabinet secretariat to support the ccc , review uk emergency planning arrangements , and improve uk preparedness for and response to emergencies .

ccs was originally set up in response to several crises in 2000 ( including fuel protests , the outbreak of foot and mouth disease, and severe flooding ) , but was given new impetus after the september 11 attacks .

specific aims of the ccs include spotting trouble ; assessing its nature and providing warning ; being ready to respond ; building greater resilience for the future ; and providing leadership to the first responder community .

in june 2002 , prime minister blair also created a new security and intelligence coordinator within the cabinet office that some have likened to a "homeland security chief," or the white house's now defunct office of homeland security .

the security and intelligence coordinator is directly responsible to the prime minister and is tasked with coordinating and developing , across all government departments , work on counterterrorism and crisis management .

some suggest that this new position was created to give greater coherence to uk security efforts and emergency response capabilities .

as the principal accounting officer for the single intelligence account , which collectively funds the uk's security and intelligence services , the security and intelligence coordinator plays a key role in setting priorities and budgets for the intelligence services .

among other duties , the security and intelligence coordinator works to ensure the delivery of contest , and is the deputy chair of the civil contingencies committee .

the current security and intelligence coordinator is sir richard mottram .

the home office , or interior ministry , is the government department that has the lead on several aspects of homeland security affairs , including counterterrorism policy within the uk .

the home office is therefore the focal point for the response to the terrorist threat , both through promulgation of legislative measures and counter - terrorist contingency planning .

it is also responsible for domestic security policies , planning for chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) incidents , and the national counter - terrorist exercise program .

in addition , the home office has the lead on setting immigration and asylum policy , and ministerial responsibility for the uk immigration service , which controls entry and exit to the uk at air , sea , land , and rail ports and identifies , monitors , and removes immigration offenders .

the home secretary is a member of the full defense and overseas policy ministerial committee , deputy chair of the dop's international terrorism subcommittee , and chair of the dop's protective security and resilience subcommittee .

the home secretary also chairs the civil contingencies committee and sits on the intelligence services ministerial committee .

several other british government ministries and departments play a role in uk domestic security and the fight against terrorism .

hm revenue and customs , a non - ministerial department that reports to the chancellor of the exchequer ( or treasury secretary ) , has the lead responsibility for detecting prohibited and restricted goods at import and export , including those goods that may be used by terrorists .

customs officers also have the power to seize terrorist - linked cash anywhere in the uk , although the treasury ministry has the lead in the fight against terrorist financing .

the department for transport's transport security and contingencies directorate is responsible for the security of the traveling public and transport facilities through regulation of the aviation , maritime , and railway industries .

the health protection agency ( hpa ) , a non - departmental body accountable to the health secretary , was established in 2003 to help provide a coordinated and consistent public health response to a range of national emergencies , from a disease outbreak to a terrorist attack .

policing in the uk is largely decentralized .

the home office has ministerial responsibility for the police services in england and wales .

the scottish ministry of justice has ministerial responsibility for policing in scotland , while the secretary of state for northern ireland sets policy for policing there .

operational control , however , of all of the police services in england , wales , scotland , and northern ireland rests with the chief constable of each force .

currently , there are 43 regional police forces in england and wales , and eight in scotland ; the police service of northern ireland ( psni ) is responsible for policing in northern ireland .

in england , wales , and scotland , these regional police forces have primary responsibility for the investigation of terrorist offenses ; the psni has lead responsibility for terrorist investigations related to the affairs of northern ireland .

each police force also has its own special branch , which works in partnership with the security service ( mi5 ) , the uk's domestic security service , to acquire intelligence on those who may be involved in terrorism .

the metropolitan police ( scotland yard ) has responsibility for london and also has various specialist units , such as those that deal with anti - terrorism , that may be called upon to fulfill a national role .

in addition to the regional forces , there are a few other british police forces that may play a role in homeland security affairs .

the british transport police ( btp ) police the railway systems of england , wales , and scotland ; the btp is also responsible for policing some metro and commuter systems , including the london underground .

the department of transport has ministerial responsibility over the btp .

the civil nuclear constabulary ( cnc ) is an armed police force that protects civil nuclear installations and nuclear materials in the uk ; it operates under the strategic direction of the department of trade and industry .

the uk has three main intelligence and security services engaged in the fight against terrorism .

the security service ( mi5 ) is responsible for the protection of national security against threats from espionage , sabotage , and terrorism .

mi5 operates under the statutory authority of the home secretary , although it is not part of the home office .

the secret intelligence service ( sis , or mi6 ) , the uk's foreign intelligence service , gathers intelligence overseas .

the government communications headquarters ( gchq ) provides signals intelligence to counter a range of threats , including terrorism , and is also the national technical authority for information assurance , helping to keep data residing on government communication and information systems safe from theft , manipulation , and other threats .

both mi6 and gchq operate under the statutory authority of the foreign secretary , although neither is part of the foreign and commonwealth office .

the main instrument for advising the government on priorities for intelligence gathering and for assessing its results is the joint intelligence committee ( jic ) .

the jic is part of the cabinet office , and currently chaired by sir richard mottram , the security and intelligence coordinator .

the jic , analogous to the u.s. national intelligence council , is responsible for providing ministers and other senior officials with coordinated , inter - departmental intelligence assessments .

in june 2003 , in an effort to improve intelligence - sharing and cooperation against terrorism further among the uk's different law enforcement and intelligence agencies , the uk created the joint intelligence analysis center ( jtac ) to collate and evaluate intelligence about potential threats and provide early warning .

jtac seeks to break down institutional barriers between analysts of the different security and intelligence agencies by drawing together about 100 officials from 11 government departments and agencies , including mi5 , mi6 , gchq , the police , and the defense and transport ministries .

jtac provides both long - term studies of international terrorism and immediate assessments of current threats ; it is analogous to the u.s. national counter terrorism center .

jtac is responsible to the director - general of mi5 .

although the police and security services have the primary role in domestic protection against terrorism , the armed forces may be called upon domestically in the event of a major terrorist incident requiring military units with specialized skills ( such as the special forces hostage rescue commandos or those trained to deal with cbrn events ) .

the uk armed forces may also be deployed to assist in the management of a natural disaster .

the decision to deploy the military to assist the civil authorities in an emergency would be made by cobr , and the armed forces would have no jurisdiction outside of supporting the civil powers .

the ministry of defense and the armed forces are also responsible for protecting 160 key uk sites , and for guarding uk nuclear weapons .

the uk's parliamentary system influences government decisions regarding homeland security budgetary priorities .

the prime minister and his cabinet are drawn from the political party with a majority in the house of commons , the elected chamber of parliament .

as such , there is no strict separation of the executive and legislative branches of government in the uk .

the prime minister , the chancellor of the exchequer , and the cabinet ministers prepare the government's budget and set overall departmental budget priorities and spending limits .

given that the uk government has a majority in parliament , the government's proposed budgetary levels are not usually contested in the same way as they often are in the united states .

uk spending on "public order and security" grew from roughly $40 billion in 2001 to $53 billion in 2005 .

this broad category includes police services , fire protection services , law courts , prisons , and research and development .

more specifically , the british government announced in its 2004 spending review that total spending on counterterrorism and resilience across departments will be over $3.6 billion by 2007-2008 ; this is compared to $2.6 billion in 2004-2005 , and less than $1.8 billion a year before september 11 , 2001 ( these figures for counterterrorism and resilience exclude core military and police spending ) .

budgetary priorities in these areas have largely flowed from the "4ps" of prevent , pursue , protect , and prepare in the uk's 2004 cross - departmental counterterrorism strategy ( contest ) , which is driving investment decisions and will guide departments as they set their detailed budgets .

the home secretary will agree with ministers across departments on what resources they will allocate from their 2004 spending review settlements to deliver contest before they finalize their department budgets .

as noted above , the security and intelligence coordinator plays a key role in setting priorities and budgets for the intelligence services .

spending for uk civil protection work , including that for the police and fire services , comes from a combination of grants from the central government and local funding .

in the immediate aftermath of september 11 , 2001 , the british government provided supplemental funding over previously budgeted 2001-2002 and 2002-2003 levels to enable departments , such as the military , the police , and the intelligence services to meet the increased need for heightened security measures and more counterterrorist activities .

the 2004 spending review placed emphasis on intelligence , emergency planning , and a range of other counterterrorist and preparedness measures: in the area of intelligence , additional funding of approximately $214 million in 2006-2007 and $337 million in 2007-2008 will be provided for the further expansion of the three security and intelligence agencies ( the current combined expenditure for the uk's three security and intelligence agencies is roughly $2.3 billion ) .

the additional spending on emergency planning will double that currently received by local authorities from the central government's civil defense grant per year ( from $35 million to $70 million ) to better enable local authorities to carry out emergency planning in light of the threat from international terrorism .

this increase appears to respond to criticism that local authorities did not have the necessary resources to plan for terrorist incidents given that the civil defense grant had significantly decreased between 1991 and 2001 as a result of the end of the cold war .

the civil contingencies secretariat reportedly played a crucial role in securing this increase in resources for the civil protection work carried out by local authorities .

extra funding of about $543 million in 2006-2007 and $614 million in 2007-2008 will also be devoted to counterterrorist measures ranging from enhancing the fire service's search and rescue capabilities to improving police abilities to deal with cbrn incidents to boosting port security , uk embassy security , and border controls .

in light of the july 2005 london bombings , the chancellor of the exchequer in december 2005 announced that a further $149 million will be provided to the security and intelligence services to aid their efforts in the fight against terrorism .

in the years since the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the uk government has introduced a raft of new legislation and pursued a variety of measures to combat terrorism and improve uk homeland security .

following the july 2005 london bombings , the blair government has also placed increased emphasis on promoting muslim integration and combating extremism ; many uk officials view such efforts not only as necessary to address societal divisions , but also as key prevention strategies in the long - term fight against terrorism .

since september 11 , british authorities have stepped up their law enforcement efforts against al qaeda and members of other radical groups .

hundreds of suspects have been questioned and arrested , and uk police and security services have increased their monitoring of mosques .

uk authorities have disrupted several potential terrorist plots over the last few years , such as breaking up an al qaeda - affiliated cell in 2003 accused of producing ricin and other chemical weapons .

law enforcement and intelligence work against terrorism are viewed as a key part of the uk's prevention and pursuit efforts .

however , the evidentiary bar for convictions in the uk remains set high given britain's strong civil liberty traditions and democratic ideals .

although nearly 900 people have been arrested since the september 11 attacks under anti - terrorism laws , only 138 have been charged with terrorist - related offenses , and only 23 of those have been convicted .

as noted above , the uk government has sought to provide extra resources to uk police and intelligence services to enable them to carry out these expanded counterterrorist duties and investigations .

the increased funding for the security and intelligence agencies has been aimed largely at enhancing training and boosting recruitment , especially of individuals with arabic and asian language skills .

press reports indicate that mi5 has begun a recruitment campaign to increase its size by 50% ( to 3,000 staff ) by 2008 .

nevertheless , some observers question whether the uk is devoting sufficient resources to improving its intelligence capabilities .

for example , one recent study asserts that counterterrorism work has become gchq's single largest collection effort in the last few years , but as a result of this new priority and still limited resources , gchq has been forced to reduce its collection activities in many non - priority geographical areas and even on some aspects of counterproliferation .

others point out that even with expanded security budgets and increased recruitment efforts , training new security service recruits takes time and keeping track of suspects are jobs of high labour intensity that entail difficult choices for police and intelligence services .

the september 11 terrorist attacks gave added momentum to uk efforts to tighten its immigration and asylum procedures to curtail illegal immigration and prevent terrorists or other criminals from abusing the uk's asylum system .

among other measures , the nationality , immigration , and asylum act 2002 introduces a new "right to carry" scheme requiring air and sea carriers to check a database to confirm that passengers pose no known immigration or security risks .

following the july 2005 london bombings , the uk government announced plans to: make it easier to deport or exclude foreign individuals from the uk who advocate violence and incite hatred ; create a list of foreign clerics who will be denied entry to the uk ; and refuse asylum to anyone with possible terrorist connections .

the uk also has long - standing legislation and security programs focused on preventing acts of violence from being perpetrated against uk air , maritime , and rail transport systems as well as the channel tunnel , which connects france and the uk .

some of these security measures , especially in the aviation sector , were instituted after the bombing of pan am flight 103 over lockerbie , scotland in 1988 .

but since september 11 , the uk has further increased aviation security measures .

the wide - ranging anti - terrorism , crime , and security act 2001 strengthened aviation security by making provision for the forcible removal of unauthorized persons from aircraft or airport restricted zones .

the uk has introduced more screening and searching of passengers and baggage ( especially those destined for the united states and canada ) , an expanded list of prohibited articles that cannot be taken on board aircraft , and intrusion - resistant cockpit doors on uk aircraft .

in addition , in 2002 , the uk announced a program to train armed sky marshals for use on uk - registered aircraft ; press reports suggest that they are now operating on some transatlantic flights .

other enhanced border control and transport security measures instituted since september 11 include increased stop - and search powers for police , immigration , and customs officials ; new rules allowing law enforcement agencies to request information about passengers and goods from air and sea carriers ; the installation of new technology at the channel tunnel to check for people concealed in lorries or trains ; and the introduction of equipment at all uk ports and airports to screen for illicit importations of radioactive materials .

several uk ports also participate in the u.s. container security initiative , which stations u.s. customs officers in foreign ports to help pre - screen u.s. - bound cargo containers to ensure that they do not contain dangerous items such as weapons of mass destruction .

the british government asserts that most uk ports , including all major and high risk ports , are in compliance with a new international maritime organization ( imo ) code that requires international ships and port facilities to implement tighter security regimes , train staff , and draw up plans for responding to a terrorist threat ; london expects that all remaining uk ports will soon be in compliance also .

as for rail security , in the wake of the march 2004 bombings of commuter trains in madrid , spain , the british government initiated a review of counterterrorist security on the uk's railway network in conjunction with the industry and police services .

although the london underground system has long had a protective security regime in place , the review recommended that such security regimes be extended to other underground , light rail , and tram systems in the uk ; work in this area is reportedly ongoing .

following the july 2005 london bombings , the uk will conduct trial screenings of passengers and baggage at a small number of national rail and london underground stations during 2006 .

despite these efforts , some analysts point to a lack of personnel resources to ensure that all uk border control and security measures are properly implemented .

for example , they contend that the department for transport's transport security and contingencies directorate ( transec ) has insufficient personnel to carry out frequent and thorough inspections of port and airport security measures , and that the uk immigration service is also understaffed .

others note that the uk has been struggling to balance new transport security requirements with the costs to the transport industry and the traveling public .

for instance , press reports suggest that the home office was forced to scale back its original plans to require air and sea carriers to obtain additional personal data from passengers following travel and tourism industry protests that it would be cost - prohibitive and inconvenience passengers given the extra processing time it would require .

the british government has also put priority on countering the cbrn aspect of terrorism and improving the ability of emergency service providers to respond quickly and effectively to a cbrn incident .

uk officials maintain that additional investments made to counter the affects of cbrn materials have also strengthened the emergency services' ability to respond to other types of disasters , such as those involving hazardous materials .

in october 2001 , the uk established a cbrn resilience program , led by the home office and run by a strategic board made up of senior representatives from all key delivery partners , such as the departments of health , and environment , food , and rural affairs .

under the program , the uk government points to significant improvements in the quantity and quality of personal protection and decontamination equipment for the police , fire , and ambulance services ; also , by mid - 2005 , over 7,000 police officers had been trained and equipped to deal with a cbrn incident .

in addition , the uk's cbrn work includes a science and technology program to detect , monitor , and respond better to cbrn materials and incidents ; it seeks to target research and development spending at the most pressing areas where threat assessments indicate that the risks are the greatest .

the uk has also devoted increased funding over the last several years to counter bio - terrorism and stockpile extra vaccines and antibiotics .

the british government maintains that it is engaged in a program of hardening a number of critical infrastructure sites , but information available publicly is limited for security reasons .

the uk categorizes its critical national infrastructure ( cni ) into ten sectors ( communications , emergency services , energy , finance , food , government and public services , health , public safety , transport , and water ) and asserts that it has special physical and electronic protective security measures in place for these sectors .

press reports indicate that mi5 has identified nuclear power stations , oil depots , and high - profile london buildings as priority terrorist targets , and it is believed that significant protection measures are focused on such sites .

in december 2004 , the u.s. department of homeland security and the uk home office signed an agreement on cooperation in science and technology for critical infrastructure protection and other homeland / civil security matters to allow the two countries to work together on counter - terrorism research in these areas .

uk officials hope this agreement will enable each side to expand their technology capabilities , especially as regards cni protection , minimize unnecessary duplication of work , and produce more efficient and cost - effective results .

as noted previously , the uk has sought to enhance its emergency planning , preparedness , and response capabilities .

the uk carries out a wide range of emergency exercises to allow the government and the emergency services to regularly practice their responses to both natural and man - made disasters .

according to the home office , improving the ability of the police , fire , and ambulance services to deal with terrorist attacks , including those involving cbrn materials , has been a top priority .

in 2002 , the uk established a cross - governmental capabilities program , coordinated by the civil contingencies secretariat , to build the capabilities necessary to deal rapidly and effectively with the consequences of all forms of disasters .

the capabilities program seeks to provide greater central direction to emergency preparedness and build resilience across all parts of the uk .

the program is divided into 17 different "workstreams," the focus of which ranges from maintaining essential services to dealing with cbrn incidents or infectious diseases to handling mass casualties , fatalities , or evacuations .

the ccs has also established a national risk assessment process to identify risks over a five - year period and form the basis for decisions about emergency preparedness .

in 2004 , the uk parliament passed the civil contingencies act .

this act represented the first wholesale revision of uk emergency legislation since the 1920s , and was intended to set out clear expectations and responsibilities of first responders , local and regional authorities , and the central government to improve civil protection , operational effectiveness , and financial efficiency .

the civil contingencies act also gives the government the power to declare a state of emergency without the approval of parliament and to pass regulations deemed necessary for preventing or controlling a crisis , such as restricting public access to certain sites , evacuate affected areas , requisition property , or ban public gatherings .

during its passage through parliament , the act encountered some resistance from human rights and civil liberty groups concerned that its definition of an "emergency" was too broad and that it could lead to an unnecessary curtailment of freedoms .

to secure parliamentary approval , the government tightened the definition of an "emergency" and included a "triple lock" guarantee to ensure that the emergency powers were only evoked in the event of a serious threat , that they were deemed necessary to cope with the situation , and were proportionate to the threat .

although analysts assess that the uk has made significant progress in enhancing its emergency preparedness and response abilities , they also point out that some challenges remain .

some experts remain concerned that the increase in funding from the central government to local authorities announced in the 2004 spending review is still not sufficient to carry out the additional emergency planning requirements mandated by the 2004 civil contingencies act .

they also point out that outside of london , which has been accorded the highest priority , there are varying levels of emergency preparedness .

many other uk regions face greater coordination hurdles , as well as equipment and training delays .

