in its quest to enhance the u.s. government's capacity to address future conflict settlements , the bush administration seeks congressional support for the establishment of a multi - component , civilian "ready reserve" for peacebuilding abroad .

the bush administration is expected to present a concrete proposal for such a reserve in february 2008 with its fy2009 budget request .

in his state of the union address on january 23 , 2007 , president bush invited the 110 th congress to work with the administration on the design and establishment of a volunteer civilian reserve corps which would function "much like our military reserve. .

this corps "would ease the burden on the armed forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve on missions abroad when america needs them," he stated .

"it would give people across america who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining struggle of our time. .

on june 1 , 2006 , the congressional research service held a workshop , entitled civilian forces for stabilization and reconstruction: u.s. proposals and international experience , in order to clarify the issues involved in forming such a reserve .

the following report , first issued in 2006 , summarizes the main points of workshop proceedings and concludes with a short discussion of related issues for congress .

it will not be updated .

the lead speaker was christopher j. hoh , the director for response strategy and resource management in the state department office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( s / crs ) .

the administration has tasked the s / crs to develop the concept of a civilian reserve force that could rapidly deploy to conflict - torn areas to carry out state - building efforts .

this is often referred to as a "surge capability. .

personnel in such a force would include rule of law practitioners ( police , judges , lawyers , prison administrators ) , civil administrators and governance experts ( people with experience involving local and state government agencies ) and infrastructure experts ( eg , civil engineers and planners ) .

mr. hoh explained current state department plans for a civilian reserve .

these plans envision the civilian reserve as a group that would fill the gap between permanent u.s. government employees , who could be deployed immediately , and contractors , who take much longer to deploy .

 ( permanent government employees would be comprised of two groups , an active force of employees dedicated solely to such operations and a stand - by reserve of government employees who have volunteered to be detailed from their permanent jobs to such operations as needed. ) .

civilian reservists would be deployable within 30 to 60 days , mobilized as government employees , paid at a comparable level with government employees doing the same work and offered comparable incentives such as death and dismemberment insurance and diplomatic privileges , according to the administration plans outlined by mr. hoh .

they would be chosen for their expertise in the areas needed for "transitional security," rule of law , essential public services , and civil administration .

they would be screened and trained for the capacity to work effectively from the very beginning of their assignment and to function in teams .

because they would be government employees , they would be accountable under u.s. government ethics laws and other regulations and could form part of the u.s. government management structure , eg , supervising and managing permanent u.s. government employees and contractors .

 ( mr. hoh did not provide an estimate of the number of reservists contemplated under current plans .

the numbers contemplated by studies prepared for s / crs are discussed in the " related issues for congress " section , below. ) .

noting that the state department had just received a lengthy report ( of well over 600 pages ) from bearingpoint , inc. outlining detailed plans for a civilian reserve , mr. hoh stated that the administration would consult with congress on specific plans for the reserve once intra - executive branch consultations are completed .

he said that the administration would consult with congress on issues regarding specific functional specialty areas ( i.e. , rule of law , civil administration , economic development ) , the types of situations in which the reserve should be deployed , and the period of time over which to build a comprehensive reserve force .

subsequent discussion centered on examining the lessons that the united nations and others have learned in developing their own roster systems to deploy civilians to peace operations .

the speaker from the united nations was catherine rolland , chief of the newly created recruitment and outreach unit of the united nations ( u.n. ) department of peacekeeping operations' ( undpko ) personnel management and support service .

the recruitment and outreach unit is responsible for the screening of candidates and the maintenance of a roster for u.n. peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations .

there were also speakers from the two largest and most sophisticated national roster systems: jens behrendt , head of recruitment since 2003 at the center for international peace operations ( zif ) in berlin , a recruitment , training and analysis agency established by the german government , and christine vincent , deputy executive director and director of operations at canadem , the canadian - government funded recruitment and placement agency which she helped establish in 1997 .

 ( canadem is the official name of the agency , even though it appears to be an acronym. ) .

these two agencies are government - established and funded , but independent .

neither country has a civilian reserve for stabilization and reconstruction ( s&r ) operations , such as that contemplated by the bush administration or by a senate bill passed shortly before the workshop was held .

 ( the reconstruction and stabilization civilian management act of 2006 , s. 3322 , passed by the senate on may 26 , 2006 , but never considered in the house , would have provided for the continued development of an extensive expert civilian response capability for s&r activities as a core mission of the state department and usaid. ) .

nevertheless , these two organizations recruit civilians from their respective countries to serve in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations run by international organizations , such as the united nations , the european union ( eu ) , and the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) .

like the united nations , zif and canadem pre - screen all candidates and they offer some level of training .

 ( details on the united nations , zif , and canadem rosters can be found in the table 1 at the end of this report. ) .

while these agencies are not equivalent to the civilian reserve proposals currently under study in the united states , the recruitment and other problems they face may well have implications for the issues that the united states will confront in forming a civilian reserve .

a fourth speaker knowledgeable about roster systems was scott r. feil , a retired u.s. army colonel and an adjunct research staff member at the institute for defense analysis ( ida ) , a non - profit institute supporting the department of defense .

he directed a forthcoming study for s / crs on civilian post - conflict reserve forces which examined the roster systems of various international organizations and countries , as well as in the united states .

two other experts with experience in recruiting and screening civilian volunteers for post - conflict missions were invited to participate in the discussion following speakers' presentations: elizabeth anderson , executive director , and michael maya , principal deputy director , of the american bar association's central european and eurasian law initiative ( ceeli ) .

ceeli deploys lawyers to post - conflict zones and new democracies in the balkans and elsewhere to help establish or reestablish the rule of law .

the major points emerging from the workshop raise questions of congressional interest about the appropriate size , screening , and resourcing of a potential civilian reserve , and additional authorities needed .

these questions are especially relevant when compared with the recommendations made by the s / crs - commissioned bearingpoint study mentioned by mr. hoh .

the workshop discussion squares with two conclusions of the bearingpoint study: first , that decisions on roster size must evolve over time , and second , that the s / crs planned roster of 3,000 ( according to the study ) "is a fraction of what will ultimately be needed to fulfill the program's mission. .

the entire roster would be deployed if reservists were sent to two large and one small operations , according to bearingpoint estimates of the size of operations .

the ratio could be as high as five persons on the roster to one person deployed if reservists were deployed to one small operation or during a year of small operations .

workshop discussion indicated that the bearingpoint ratio , which is about the same as the zif ratio and about half of the canadem ratio for its core roster , might well be workable for a small operation but problematic for larger and multiple operations .

the bearingpoint study states that s / crs will need to closely track deployment refusal rates as one determinant of optimal roster size .

the ida study contemplates a rule of law reserve of 6,000 people , including police units and judicial teams , and a civilian response corps of 2,500 in other specialities , according to mr. feil .

in developing its concept , the ida study looked not only at international rosters , including zif and canadem , but also several domestic models that are used for a variety of purposes .

one that mr. feil pointed to as working well is the large online roster of the national wildfire coordinating group , with some 75,000 firefighters available for national emergencies .

mr. feil spoke highly of another as a possible model for a u.s. civilian reserve — one built on the concept of "directed overstrength" in local agencies , where u.s. government provides funding for or reimburses positions in non - federal agencies whose occupants could be called up when needed for deployments abroad .

the emphasis placed by participants on the need to screen personnel , with special observation of their reaction to stress , raises the question as to whether the zif model might be more appropriate than the less extensive bearing point model .

as noted earlier , zif screens applicants extensively , placing potential reservists on its roster only after they have successfully completed a training exercise that places them in stressful situations .

the bearing point model recommends a written exam for applicants as a first screening step and an in - person evaluation relying on multiple screening methods .

the bearingpoint model calls for four to six training events while reservists are in service: "baseline training , orientation , annual training , pre - deployment readiness , leadership training and in - country training. .

one question is whether baseline training should be made part of the screening process , before applicants are actually accepted into the reserve .

the workshop discussion indicates that the most extensive training recommended by bearingpoint may well be desirable .

there seemed to be a consensus that the longer deployments of a year or more are better than shorter ones .

the bearingpoint study contemplates a standard maximum deployment length of one year in the field for most u.s. civilian reservists , with provisions for renewals .

bearingpoint found that most participants in its focus groups would be willing to join a civilian reserve that required a commitment to deploy on one tour for a maximum of twelve months over a four year contractual period , although some were also interested in the possibility of extending tours and of additional deployments .

the bearingpoint study states that "the experience of comparative organizations indicates that six months to one year as a standard tour length adequately satisfies the requirement for continuity of operations and the [critical] relationship building with local and partner organizations. .

 ( bearingpoint did recommend shorter three - to - six - month standard deployment commitments for law enforcement personnel , particularly constabulary police , because "performance can erode" over time in high threat environments. ) .

a one - year deployment length is consistent with current administration thinking , which views the civilian reserve as an add - on to the force of permanent employees that fill the gap before contractors can be mobilized .

nevertheless , and despite the bearingpoint assessment that most potential reservists would be unwilling to sign on for longer than a one - year tour , the workshop speakers stress that the need for continuity of personnel may argue for a somewhat altered version of the model .

one - year deployments may be adequate for most people in specialties where relationships are not crucial to success , such as infrastructure engineers and other more technical experts .

longer deployments may be considered , however , for positions and specialties where long - term personal relationships and mentoring are important for a successful outcome .

ms. andersen of the aba indicated that in rule of law areas involving the courts and rule of law reform , where relationships are crucial to success , tours of one year or more are desirable .

 ( she noted that about one - half of those deployed on aba missions volunteer for a second year. ) .

longer deployments may especially be needed when civilian reservists serve as managers or supervisors , as is contemplated by the proposal to activate them as federal employees .

further studies which test for the willingness of potential reservists in different specialties and at different levels of experience and pay to deploy for longer periods may be useful .

workshop discussion raises questions regarding the appropriate use of contractors .

for the most part , canadem and zif rosterees are not government employees .

representatives from both organizations noted their consequent lack of control over deployed rosterees as occasionally problematic and one of the factors that make extensive screening necessary .

according to the current civilian s&r deployment concept for the united states outlined by mr. hoh , federalized reservists would be deployed to cover the time "gap" before contractors could be deployed .

because the u.s. government similarly lacks control over contractors operating abroad on its behalf , policymakers may wish to consider whether the only factor to consider in choosing civilian reservists over contractors is relative deployment times .

reservists might be considered in circumstances where hostilities persist over a long period of time or where u.s. interests are particularly sensitive .

alternately , because deploying reservists for greater lengths of time would have implications for the size of the civilian reserve force , policymakers may wish to consider greater controls over deployed contractors and greater oversight over contractor rosters .

