congress generally authorizes new army corps of engineers water resources studies and projects before appropriating funds for these activities .

authorization typically occurs in a water resources development act ( wrda ) .

the 110 th congress overrode a presidential veto of wrda 2007 .

wrda 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 ) became law on november 9 , 2007 , authorizing approximately 900 projects , studies , and modifications to existing authorizations .

the president vetoed wrda 2007 , citing "excessive authorizations" and a lack of fiscal discipline and priorities .

this was the first congressional override of a veto by president george w. bush .

 ( for information on the override process , see crs report rs22654 , veto override procedure in the house and senate , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the u.s. army corps of engineers is a federal agency in the department of defense with military and civilian responsibilities .

at the direction of congress , the corps plans , builds , operates , and maintains a wide range of water resources facilities in u.s. states and territories .

the agency's traditional civil responsibilities have been creating and maintaining navigable channels and controlling floods .

in the last two decades , congress has increased the corps' responsibilities in ecosystem restoration , municipal water and wastewater infrastructure , disaster relief , and other activities .

the agency's regulatory responsibility for navigable water extends to issuing permits for private actions that might affect wetlands and other waters of the united states .

wrda is the main legislative vehicle for corps civil works authorizations .

after providing background information on wrda , this report considers the major issues that shaped wrda 2007 in the 110 th congress , including changes to corps project development practices and policies , coastal louisiana wetlands restoration activities , umr - iww investments , and everglades restoration projects .

because of the number of projects awaiting authorization and the length of time since congress enacted the last wrda in 2000 , there was considerable support among some stakeholders for the 110 th congress to enact a wrda 2007 .

the bush administration did not send congress a wrda proposal ; instead , it expressed its position through administration letters and statements of administration policy by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

a reason cited by the president for vetoing wrda 2007 was billions in new authorizations ( including billions for projects that the administration considers to be outside the core mission of the agency ) that create unrealistic expectations among local communities of likely federal actions and funding .

the administration also opposed provisions that would increase the federal financing of corps projects .

in addition to directing future federal investments in water resources through wrda authorizations , congress also is confronted with addressing water resources issues that are not resolved through authorizing new projects .

an example of an ongoing water resource issue affecting the corps and the nation that may receive congressional attention outside of wrda is multi - use river management .

an array of interests are questioning current river management practices across the nation and how management can balance benefits ( and harm ) across multiple river uses , including in - stream uses .

how the nation uses and values its rivers has changed over time .

rivers now are seen as providing not only economic benefits but also recreational opportunities and species habitat .

this shift has resulted in a reexamination by the courts , agencies , and stakeholders of the distribution of economic and other benefits of management alternatives .

for example , missouri river management raises some fundamental questions about water resources management , such as whether some river uses should take priority over others ( eg , threatened and endangered species protection over inland waterway transportation , or vice versa ) and how precedence should be decided ( eg , balancing competing uses versus maximizing economic benefits , versus maintaining minimum levels of some values ) .

the river's management is a prime example of the complex issues in which the corps is embroiled that often result in congressional consideration through oversight or legislative language in wrda or other bills .

a broad water resource issue that is unlikely to be directly addressed by wrda , but is significant to the agency and the nation , is the federal role in water resources .

hurricane katrina raised questions about this role ; in particular , the disaster brought attention to the trade - offs in benefits , costs , and risks of the current division of responsibilities among local , state , and federal entities for flood mitigation , preparedness , response , and recovery .

the question of the federal role also is raised by increasing competition over water supplies , not only in the west but also for urban centers in the east ( eg , atlanta ) , which have resulted in a growing number of communities seeking financial and other federal assistance , actions , and permits related to water supply development ( eg , desalination and water reuse projects , reservoir expansions and reoperations ) .

congress rarely chooses to pursue broad legislation on federal water resources policies for many reasons , including the challenge of enacting changes that affect such a wide breadth of constituencies .

instead , congress traditionally has pursued incremental changes through wrda bills and other legislation , and this pattern seems likely to continue .

like wrda debates in recent congresses , the wrda 2007 debate was dominated by different opinions over the desirability and need for changing the agency's policies , practices , and accountability , and for authorizing billions of dollars in investments in ecosystem restoration , navigation , and flood and storm damage reduction measures .

the debates surrounding wrda 2007 illustrated the continuing differences of opinions over the role of authorizations in guiding and prioritizing the agency's activities .

the growing backlog of corps construction and maintenance activities , constraints on federal water resources funds , the nation's aging water resources infrastructure , failure of the corps - constructed floodwalls in new orleans during hurricane katrina , and increased attention to the flood risks of urban areas have raised concerns about continuing the practice of adding billions of dollars in authorizations to the corps' portfolio of activities through omnibus wrda legislation .

however , many factors maintain the popularity of the wrda vehicle among legislators , and nonfederal project sponsors create demand for its passage , prompting its likely continued use .

crs report rs20866 , the civil works program of the army corps of engineers: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32064 , army corps of engineers water resources projects: authorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

congressional budget office , h.r .

1495 water resources development act of 2007 , as reported by the house committee on transportation and infrastructure on march 15 , 2007 , http: / / www.cbo.gov / ftpdocs / 79xx / doc7974 / hr1495.pdf .

letter to honorable barbara boxer , may 8 , 2007 , on amendment in nature of a substitute to s. 1248 , the water resources development act of 2007 , available at http: / / www.cbo.gov / ftpdocs / 80xx / doc8093 / s1248am.pdf .

h.r .

1495 water resources development act of 2007 , conference report filed on july 31 , 2007 , available at http: / / www.cbo.gov / ftpdocs / 86xx / doc8651 / hr1495conference.pdf .

executive office of the president , office of management and budget , statement of administration policy on h.r .

1495 ( house ) ( made on april 18 , 2007 ) , available at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / legislative / sap / 110-1 / hr1495sap - r.pdf .

statement of administration policy on h.r .

1495 ( senate ) ( made on may 11 , 2007 ) , available at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / legislative / sap / 110-1 / hr1495sap - s.pdf .

rob portman ( executive office of the president , office of management and budget ) and john paul woodley , jr. ( assistant secretary of the army ( civil works ) , letter to chairman james oberstar , august 1 , 2007 .

crs report rs22276 , coastal louisiana ecosystem restoration after hurricanes katrina and rita .

crs report rs22110 , coastal louisiana ecosystem restoration: the recommended corps plan .

crs report rs22467 , coastal wetlands planning , protection , and restoration act ( cwppra ) : effects of hurricanes katrina and rita on implementation .

crs report rl33597 , mississippi river gulf outlet ( mrgo ) : issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33188 , protecting new orleans: from hurricane barriers to floodwalls , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32470 , upper mississippi river - illinois waterway navigation expansion: an agricultural transportation and environmental context , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl32630 , upper mississippi river system: proposals to restore an inland waterway ' s ecosystem , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22048 , everglades restoration: the federal role in funding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20702 , south florida ecosystem restoration and the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

