the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) released two recent documents that renewed public and congressional interest in animal biotechnology in general and animal cloning in particular .

on january 15 , 2009 , the agency released final guidance representing its current thinking on the regulation of genetically engineered ( ge ) animals for food or drugs .

fda did so under its existing statutory authority and regulations .

a year earlier , on january 15 , 2008 , fda had unveiled its final risk assessment and industry guidance on the safety of milk and meat from cloned animals and their offspring .

fda found that , generally , meat and milk products from cattle , pigs , and goats are as safe as products from their non - cloned counterparts .

still , some in the united states remain concerned about the safety and other impacts of ge animals and of animal cloning , and they continue to advocate a cautious approach to commercialization of such products .

outside of the united states , animal biotechnology , including both ge and cloning , is the focus of ongoing regulatory , policy and scientific discussions within the european union ( eu ) as well as within the international organization for animal health , known by its french acronym , the oie .

 ( cloning by itself is not considered to be genetic engineering ; see discussion later in this report. ) .

biotechnology is a broadly defined term of relatively recent origin describing the range of modern knowledge , applications , and techniques underlying advances in many fields , notably health care and agriculture .

animal biotechnology has been defined as "that set of techniques by which living creatures are modified for the benefit of humans and other animals. .

by its very nature , agricultural development is the history of humans modifying plants and animals to maximize desirable traits .

for example , domestication and selective breeding of animals date back many thousands of years .

artificial insemination of livestock , notably dairy cattle , is a more recent technology , first finding wide commercial acceptance in the 1950s .

discovery of the genetic code in the 1950s gave birth to modern techniques of biotechnology .

one of the first commercial products of this new biotechnology in animal agriculture was bovine somatotropin ( bst ) , a naturally occurring metabolic modifier that is now being manufactured in larger quantities through the use of recombinant dna technology .

manufactured bst came onto the market in 1994 and is now administered to as many as half of all u.s. dairy cattle to increase per - cow milk output .

although bst is being used commercially in approximately 20 countries , it is banned in the european union ( eu ) .

the first u.s. approval of a commercial product from a ge animal is for the drug atryn , an anticoagulant agent being produced in the milk of transgenic goats .

fda announced its approval on february 6 , 2009 .

the goats were genetically engineered by introducing a segment of dna into their genes that coded for the goat to produce human antithrombin in its milk .

antithrombin is a naturally occurring protein in healthy humans that helps keep blood from clotting in blood vessels .

other developments include pigs that have been engineered for increased sow milk output to produce faster - growing piglets .

chinese researchers announced in april 2011 that they had produced a herd of dairy cattle whose milk contains human breast milk proteins ( lysozyme , lactoferrin , and alpha - lactalbumin ) .

the researchers used cloning technology to introduce human genes into the dna of holstein dairy cows before the genetically modified embryos were implanted into surrogate cows .

cloned cattle also have been developed to resist mastitis , an infectious disease of the udder .

a genetically engineered salmon — aquadvantage salmon — with enhanced growth characteristics is currently under review by fda for commercialization .

if approved , it would be the first ge animal approved for human consumption .

the company that developed the salmon , aquabounty technologies , inc. , has artificially combined growth hormone genes from an unrelated pacific salmon with dna from the anti - freeze genes of an eelpout .

this modification causes production of growth hormone year - round , creating a fish the company claims grows at twice the normal rate .

output traits such as drugs recovered from animal milk ( "pharming" ) , milk that lacks allergenic proteins , and animal organs for human transplant ( xenotransplantation ) that resist rejection are other contemporary objectives of animal biotechnology research .

in march 2006 , researchers at the university of missouri announced the creation of transgenic pigs whose tissue contains omega - 3 fatty acids .

the consumption of omega - 3 fatty acids , found primarily in fish , has been linked to lowered incidence of heart disease in humans .

similar research is also under way to produce omega - 3 fatty acids in cow's milk and in chicken eggs .

this report describes several scientifically emerging animal biotechnologies that are raising a variety of questions concerning risks to humans , animals , and the environment , as well as ethical concerns .

the report examines applications of the technologies and discusses major issues that may arise .

consumers , agricultural producers , the biotechnology industry , and federal regulatory bodies are debating the relative costs and benefits of these technologies .

as technologies move toward commercialization , congress is being asked to examine these issues and possibly to refine the current federal regulatory structure governing the technologies and their agricultural products .

given the breadth of the term "animal biotechnology," one might reasonably define it to include thousands of years of humans selectively breeding animals: observing desirable animal traits and attempting to breed those traits into successive lines of animals .

one of the first modern forms of assisted reproductive technology ( art ) was artificial insemination ( ai ) .

ai has been long established as a technological advance in traditional selective breeding and an important adjunct to the development of modern industrial animal production , especially in dairy and poultry .

ai was adopted by producers and accepted by the public with virtually no controversy .

for example , more than 70% of all u.s. - bred holstein cows , by far the most widely used milk producers , are artificially inseminated .

estrus synchronization , which improves the efficiency of ai by more accurately controlling when a female is in heat , is also an important animal biotechnology .

with the development in the 1970s and patenting in the 1980s of recombinant dna techniques , and the subsequent analysis of genes , their resulting proteins , and the role played by the proteins in animal biochemical processes ( functional genomics ) , modern biotechnology is increasingly equipped with a set of sophisticated tools holding the promise of transforming the selective breeding of animals .

the range of new techniques and technologies could transform animal biotechnology in ways that plant biotechnology was transformed in the 1980s and 1990s .

modern animal biotechnology is developing against the background of public experience with plant biotechnology , and controversy over the technologies may be a continuing feature of animal biotechnology development , not least because of the closer connection between humans and some animals and the belief that techniques developed for animals are only a step away from application to humans .

some of the better known animal biotechnologies follow .

a number of them are types of assisted reproductive technology ( art ) .

the basic federal guidance for regulating the products of agricultural biotechnology is the coordinated framework for regulation of biotechnology ( 51 fed .

reg .

23302 ) , published in 1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

a key principle has been that ge products should continue to be regulated according to their characteristics and unique features , not their methods of production , that is , whether or not they were created through biotechnology .

the framework provides a regulatory approach intended to ensure the safety of biotechnology research and products , using existing statutory authority and previous policy experience .

some newer applications of biotechnology did not exist when the current regulatory framework was enunciated .

the nrc animal biotechnology report concluded that this regulatory regime "might not be adequate to address unique problems and characteristics associated with animal biotechnologies" and that federal agency responsibilities are not clear .

in 1997 , scientists at the roslyn institute in scotland used nuclei from the mammary cells of an adult sheep to clone "dolly. .

such nuclear transfer ( nt ) techniques were first developed in amphibians in the 1950s .

they were first used in sheep in 1986 , with the production of clones using nuclei taken from sheep embryos .

the significance of dolly was that she was cloned from differentiated cell types obtained from an adult ( called "somatic cell nuclear transfer" or scnt ) , rather than undifferentiated cells from an embryo ( "embryonic nt" ) .

cloning in animal agriculture is generally not applied in isolation from other biotechnologies such as genetic engineering .

scientists note that cloning does not require fertilization and is not , by itself , a form of genetic engineering , that is , altering , removing , or inserting genes into an animal's existing dna .

however , cloning can involve transgenic as well as non - transgenic cells .

scnt is not yet a notably efficient technique ready for widespread commercial adoption .

for example , only about 6% of the embryos transferred to recipient cows resulted in healthy , long - term surviving clones , according to a 2005 report .

the european food safety authority ( efsa ) recently reported that overall success rates vary by species , ranging from 0.5% to 5% .

success rates are said to be improving , however .

as more efficient cloning technologies , which can overcome the range of cloning abnormalities that have resulted from scnt , are introduced , they could provide new opportunities in human medicine , agriculture , and animal welfare .

this is the focus of much of the current international animal biotechnology research .

the efsa draft scientific opinion estimated the number of live clones worldwide in 2007 to be less than 4,000 cattle and 1,500 pigs , of which about 750 cattle and 10 pig clones were in the united states .

efsa reported that life span data were limited , with only a few reports on cattle of six to seven years of age and no data available in 2007 on the full natural life span of livestock clones generally .

the following are among the policy concerns that have arisen along with the development of new biotechnologies in animal agriculture .

some may be more applicable to ge - related technologies than to cloning per se , although others , like social acceptance and animal welfare concerns , may apply to both .

members of congress in the past have proposed various bills aimed at more closely regulating the plant and animal products of agricultural biotechnology generally , requiring such products to be labeled , and providing a means to recover any damages caused by the technology .

as with human cloning , ethical issues concerning animal clones and other animal biotechnologies also may continue to be visible public issues .

as before , the 112 th congress could be asked to play a larger role in weighing the benefits and costs of these evolving technologies , and to refine existing government oversight .

in the 110 th congress , the senate - passed version of the 2007-2008 farm bill ( h.r .

2419 , in section 7507 ) contained statutory language that would have required fda both to postpone publication of its final risk assessment until the completion of several newly mandated studies , and also to maintain the voluntary marketing moratorium until then .

however , conferees deleted the senate language from the final measure ( signed into law as p.l .

110-234 ) .

more specifically , the senate bill would have directed the hhs secretary to contract with the national academy of sciences to conduct a study on the safety of food products from cloned animals and the health effects and costs attributable to milk from cloned animals , with a report to congress due within one year of enactment .

the study was to address whether there were a sufficient number of studies to support the fda draft assessment , and whether there were other pertinent ones that were not taken into account .

it would have included an evaluation of potential public health effects and associated health care costs , and an evaluation of any consumer behavior and negative health and nutrition impacts resulting from a decrease in dairy consumption if milk from cloned animals and their offspring is commercialized .

animal cloning - related bills ( s. 414 and h.r .

992 ) were introduced in early 2007 , both of which would have amended federal food safety laws to require that foods from cloned animals and their offspring be so labeled .

also introduced in early 2007 was s. 536 / h.r .

1396 , which would have prohibited the use of the "organic" label on food products from cloned livestock or their offspring .

another ( h.r .

4855 ) , introduced in late 2007 , would have required studies like those in the senate farm bill on the impacts of food products from cloned animals entering the food supply .

in late july 2008 , three related bills were introduced that , their sponsor said , were to create a comprehensive framework for regulating gmos .

h.r .

6636 would have required the labeling of all foods produced with ge material .

h.r .

6635 would have prescribed relatively stringent new regulations for fda approval and oversight of ge crops .

h.r .

6637 would have regulated business dealings between agricultural producers and the developers of genetically engineered plants and animals , and sought to hold biotechnology companies liable for any adverse on - farm impacts from their products .

these bills were not enacted , nor were they reintroduced in the 111 th or 112 th congresses to date .

as discussed above in the section on ge salmon , bills introduced in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

521 / s. 230 ) would prevent fda from approving the ge salmon .

the bills would amend the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act to state that ge fish "shall be deemed unsafe. .

the house and senate bills have been referred to the energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on health and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , respectively .

