on may 13 , 2005 , the department of defense ( dod ) announced recommendations to close or realign a number of domestic u.s. military bases in order to consolidate forces and save funds .

the announcement occurred as a step in the 2005 round of the base realignment and closure ( brac ) process , as authorized by congress in 2001 .

specifically , dod recommended closures and realignments that the agency estimated would eliminate approximately 18,000 civilian support positions .

in addition , the dod recommendations contemplated significant restructuring and consolidation of support functions with potential implications for affected civilian employees .

under the brac framework , secretary of defense donald rumsfeld transmitted the recommendations to the defense base closure and realignment commission ( commonly referred to as the brac commission ) for its review and recommendations .

after its review process , on september 8 , 2005 , the brac commission transmitted its recommendations in a report to president george w. bush .

the brac commission accepted a majority of dod's recommendations for closure and realignment , rejected or modified some dod recommendations , and made several recommendations on its own initiative .

appendix o of the brac commission's report included information about "employment impact by economic areas and states," including , among other things , net direct job changes ( i.e. , increases and decreases for each state and area ) for military , civilian , and contractor personnel .

overall , the data in appendix o indicated a net decrease of 15,874 federal civilian jobs across all states and areas , corresponding to the brac commission's recommendations .

maryland was listed with the largest increase in net civilian jobs ( 7,773 ) among all states , and virginia was listed with the largest decrease ( - 10,838 ) .

 ( see appendix of this report for a table showing net job changes for each state , territory , and the district of columbia. ) .

on september 15 , 2005 , the president , who could accept or reject the brac commission's recommendations only in their entirety , approved the commission's recommendations and transmitted them to congress .

on october 27 , 2005 , congress rejected h.j.res .

65 , a resolution of disapproval of the brac commission's recommendations .

the recommendations took effect on november 9 , 2005 .

in late 2005 , dod issued instructions to the military departments and defense agencies to create a "business plan" for each of the recommendations drafted by the commission and approved by the president .

dod reportedly planned to develop "general plans" early in 2006 to implement the brac commission's recommendations , with over 240 specific implementation plans being developed thereafter at "their own pace , their own schedule and their own cost structure. .

barring future congressional action , dod is required to implement the recommendations by 2011 .

congress did not enact a military construction appropriations act for fy2007 .

p.l .

110-5 , the revised continuing appropriations resolution for fy2007 , provides an appropriation of nearly $2.5 billion for brac .

this amount is $3.1 billion less than the president requested .

h.r .

1591 , emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2007 , as passed by the house and the senate , includes the $3.1 billion for the 2005 department of defense base closure account .

unless the president vetoes the legislation , brac would be fully funded .

according to dod , "[w]hen implementing decisions during the past four brac rounds , the department worked diligently to assist its military and civilian personnel in transition ... [and] attempted to minimize involuntary separations of defense civilians at closing or realigning installations through a variety of placement , retirement , and federal retraining programs. .

as evidence of the success of these programs , dod also stated that "[e]ven though the department's civilian workforce has been reduced by 40 percent since the first brac rounds began in 1988 , less than 10 percent of the affected employees were involuntarily separated. .

for the current round , dod stated: one of the department's challenges at installations subject to brac decisions is the fair and effective management of human resources .

the closure of installations with the potential for separating a large number of civilian employees presents major challenges to commanders and human resource personnel .

while these installations will still have missions to accomplish , the employees will be stressed about their careers and employment security .

in this atmosphere , productivity will suffer and the employees' overall quality of life may diminish .

the department has a number of mitigating placement , transition , and worker assistance programs to draw from... .

in order to assist with efforts to mitigate the impact of job separations ( eg , through reduction in force ) and otherwise help civilian employees with transitions , dod established a "brac transition" website and created a brochure to assist civil service employees ( appropriated fund employees ) and nonappropriated fund ( naf ) employees .

the website outlines several available resources , including job placement programs , separation incentives , and various benefit and entitlement programs , including some from other agencies .

this report focuses on dod civil service ( appropriated fund ) employees .

when brac closures and realignments are implemented , there will likely be several implications and options for affected dod civil service employees .

the sections below briefly identify a number of them .

as noted in dod's brac report , however , "[c]oncerns about the implementation of brac decisions are numerous and based on very installation - specific circumstances .

for many of these concerns , sufficient information may be available only after brac decisions are finalized and installation - specific implementation plans are developed. .

therefore , it appears that detailed information about these implications or options will emerge over time .

implementation of dod's nsps could have implications in some respects for how dod employees are affected by the brac process .

according to dod , benefits such as health and life insurance , retirement , thrift savings plan , annual and sick leave , severance pay and moving expenses are untouched as a result of nsps .

additionally , the department's primary tools for transition assistance for its civilians , such as outplacement services , priority placement and separation incentives , will be available to employees under nsps .

eligibility for those programs and services is not affected by nsps .

nevertheless , it is possible that nsps implementation might affect collective bargaining agreements and rifs , with attendant implications for employees , as discussed elsewhere in this report .

it is not yet clear , however , if or when the nsps will be implemented for employees potentially affected by the brac process .

according to dod , brac will not affect the "overall implementation" of nsps , and activities on the brac list will not automatically be excluded from "spiral one" ( the first phase ) of the nsps implementation .

however , "[c]omponents will assess whether inclusion of a brac site in spiral one is appropriate , considering such factors as the anticipated time frame for the closure / realignment and impact on the mission and the workforce. .

dod employees are currently represented by 43 unions .

although the secretary of defense has broad authority to take appropriate action to provide for the more effective and efficient operation of the agency , including the transfer and reassignment of any function or duty , the collective bargaining agreements that were negotiated by dod and the unions may include provisions that have implications for how dod employees are affected by the brac process .

for example , an agreement may include a negotiated grievance procedure that could be invoked in connection with a rif action .

in national federation of federal employees v. flra , a 2004 case involving non - professional employees at the u.s. army's letterkenny depot , whose activities were transferred following a decision by the brac commission , the collective bargaining agreement that was negotiated between the parties included a provision that permitted the union to request bargaining within 10 days after receiving notice of a change in working conditions .

although a collective bargaining agreement may include provisions that affect the brac process , such provisions could arguably be nullified by the implementation of the nsps .

section 9901.905 ( a ) of the nsps regulations indicates that any provision of a collective bargaining agreement that is inconsistent with the regulations or dod implementing issuances is unenforceable .

in addition , section 9901.917 ( d ) ( 2 ) of the regulations states that management has no obligation to bargain over a change to a condition of employment unless the change is "foreseeable , substantial , and significant in terms of both impact and duration on the bargaining unit , or on those employees in that part of the bargaining unit affected by the change. .

in february 2006 , however , a federal district court enjoined the regulations on the grounds that they failed to ensure collective bargaining rights , did not provide for the independent third - party review of labor - relations decisions , and failed to provide a fair process for appealing adverse actions .

the case has been appealed and a decision from the court of appeals is expected shortly .

whether unions have a significant role in the brac process will likely depend on the validity of the nsps regulations , as well as the provisions of existing agreements and other dod implementing issuances .

