in 1999 , congress created a bipartisan commission to study the housing needs of the senior population as it ages .

the commission's final report , entitled a quiet crisis in america , warned of the nation's growing senior population and the lack of affordable housing and supportive services programs to meet future demand .

since the 1950s , the number of individuals age 65 and older has gradually begun to make up a larger percentage of the total u.s. population , and their numbers and share of the population are expected to continue to grow through 2050 .

between 2010 and 2050 , the number of persons age 65 and older is expected to grow from 40 million to nearly 86 million , and from 13% of the population to 20% .

in particular , the "oldest old," those individuals aged 85 and older , are becoming a larger share of the elderly population , raising concerns about the availability of supportive services in addition to affordable housing .

the bipartisan housing commission estimated that the aging of the population would result in the need for an additional 730,000 units of affordable housing by 2020 on top of the estimated 1.4 million households receiving assistance in 1999 .

the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) operates a number of programs that provide both housing and supportive services for elderly households .

hud defines "elderly person" as a household composed of one or more persons in which at least one person is age 62 or older at the time of initial occupancy .

five hud programs provide affordable rental housing with units designated specifically for low - income elderly households .

of these five , only one , the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly program , provides housing exclusively for elderly persons .

the other four programs provide housing for all age groups , but allow some properties to be devoted primarily to housing elderly residents .

the section 236 and section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) programs insured loans to private developers during the 1960s and early 1970s so that they could build low - income housing , some of which included buildings dedicated to elderly residents ( neither program makes new loans , although some buildings still have active mortgages ) .

the public housing and project - based section 8 programs also dedicate some buildings primarily for use by elderly households .

in addition to housing , hud funds four supportive services programs for elderly residents in its subsidized properties .

these programs are the congregate housing program , the service coordinator program , the resident opportunity and self - sufficiency ( ross ) service coordinator program , and the assisted living conversion program .

each program works to allow elderly persons living in hud - eligible properties to remain in their apartments through assistance and services .

this report provides a summary of the hud programs that provide multi - family rental housing for low - income elderly households and their related supportive services programs .

it also discusses funding and current issues in the area of assisted housing for low - income elderly persons .

however , the report does not include a comprehensive look at all housing programs that serve elderly households .

major sources of assistance that are not discussed include hud's section 8 voucher program , hud's mortgage insurance and reverse mortgage programs , and the department of agriculture's rural housing programs that provide assistance to elderly households .

four federal programs are available to provide services for elderly residents who live in hud - subsidized buildings .

the programs are the congregate housing program , the service coordinator program , the resident opportunity and self sufficiency ( ross ) service coordinator program , and the assisted living conversion / service enriched housing program .

three of the four programs — congregate housing , service coordinator , and assisted living conversion / service enriched housing — base their services on whether residents are considered to be either frail elderly or at - risk elderly .

in the ross program , services are available whether residents are frail or not .

whether individuals are frail elderly or at - risk elderly depends on their ability to engage in activities of daily living ( adls ) .

adls consist of five or six categories of activities considered necessary for an individual to maintain independent functioning and their own personal care ; the number of categories of activities varies slightly by program .

the five common categories of activities included in all three programs are eating , which includes cooking and serving food ; dressing ; bathing , which includes getting in and out of a tub or shower ; grooming ; and home management , which includes housework , shopping , and laundry .

the congregate housing program contains one additional adl focused on an individual's ability to move , and includes getting in and out of chairs , walking , going outdoors , and using the toilet .

residents who are age 62 or older and unable to perform at least three adls to some degree are considered frail , while those who are unable to perform one or two adls are considered at risk .

however , each of the three programs specifies that residents must be able to participate in adls at some minimal level .

for example , residents must be able to feed , dress , and wash themselves ; be able take care of their personal appearance ; and be mobile ( including use of a wheelchair ) .

in the congregate housing and assisted living conversion programs , residents qualify for assistance on an individual basis , while in the service coordinator program , entire buildings are eligible for services if a high enough percentage of residents is frail or at risk .

funding for section 202 and related programs ( principally the service coordinator and assisted living conversion programs ) was reduced by nearly 50% in fy2011 compared to the funding levels in the previous decade and has not recovered to previous levels since that time .

in the years since fy2011 , no funding has been appropriated for new section 202 units , and the assisted living conversion program has not received any funding since fy2013 .

instead , funding has largely been sufficient to support the renewal of section 202 rental assistance and service coordinator contracts .

while both president bush and president obama had proposed to reduce funding for the section 202 account on several occasions ( in fy2007 through fy2009 , and again in fy2011 ) , it was not until fy2011 that congress first reduced funding for the program .

in that year , it appropriated $400 million compared to the $825 million that was appropriated in fy2010 ( department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act ( p.l .

112-10 ) ) .

since then , appropriations have dipped as low as $355 million , in fy2013 , before rebounding to $420 million and $433 million in fy2016 .

see table 3 for section 202 funding levels through fy2016 , as well as funding for the multifamily service coordinator and assisted living conversion programs .

for more information about the status of appropriations , see transportation , hud , and related agencies' appropriations , issue before congress .

in the fy2014 appropriations law ( p.l .

113-76 ) , congress gave hud the authority to use excess residual receipts and other unobligated funds for "demonstration programs to test housing with services models for the elderly that demonstrate the potential to delay or avoid the need for nursing home care. .

in its fy2016 congressional budget justifications , hud had set aside $20 million for this purpose .

in january 2016 , hud released a notice of funding availability ( nofa ) for the supportive services demonstration for elderly households in hud - assisted multifamily housing .

the nofa provided that hud would award $15 million to at least 80 multifamily housing owners , including section 202 , project - based section 8 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) , and section 236 projects .

funds are available for grant recipients to hire full - time "enhanced" service coordinators and part - time wellness nurses .

through the grant applicant pool , hud will select properties to be control subjects to use as comparisons in determining the effectiveness of the demonstration .

one of the issues faced by owners of older section 202 developments is finding the funds to make improvements to their properties , which may be deteriorating or in need of modernization , so that they can continue to provide affordable housing .

one of the ways this can be done is through refinancing .

owners pay off their old section 202 loan and use the property's equity to make needed improvements .

however , prior to 2011 , owners of older section 202 buildings had to obtain hud approval to prepay their loans ( in most cases ) , and refinance into a loan with "a lower interest rate on the principal of the loan for the project and in reductions in debt service" ( i.e. , reduced principal and interest payments ) .

for owners of section 202 properties that were financed prior to 1974 , when interest rates were set at about 3% , it was difficult , if not impossible , to meet the requirement of a lower interest rate and reduced debt service .

the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly act ( p.l .

111-372 ) changed the law to allow owners with interest rates at or below 6% to refinance as long as they use proceeds from the new loan to address the physical needs of the property ( notwithstanding the reduced interest rate and lower debt service requirement ) .

in addition , the law gave hud the authority to subordinate existing section 202 debt when owners obtain new financing for the project .

in the case of a refinancing , section 202 owners must use the proceeds from the new loan either in a manner that is advantageous to the tenants or to provide affordable rental housing and social services for elderly persons living in another hud - assisted property owned by the same entity .

the law also enumerated purposes that would fulfill these requirements .

among the purposes for which owners can use refinancing proceeds under p.l .

111-372 are 15% for supportive services , or more with a waiver from hud ( prior law did not allow for hud waiver ) , rehabilitation that results in a reduction in total units ( eg , converting efficiency units to one - bedroom units ) , and payment of developers' fees .

p.l .

111-372 also extended the term of the property's affordability when owners prepay their section 202 loans ( with or without refinancing ) .

congress initially allowed prepayment of section 202 loans as long as property owners continue to operate their properties on terms at least as favorable to tenants as the terms under the original loan agreement up through the original date of loan maturity ( p.l .

98-181 ) .

in 2000 , the american homeownership and economic opportunity act ( p.l .

106-569 ) added that , if there is a rental - assistance contract in place , the property owner must continue to operate under the terms required by the rental - assistance contract through loan maturity .

p.l .

111-372 updated the law to provide that in order to gain hud approval to prepay an existing section 202 loan , an owner must agree to maintain affordability under the terms of the original loan or existing project - based rental assistance contract for 20 years beyond the date of the original loan's maturation .

another change to existing law contained in p.l .

111-372 was the authorization of "senior preservation rental assistance contracts" ( sprac ) for previously unassisted units in cases where owners prepay their section 202 loans .

in general , unassisted units are in properties that were financed prior to 1974 , when most units did not receive rental assistance .

spracs are available to prevent displacement of tenants in cases where a refinancing results in increased rents .

hud released a final notice describing how sprac funds would be awarded on july 3 , 2013 .

the law also provided that section 8 rental assistance is not to increase as the result of a refinancing unless it occurs pursuant to mark - up - to - market and mark - up - to - budget transactions under the multifamily assisted housing reform and affordability act ( mahra ) .

before p.l .

111-372 was enacted , congress had included similar refinancing provisions in the fy2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) and the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

however , the refinancing provisions did not specifically amend existing law , so they were in effect only for the duration of the fiscal year that the appropriations law was in effect .

as in p.l .

111-372 , under the appropriations laws , owners were able to refinance loans with interest rates at or below 6% in order to address a property's physical needs .

however , the language in the appropriations acts contained some provisions that were not part of p.l .

111-372 .

for example , the transactions were to meet a cost benefit analysis established by hud , and , instead of providing project - based rental assistance to previously - unassisted units in cases of increased rents , the appropriations laws provided for enhanced section 8 vouchers .

on may 4 , 2012 , hud released a notice with policies and procedures governing all refinancings of section 202 loans .

the housing finance and rental assistance programs discussed in this report all operate through private for - profit or nonprofit entities .

in the section 202 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) , and section 236 programs , hud entered into agreements with private owners to maintain affordable housing for a period of years , ranging from 20 years to 50 years .

similarly , hud has entered into rental assistance contracts with many owners to provide rental support for the units for a period of time .

the affordability terms agreed to by property owners participating in these programs , sometimes referred to as "affordability restrictions," began to come to an end in the 1980s .

when the restrictions on these properties end , there is a risk that they will become unaffordable to low - and moderate - income tenants , and that tenants will be displaced .

efforts to maintain the affordability of the remaining hud - assisted properties as their affordability restrictions come to an end are often referred to as "assisted housing preservation. .

affordable housing units may be converted to market - rate housing under several circumstances .

first , when hud - subsidized mortgages or direct loans reach maturity or when owners decide to prepay their mortgages , they may decide to convert the units to market - rate rentals .

a second possibility is that owners receiving project - based section 8 rental assistance could lose or terminate their contracts .

a third concern is that owners of older buildings will not have enough funds to modernize or renovate deteriorating facilities , and units will be unavailable because they are not habitable .

the possibilities vary depending on the type of mortgage subsidy program or rental assistance contract .

below is a brief summary of how hud assistance can come to an end .

for more information about the issue of hud - assisted housing preservation , see crs report r41182 , preservation of hud - assisted housing , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

loan maturity — owners of section 202 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) , and section 236 financed properties may convert units to market - rate rents upon mortgage maturation provided there is no rental assistance contract attached to the unit .

for units receiving section 8 assistance , the assistance continues until the end of the contract ( although the contract may be renewed after loan maturation ) , at which point tenants receive section 8 vouchers .

in the case of rap and rent supplement , the rental assistance contracts generally end at loan maturity .

tenants receiving assistance under rent supplement do not receive section 8 vouchers , while rap - assisted tenants are eligible for vouchers .

loan prepayment — many , though not all , owners of section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) and section 236 properties can prepay their hud - insured mortgages without hud's permission and end affordability restrictions .

however , income - eligible tenants receive section 8 vouchers .

opt out of rental assistance contracts — when owners opt out of section 8 contracts , assisted tenants receive section 8 vouchers .

tenants receiving assistance under rent supplement do not receive section 8 vouchers , while rap - assisted tenants are eligible for vouchers .

hud actions: toward the end of fy2010 , hud began publishing notices that would enable section 202 and other property owners to make improvements to their multifamily housing developments , potentially preserving affordable units that would otherwise fall into disrepair .

one notice , published on december 20 , 2010 , gives hud the discretion to subordinate section 202 loans when owners have "immediate needs for rehabilitation , significant or emergency repairs," but are unable to go through the refinancing process to pay off the section 202 loan .

owners must be able to show that the subordination is necessary in order to preserve the project , and must enter into extended use agreements for the longer of 20 years beyond the loan's original maturity date or the date on which the subordinated loan is paid off .

similarly , hud issued a notice that gives it the authority to defer the repayment of flexible subsidy debt in circumstances that would assist in preserving properties .

from the late 1970s to the mid - 1990s , the flexible subsidy program provided loans to properties with hud - assisted financing that were having financial difficulties ( the last year in which congress gave new obligation authority was fy1995 ) .

hud may approve deferral of payment in cases where an owner refinances a loan but the funds are not sufficient to pay off the flexible subsidy debt .

as with subordination of section 202 loans , an owner has to show that the deferral is necessary to ensure preservation of the project and must agree to an extended use agreement for the longer of 20 years beyond the flexible subsidy loan's original maturity date or the loan's payoff date .

another hud notice , issued on february 1 , 2011 , allows section 202 owners , among others , to convert efficiency units to one - bedroom units , even if conversion results in fewer total units in the building .

conversion may occur because efficiency units are undesirable and owners are unable to rent them , resulting in lack of income to keep properties operational .

in order to be able to convert units , owners must demonstrate that the local market demand is such that conversion is necessary and that it will put the property in a better financial position .

in a notice issued on november 10 , 2011 , hud provided guidance to nonprofit owners of section 236 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) , and other properties with fha - insured mortgages regarding their ability to realize profits from property sales .

nonprofit owners will be able to realize sale proceeds if each of the following requirements are met: ( 1 ) the property is sold to another owner that will enter into a use agreement to maintain affordability for at least 20 years beyond the original mortgage maturity date under the same terms as the original mortgage , ( 2 ) if there is a section 8 housing assistance payment ( hap ) contract in place , it must be renewed for at least 20 years , ( 3 ) rent increases must be implemented in conformance with guidance in the notice , ( 4 ) the purchaser must submit a capital needs assessment , and significant repairs must be undertaken after the transaction closes , ( 5 ) the purchaser should have a feasible financing plan for the duration of the use agreement or hap contract ( whichever is longer ) , and ( 6 ) the purchaser must be experienced in the operation of affordable rental housing .

congressional action: the fy2012 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

112-55 ) established the rental assistance demonstration ( rad ) .

rad allows existing housing subsidy programs to convert to section 8 project - based rental assistance ( pbra ) or section 8 project - based vouchers ( pbv ) .

rad has two components , one of which allows owners to convert rent supplement and the rap contracts to pbv and pbra assistance .

hud does not have the authority to renew rent supplement or rap contracts when they expire , but has the authority to renew section 8 contracts .

according to the 2014 american community survey , approximately 2.72 million grandparents lived with and were responsible for the basic needs of one or more grandchildren under the age of 18 .

of those families , 21% were in poverty .

the numbers have increased since 2000 , when approximately 2.4 million grandparents were raising grandchildren , with 19% of the families poor .

the hud guidelines governing the section 202 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) , section 236 , and certain project - based section 8 assistance programs specifically prohibit the exclusion of children from these developments ( "owners may not exclude otherwise eligible elderly families with children from elderly properties ..." ) .

guidelines governing public housing developments are less specific , although the guidance states that "there is nothing in the definition of elderly family that excludes children .

many elderly families today consist of grandparents with custody of grandchildren .

this is an elderly family. .

even if developments designed for elderly residents do allow children , however , they might not be equipped to serve families with both elderly members and young children .

for example , most units in elderly housing developments are either efficiencies or have only one bedroom , and may not have the space to accommodate family members .

in addition , elderly developments might lack common spaces where children might play , or the after - school programs that are sometimes a part of hud - subsidized complexes for families .

in order to address the growing number of grandparents raising grandchildren , congress enacted the living equitably — grandparents aiding children and youth ( legacy ) act in 2003 as part of the american dream downpayment act ( p.l .

108-186 ) .

the legacy act provided for the funding of housing units in the section 202 program for elderly residents raising grandchildren or other relatives age 19 or younger .

congress did not fund the legacy act until fy2006 , when it appropriated $3.96 million for an intergenerational families demonstration project .

in december 2008 , hud announced two awardees , both of which received capital grants and rental assistance: one project consisting of 10 units in chicago and the other consisting of 9 units in smithville , tn .

the legacy act also called for hud , together with the census bureau , to produce a study of the affordable housing needs of grandparents raising grandchildren .

in april 2008 , hud released a report to congress on intergenerational housing needs and hud programs .

the report describes the number , characteristics , and housing conditions of grandparent - headed households and households with other relatives raising related children .

the report estimated that 265,000 grandparent - headed households and 225,000 households headed by other relatives were considered very low income , and therefore would have been eligible for legacy act - funded housing .

