rasul v. bush , issued by the u.s. supreme court at the end of its 2003-2004 term , clarified that u.s. courts do have jurisdiction to hear petitions for habeas corpus on behalf of the approximately 550 persons then detained at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , in connection with the war against terrorism , establishing a role for federal courts to play in determining the validity of the military commissions convened pursuant to president bush's military order ( m.o. ) .

of november 13 , 2001 .

after dozens of petitions for habeas corpus were filed in the federal district court for the district of columbia , congress passed the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) , revoking federal court jurisdiction over habeas claims , at least with respect to those not already pending , and creating jurisdiction in the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to hear appeals of final decisions of military commissions .

the supreme court , in hamdan v. rumsfeld , overturned a decision by the d.c .

circuit that had upheld the military commissions , holding instead that although congress has authorized the use of military commissions , such commissions must follow procedural rules as similar as possible to courts - martial proceedings , in compliance with the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

in response , congress passed the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca ) to authorize military commissions and establish procedural rules that are modeled after , but depart from in some significant ways , the ucmj .

the department of defense has issued regulations for the conduct of military commissions pursuant to the mca .

one detainee , david matthew hicks of australia , was convicted of material support to terrorism pursuant to a plea agreement .

trials began for two other defendants , but were halted after the military judges dismissed charges based on lack of jurisdiction , finding in both cases that the defendants had not properly been found to be "unlawful enemy combatants. .

the prosecutors appealed the cases to the court of military commissions review ( cmcr ) , which reversed the dismissal of charges in one case and remanded it to the military commission for a determination of whether the accused is an "unlawful enemy combatant. .

the cmcr decision rejected the government's contention that the determination by a combatant status review tribunal ( csrt ) that a detainee is an "enemy combatant" was a sufficient basis for jurisdiction , but also rejected the military judge's finding that the military commission was not itself empowered to make the appropriate determination .

in response to the hamdan decision , congress enacted the military commissions act of 2006 ( "mca" ) to grant the president express authority to convene military commissions to prosecute those fitting the definition under the mca of "alien unlawful enemy combatants. .

the mca eliminates the requirement for military commissions to conform to either of the two uniformity requirements in article 36 , ucmj .

instead , it establishes a new chapter 47a in title 10 , u.s. code and excepts military commissions under the new chapter from the requirements in article 36 .

it provides that the ucmj "does not , by its terms , apply to trial by military commissions except as specifically provided in this chapter. .

while declaring that the new chapter is "based upon the procedures for trial by general courts - martial under [the ucmj]," it establishes that "[t]he judicial construction and application of [the ucmj] are not binding on military commissions established under this chapter. .

it expressly exempts the new military commission from ucmj articles 10 ( speedy trial ) , 31 ( self - incrimination warnings ) and 32 ( pretrial investigations ) , and amends articles 21 , 28 , 48 , 50 ( a ) , 104 , and 106 of the ucmj to except military commissions under the new chapter .

other provisions of the ucmj are to apply to trial by military commissions under the new chapter only to the extent provided therein .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress to amend the mca .

for additional legislation pertaining to detainees and habeas corpus , see crs report rl33180 , enemy combatant detainees: habeas corpus challenges in federal court , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

h.r .

1585 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( as passed by the house of representatives on may 17 , 2007 ) , would require a report within 60 days after enactment that contains a plan for the transfer of each individual presently detained guantanamo bay , cuba , who is or has ever been classified as an "enemy combatant. .

it would also require a report identifying detainees who are charged with crimes , those who are eligible for release , and those who are not charged but ineligible for release , supplemented by a list of "actions required to be undertaken , by the secretary of defense , possibly the heads of other federal agencies , and congress , to ensure that detainees who are subject to an order calling for their release or transfer from the guantanamo bay facility have , in fact , been released. .

section 1057 .

h.r .

2543 , the military commissions revision act of 2007 , would redefine "unlawful enemy combatant" to mean "a person who has engaged in , attempted , or conspired to engage in acts of armed hostilities or terrorism against the united states or its co - belligerents , and who is not a lawful enemy combatant. .

it would permit the admission into evidence of statements obtained by a degree of coercion less than torture in military commission only if the military judge finds that ( 1 ) the totality of the circumstances indicates that the statement possesses probative value to a reasonable person ; ( 2 ) the interests of justice would best be served by admitting the statement into evidence ; and 3 ) the interrogation methods used to obtain the statement do not amount to cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment .

the bill would also repeal 10 u.s.c .

§ 948d ( c ) so that csrt determinations would no longer be dispositive for the purpose of establishing jurisdiction of military commissions , and would restore habeas corpus for persons detained as 'enemy combatants' for more than two years and have not been charged with a crime .

s. 1547 and s. 1548 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( reported by the senate armed services committee and the senate select committee on intelligence on june 5 and june 9 , respectively ) , would make csrts mandatory for all detainees and would require the secretary of defense to provide procedural rules in some ways similar to those prescribed by the mca for military commissions .

section 1023 .

specifically , detainees would have a right to an attorney for csrt proceedings , would be entitled to obtain evidence and witnesses under rules consistent with those that apply to military commissions , and the detainee's counsel would have an opportunity to view classified evidence , including evidence to be admitted against the detainee and any potentially exculpatory evidence , consistent with the procedures for the protection of classified information in section 949d ( f ) of title 10 , u.s. code .

the detainee would be entitled to have access to all unclassified evidence and "an unclassified summary of the classified evidence admitted against the detainee that is sufficiently specific to provide the detainee a fair opportunity to respond , with the assistance of counsel , to such evidence. .

information obtained through torture would not be admissible into evidence before a csrt .

information obtained through lesser forms of coercion would be admissible under the same standards as in military commissions , amended as described below .

with respect to military commissions , the bills would define "unlawful enemy combatant" to include any alien who has been a "knowing and active participant in an organization that engaged in hostilities against the united states. .

they would also prohibit the use of information acquired through coercion not amounting to cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment unless the statement is found to be reliable and probative ; its admission would best serve the interests of justice ; and either 1 ) the tribunal determines that the alleged coercion was incidental to the lawful conduct of military operations at the point of apprehension ; 2 ) the statement was voluntary ; or 3 ) the interrogation methods used to obtain the statement do not amount to cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment prohibited by section 1003 of the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000dd ) .

the rules for the admission of hearsay evidence would be amended to eliminate the reference to the requirements and limitations applicable to the disclosure of classified information. .

rather than requiring the party opposing admission to demonstrate that the evidence is unreliable or lacking in probative value , the bills would make the military judge responsible for determining whether "the totality of the circumstances render the evidence more probative on the point for which it is offered than other evidence which the proponent can procure through reasonable efforts , taking into consideration the unique circumstances of the conduct of military and intelligence operations during hostilities. .

h.r .

2710 would restore habeas corpus for detainees .

it would eliminate the csrt review procedure , but retain the dta provision for appealing military commission decisions , in addition to habeas corpus .

h.r .

1416 and s. 185 , the habeas corpus restoration act of 2007 , would remove habeas corpus restrictions on detainees and clarify that habeas corpus is available to challenge military commission decisions .

h.r .

1416 would also strike the prohibition in section 5 of the mca on the use of the geneva conventions as a source of rights in habeas corpus and other court actions against the united states or its officers and employees .

h.r .

2826 would amend 28 u.s.c .

§ 2241 ( e ) to allow habeas corpus actions and requests for injunctive relief against transfer , except in cases of detainees held in an active war zone where the armed forces are implementing the prisoner of war ( pow ) regulation , ar 190-8 , but would prohibit all other court actions by detainees .

however , it would also amend the mca in such a way as to maintain the current limited appeal of military commission decisions , in addition to habeas corpus .

h.r .

267 , the military commissions habeas corpus restoration act of 2007 , would eliminate restrictions on habeas corpus in 28 u.s.c .

§ 2241 ( e ) , but would eliminate jurisdiction over all other actions , except for dta challenges of csrt determinations and military commission decisions .

s. 1876 , the national security with justice act of 2007 , would redefine "enemy combatant" to mean a person who is not a lawful enemy combatant who has engaged in hostilities against the united states ; or has purposefully and materially supported hostilities against the united states ( other than hostilities engaged in as a lawful enemy combatant ) .

it would expressly exclude from the definition of "enemy combatant" u.s. citizens and aliens lawfully within the united states who are taken into custody there .

section 201 .

the bill would eliminate the mca provision for exclusivity of its appeals provisions , 10 u.s.c .

§ 950g , and would eliminate the provision in the dta for appeals of status determinations , but would extend a statutory right of habeas corpus to detainees , giving the d.c. federal district court jurisdiction to hear challenges to detention and challenges of final decisions of military commissions .

section 301 .

habeas corpus challenges would not be permitted by persons detained in a foreign zone of military operations where the secretary of defense certifies that the united states is implementing its detainee regulations , army regulation 190-8 , or any successor regulation .

s. 576 and its companion bill , h.r .

1415 , the restoring the constitution act of 2007 , would redefine "unlawful enemy combatant" to mean an individual who is not a lawful combatant who "directly participates in hostilities in a zone of active combat against the united states," or who "planned , authorized , committed , or intentionally aided the terrorist acts on the united states of september 11 , 2001,"or harbored such a person .

the bills would also expressly limit the definition of "unlawful enemy combatant" for use in designating individuals as eligible for trial by military commission .

the bills would require procedural and evidentiary rules for military commissions to conform to the ucmj except where expressly provided otherwise , and would limit the secretary of defense's authority to make exceptions to commission procedures and rules of evidence to those made necessary by unique circumstances of military or intelligence operations during hostilities .

the bills would repeal the authority for civilian attorneys to act as trial ( prosecution ) counsel in a commission proceeding , but would permit civilian attorneys to act as defense counsel , with the assistance of detailed defense counsel .

an accused who elects to represent himself would be authorized to obtain the assistance of civilian counsel in addition to detailed defense counsel .

the bills would modify the evidentiary requirements of the mca in several respects .

the provision for permitting evidence acquired without a warrant would not apply to evidence acquired within the united states .

the responsibility for determining the reliability of hearsay evidence would fall on the military judge , on motion of counsel , rather than requiring the party opposing the evidence to demonstrate its lack of reliability .

all statements obtained through coercion would be inadmissible before a military commission , except against a person accused of coercion .

the military judge would have the authority to order trial counsel to disclose to defense counsel the sources , methods , or activities by which witnesses or evidence against the accused was obtained , if he determines that that information might reasonably tend to affect the weight given to the out of court statement by the members of the military commission .

the prosecution could withdraw the evidence in lieu of compliance with such an order .

if the military judge were to determine that substitute information describing evidence of an exculpatory nature insufficiently protected the accused's opportunity for a fair trial , the judge could dismiss some or all of the charges or specifications or take such other action as he deemed necessary in the interest of justice .

habeas corpus would be available to detainees to challenge their detention , but other causes of action would be eliminated .

the bills would route appeals of military commissions to the court of appeals for the armed forces rather than the court of military commissions review .

they would also eliminate the mca provision excluding geneva conventions as a "source of rights," 10 u.s.c .

§ 948b ( g ) , replacing it with a provision stating that military commission rules that are determined to be inconsistent with the geneva conventions are to have no effect .

the mca would expressly state that the president's authority to interpret the geneva conventions is subject to congressional oversight and judicial review .

the bills would provide for expedited challenges to the mca in the d.c. district court .

s. 447 , the federal death penalty abolition act of 2007 , would eliminate the death penalty for crimes triable by military commissions in 10 u.s.c .

§ 950v ( b ) .

the following tables provide a comparison of the military tribunals under the regulations issued by the department of defense , standard procedures for general courts - martial under the manual for courts - martial , and military tribunals as authorized by the military commissions act of 2006 .

table 1 compares the legal authorities for establishing military tribunals , the jurisdiction over persons and offenses , and the structures of the tribunals .

table 2 , which compares procedural safeguards incorporated in the previous dod regulations ( in force prior to the hamdan decision and the enactment of the mca ) and the ucmj , follows the same order and format used in crs report rl31262 , selected procedural safeguards in federal , military , and international courts , by [author name scrubbed] , in order to facilitate comparison of the proposed legislation to safeguards provided in federal court , the international military tribunals that tried world war ii crimes at nuremberg and tokyo , and contemporary ad hoc tribunals set up by the un security council to try crimes associated with hostilities in the former yugoslavia and rwanda .

