trade capacity building ( tcb ) can be broadly defined as development assistance aimed at helping countries build the physical , human , and institutional capacity to participate in global trade .

it includes assistance to negotiate , implement , and benefit from trade agreements , such as agreements within the world trade organization ( wto ) , and regional and bilateral free trade agreements .

many experts consider tcb to be vital for developing countries to benefit from trade liberalization and to participate actively in the global economy .

in turn , trade liberalization and participation in the global economy are considered important factors in promoting economic growth and poverty reduction .

this report examines key issues in tcb , provides an overview of u.s. and international tcb programs , and explores congressional involvement in tcb .

tcb is provided by bilateral donors such as the united states , the european commission , individual european countries , and japan , korea , and canada .

multilateral institutions such as the world bank , the inter - american development bank ( idb ) , the world trade organization ( wto ) , and the united nations also provide tcb .

direct recipients of tcb include government ministries , customs officials , business owners , local non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and farmers .

tcb can take the form of workshops , on - the - job training , data collection , feasibility studies , infrastructure upgrades , and efficiency improvements in procedures .

ideally , developing countries incorporate tcb needs in their national development plans , and tcb programs are planned in partnership between recipient and donor countries .

the u.s. government provides tcb assistance to developing countries worldwide on a bilateral basis , and through contributions to multilateral organizations and established global tcb trust funds .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) has historically provided the bulk of u.s. tcb assistance , but other agencies such as the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , u.s. department of commerce , and u.s. trade and development agency ( ustda ) also provide such assistance .

the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) first provided tcb assistance in fy2005 , and in fy2006 and fy2007 its tcb funding obligations surpassed those of usaid .

u.s. tcb is not currently a discrete line item with its own budget ; it is funded through several different initiatives within usaid and other agencies .

in fy2007 , u.s. government agencies reported obligating nearly $1.4 billion to tcb , of which over $1 billion was obligated by the mcc and usaid .

according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the united states allocated about 25% of its total official development assistance ( oda ) to tcb between 2002 and 2005 .

interest in tcb has grown in the donor community , both in the united states and abroad .

as developing countries become more involved in trade negotiations , trade capacity becomes a higher priority issue for them and for donors .

developing countries from every region have entered free trade agreement ( fta ) negotiations with the united states or the european union .

they have also been heavily engaged in the doha round of wto negotiations .

in order to conclude the doha round and other trade negotiations , developing country needs may require consideration , and that may include additional resources for tcb .

congress has several policy interests in tcb .

first , tcb may be included in some potential free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

the united states has concluded fta negotiations with some developing countries , and congress may be asked to consider implementing legislation for these potential ftas .

congress also appropriates funds for tcb through usaid and other budgets .

congress may play a role in oversight of tcb programs , to ensure effectiveness and adherence to u.s. interests .

tcb is also considered a compliment to u.s. trade preference programs such as the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , which congress oversees .

finally , tcb is provided to developing countries through their participation in the wto , and has been a topic of discussion in the doha development agenda ( dda ) round of negotiations .

congress may consider implementing legislation for a wto agreement , and tcb could be important in that discussion .

there is no set definition of tcb in trade and development public policy discourse .

a narrow definition of tcb might include only assistance directly related to trade agreements , such as assistance to negotiate and implement such agreements .

however , tcb is usually defined more broadly to include all types of development assistance that directly affect a country's capacity to participate in trade .

this broader definition of tcb is assumed for the purpose of this report ( see the box on page 3 for elaboration on the various areas of tcb assistance ) .

the assistance contained within the broad definition of tcb includes addressing the regulatory environment for business , trade , and investment , supply - side constraints such as low productive and entrepreneurial capacity , and inadequate physical infrastructure such as transport and storage facilities .

the goals of tcb include overcoming adjustment costs from liberalized trade ; offsetting high implementation costs of trade agreements ; offsetting preference erosion from multilateral liberalization ; offsetting lost tariff revenue ; improving negotiating capacity ; and addressing supply - side constraints that make it difficult for developing countries to compete in world markets .

a risk of defining tcb too broadly is that almost any assistance activity can be loosely defined as tcb .

there are many areas of assistance that focus on domestic policy and capacity issues in a developing country , for example , business regulatory regimes , but also have direct consequences for trade .

however , there are other areas of assistance , such as providing training to local microenterprises that are not likely to engage in international trade , where the linkage to trade is often not clear .

in some cases , two similar projects in different countries can be similarly described on paper , but may be implemented with different objectives in mind .

one project may be strongly trade - related , while another may not qualify strongly as tcb .

this poses a problem when examining the aggregate tcb data .

it is useful to know the total amounts of tcb assistance provided to different countries for summary purposes , but this data should be viewed as an inexact estimate of tcb , rather than as a definitive tool for measuring tcb assistance .

trade capacity building has some synonyms .

it is also referred to as aid for trade or trade - related technical assistance ( trta ) , especially within the context of the wto .

some distinctions can be made between these terms , but since there is no agreement on them they are treated as interchangeable within this report .

trade capacity building is based on the premise that trade liberalization leads to economic growth for both developed and developing countries , but developing countries do not have the capacity to achieve trade - led economic growth without assistance .

on a more basic level , tcb assumes that donors can have an impact on trade capacity in developing countries .

tcb is often cited as an important complement to market access , which is believed to be necessary but insufficient for developing countries to increase participation in trade .

other reasons given for tcb are to offset preference erosion and the adjustment costs of trade liberalization .

the development community was skeptical about using trade as a vehicle for economic growth and development in the 1960s and 1970s .

at the time , import substitution industrialization ( isi ) , where developing countries limited imports of manufactured products to foster a domestic manufacturing sector , was the prevailing theory in trade and development .

aid was used to support industrialization , and not to foster trade .

in the 1980s , after the apparent failure of isi policies , there was a shift in mainstream development thinking to the view that removing barriers to trade and other market distortions would foster growth .

as the expected gains from trade and economic reforms did not materialize , another shift in development thought took place in the late 1990s .

the development agenda changed its focus to strengthening institutions that support markets and trade - led growth .

development experts recognized that liberalized trade was necessary but not sufficient for increased growth and poverty reduction .

at the same time , capacity development became a popular term during the 1990s , reflecting the need for demand - driven assistance as opposed to assistance imposed from outside and based primarily on what donors were willing and able to provide .

tcb grew from these ideas about trade and development .

since the beginning of u.s. development assistance in the 1950s , u.s. development programs have had elements of what we now refer to as tcb assistance .

the types of tcb assistance provided , from agricultural development to transportation infrastructure , have changed based on the evolving focus of overall u.s. development assistance .

the composition and focus of such assistance over the last 60 years have been determined mainly by changes in u.s. foreign policy , prevailing theories of development , and domestic administrative realities .

tcb emerged as a concept in u.s. development assistance parlance around 1999 , even though many of the programs included in tcb had been ongoing for years .

before tcb , the terms used for similar assistance were generally technical assistance or technical cooperation .

the development of tcb as a concept brought some changes to the planning and implementation of tcb programs .

in the past , these programs were conceived as general economic development programs , and not necessarily formed with a wider trade agenda in mind .

more importantly , capacity building relies on a partnership with beneficiaries , involving a variety of actors , including government , private sector , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

tcb programs are also meant to be planned in coordination with trade policy .

with tcb on the agenda , trade officials , both in the united states and in developing countries , may have a greater influence on development policy than they did previously .

according to the usaid trade capacity building database , u.s. government agencies obligated $1.4 billion in tcb assistance worldwide in fy2007 .

tcb is funded through a variety of u.s. agencies and budgets , and includes a variety of programs , from agricultural development to wto accession .

the united states began tracking its tcb assistance in 1999 , and according to the tcb database it climbed steadily every year until fy2006 , from $370 million in 1999 to $1.4 billion in 2006 and 2007 .

it is possible that this apparent four - fold increase over seven years is partly due to greater reporting of tcb assistance by the responsible agencies , as well as an inclination to include more activities within the definition of tcb .

however , there has also been increased interest in tcb which may have led to greater funding for more programs .

from fy1999 to fy2005 , usaid funded the majority of tcb assistance .

in 2005 , it funded 52% of total u.s. government tcb assistance , about 66% in 2004 , and around 70% in previous years .

in fy2006 , the mcc became the largest u.s. government funder of tcb , with $610.3 million or 44% of total u.s. tcb ( as compared to $473.1 million from usaid ) .

in fy2007 , the mcc funded even more tcb: $775.4 million , or 55% of total u.s. tcb .

the mcc first obligated funds for tcb in 2005 .

the united states provides tcb to a range of developing countries around the world , including potential fta partners .

in developing countries where the united states is negotiating an fta , the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) coordinates tcb assistance through tcb working groups , consisting of u.s. government interagency representatives and partner country government representatives .

the cafta - dr tcb working group was the first such working group , and it met concurrently with the fta negotiations .

the working group was institutionalized as a committee in the text of the negotiated agreement .

since the passage of the agreement , the cafta - dr tcb committee will reportedly focus its work on coordinating tcb programs for implementing the agreement and addressing concerns regarding the transition to free trade .

as shown in figure 2 , tcb funding trends since 2004 have varied by region .

the middle east and north africa region received much less tcb assistance in 2006 and 2007 than in the previous two years because of a decline in tcb assistance in 2006 to iraq ( from $101 million in 2005 to $3 million in 2007 ) , egypt ( from $69 million in 2005 to $18 million in 2007 ) , and the west bank / gaza ( from $35 million in 2005 to $0 in 2007 ) .

the regions of sub - saharan africa and the former soviet republics both saw a surge in tcb assistance in 2006 because of mcc - funded tcb activities: $276 million to cape verde and benin in sub - saharan africa ; and $280 million to armenia and georgia in the former soviet republics .

in fy2007 the former soviet republics received more typical levels of tcb assistance because the region had no new mcc compacts , whereas ghana and mali in sub saharan africa signed new compacts , inflating the region's tcb funding .

the latin america and caribbean region had a similarly high level of tcb assistance in 2005 and 2007 , as a result of mcc funded assistance .

no mcc funds for tcb were obligated to the latin america and caribbean region in 2006 .

tcb assistance is often provided on a regional level to improve efficiency and encourage regional economic integration .

some projects are also provided on a global level , or they may be recorded as global projects in the database while focusing on individual countries in different regions .

a variety of u.s. agencies have a role in providing tcb assistance .

all u.s. government tcb assistance is coordinated by a tcb interagency group , which is co - chaired by ustr and usaid .

the interagency group meets monthly to coordinate on general tcb issues including free trade negotiations , wto issues , the integrated framework ( if ) , preference programs , and performance measures .

figure 4 below shows a breakdown of the different agencies' shares of tcb funding in 2005 .

some agencies implement tcb funded by other agencies , so figure 5 , which illustrates tcb assistance implementation rather than funding , shows a slightly wider distribution of tcb implementation across agencies .

for example , the department of labor and the department of agriculture both fund their own programs and implement tcb activities funded by other agencies such as usaid and the state department .

this interagency cooperation is an example of agencies coordinating their activities through the interagency group .

the "other" category represents a greater share of tcb program implementation , because many agencies with relatively small tcb programs are funded by other agencies .

a low level of tcb funding by a particular agency may not be indicative of inconsequential involvement in tcb ; some important tcb programs require less funding than others .

infrastructure development is inherently more expensive , and workshops are less expensive .

one u.s. government office with a significant role in tcb is not included in the u.s. tcb database — that is ustr , which has an office for trade capacity building , but does not implement or fund any tcb programs .

ustr exclusively plays a role in coordinating tcb .

negotiating offices within ustr occasionally advise tcb implementors when they are providing assistance related to a particular agreement or negotiation .

the fact that tcb is provided by many different u.s. government agencies has been cited as both an advantage and a source of concern .

on the advantage side , more agency involvement means greater support from a wider pool of expertise and funding options .

in some cases expertise is at least as important as funding , and it can be helpful to have u.s. regulatory agencies understand tcb objectives .

one example of this benefit is the u.s. department of agriculture's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) .

aphis is primarily a regulatory agency with the responsibility of protecting u.s. agriculture from foreign pests and diseases .

obtaining clearance from aphis has been notoriously difficult for agricultural producers from developing countries .

some have argued that bringing aphis into tcb has not only benefitted developing countries by providing additional expertise , but has raised awareness of this problem within aphis .

the issue of regulatory agencies providing tcb has raised some concerns .

some observers caution that the mission of regulatory trade agencies , generally to protect the united states from potentially harmful imports , conflicts with that of tcb , generally to encourage imports from developing countries .

this conflict of interest may result in either ineffective tcb or protection , or both .

the other major concern about the variety of u.s. government agencies in tcb is that it can be difficult to coordinate activities across the agencies .

congress has passed appropriations legislation providing funds and guidance for trade capacity building .

other legislation passed by congress may restrict the provision of tcb , either by limiting which countries can receive certain types of funding or by limiting the types of activities in which foreign assistance may be provided .

trade capacity building is generally regarded as an activity taken on by the united states and other donors for altruistic purposes: to help developing countries benefit from trade and achieve poverty reduction .

there are other possible motivations for tcb that are not as altruistic .

one possible motivation is to create markets for u.s. exports .

tcb might achieve this objective indirectly by increasing developing countries' incomes , which would in turn would allow developing countries to import more goods from the united states .

tcb can more directly create markets for u.s. exports by influencing developing countries' policies ( such as technical standards ) to be more open to u.s. goods , and by promoting development in sectors that would likely require imports of intermediate products and capital goods from the united states .

the u.s. export - import bank facilitates this process , by providing loans to businesses in developing countries to import american capital goods such as factory equipment .

another possible motivation for providing tcb is to gain the cooperation of developing countries in trade negotiations , both bilateral and multilateral .

by helping trade officials in developing countries understand the technical aspects of an agreement , they are more likely to complete negotiations and implement the agreement .

developing countries are also more likely to be agreeable in negotiations if they expect to receive assistance in implementing the agreement .

an example of this can be found in the trade facilitation negotiations of the wto doha round .

at first , developing countries did not want trade facilitation to be part of the round at all .

however , once they started receiving technical assistance in trade facilitation and technical assistance became part of the trade facilitation negotiations , the negotiations moved along more easily than other negotiating areas .

also , technical assistance in trade facilitation caused some countries to make unilateral trade facilitation reforms without any obligation under a wto agreement .

critics of u.s. trade policy contend that tcb may be used to deflect attention from a failure of the united states and other donor countries to adopt pro - poor trade reform .

they point to high u.s. tariffs on imports produced by developing countries and trade - distorting agricultural subsidies .

other critics believe that u.s. tcb is influenced more by political objectives than development goals .

they note that iraq was the third - largest recipient of u.s. tcb funds in 2005 , after honduras and nicaragua , which both received the majority of their tcb assistance from the millennium challenge corporation .

some observers have also questioned whether the administration uses tcb as a way to influence developing country trade policies without going through the trade negotiations process .

trade capacity building may conflict with some perceived u.s. interests .

building the negotiating capacity of developing countries may make reaching agreement easier , but it might also help them to negotiate more aggressively against u.s. positions .

also , assisting developing countries to be more competitive in world markets may help them to compete against u.s. businesses .

however , the same argument can be made for the benefits of increased competition through tcb as through trade liberalization .

increased competition tends to increase firm productivity and may benefit both consumers and workers through decreased consumer prices and increased wages .

as in trade liberalization , however , the benefits and losses associated with increased competition can be unevenly distributed in the economy , causing some regions and industries to suffer losses of jobs and incomes disproportionately .

although , one major difference with general trade liberalization is that most tcb recipients are poor countries that are not likely to provide major competition to u.s. business .

exceptions to this difference may be found in a few major agricultural and textile producers who receive tcb assistance .

one major challenge for tcb as an area of foreign assistance is to coordinate assistance with the trade policy agenda , and to effectively integrate tcb assistance and trade into developing countries' national development strategies .

changing trade policies , such as reducing trade barriers through a free trade agreement ( fta ) , may require new types of assistance to help developing countries benefit from trade .

in this way , trade is not an end in itself but a tool for development .

to fully utilize trade as a tool for development , it also needs to be considered in all aspects of development planning .

economic and social policies that have been considered separately from trade in the past may have an effect on a country's competitiveness and ability to benefit from trade , therefore policymakers should have an appreciation for possible trade implications when they are making development plans .

one possible challenge in integrating trade with development planning is that national development strategies are typically planned on a relatively long time - frame through processes such as the poverty reduction strategy paper ( prsp ) , while trade needs can change more quickly .

as a result , there may be tension between responding to changing trade needs and long term development planning .

another major challenge for tcb is international donor coordination .

tcb assistance is provided by a wide range of donors in a multitude of sectors , and there has been some overlap and duplication among donors .

this overlap and duplication of efforts is not only wasteful , but it can cause confusion and make programs less effective .

demand - driven tcb assistance , where donors provide assistance based on the strategies and requests of recipient governments , has inherent benefits and may help facilitate donor coordination .

for tcb assistance to be demand - driven , recipients need to be proactive in assessing and communicating their needs , and donors need to orient their assistance around those stated needs .

one example of this has been in the tcb provided alongside the cafta - dr negotiations , where there was close communication between usaid , ustr , and the recipient governments in the context of the negotiations .

there is concern that some tcb recipient countries may lack the capacity to assess and prioritize their needs , which would hinder achieving demand - driven assistance .

tcb recipients have complained that they lack the capacity to coordinate the assistance they receive from various donors .

it is especially difficult when the assistance comes in the form of multiple short - term projects rather than a long term strategy that is coordinated with national development plans .

some steps toward international donor coordination have reportedly been taken , notably through the oecd and the wto .

donor coordination has been hampered because donor countries and organizations generally prefer to take credit for their efforts , and they tend to have different strategies and mechanisms for planning and implementing foreign assistance .

this leads to assistance being supply - driven , that is , driven by what donor countries are able and willing to provide .

according to experts , assistance must be driven by the partner country's own needs , goals and strategies to be effective , rather than being driven by the donor country's administrative priorities .

oecd members agreed to implement this principle of foreign aid in the paris declaration on aid effectiveness .

evaluating the effectiveness of tcb is another challenge .

the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) issued a report in february 2005 which determined that the united states government does not effectively monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of tcb programs .

it recommended that usaid and ustr work together to develop a strategy , in consultation with other u.s. agencies that provide tcb , for evaluating tcb effectiveness .

ustr and usaid have responded to this recommendation , and are reportedly in the process of developing evaluation mechanisms .

measuring the effectiveness of tcb can be difficult , because meaningful indicators are not readily available .

changes in trade volumes and other high level indicators are not necessarily attributable to tcb .

trade volumes respond to many factors , of which tcb is just one and not as significant in the short term as economic factors such as commodity price fluctuations .

lower level indicators , such as the number of people trained in wto negotiations , may be entirely attributable to tcb , but they do not say much about the effects of such training .

according to the oecd , the most measurable and positive outcome of tcb has been in the awareness of wto issues , participation in the doha round negotiations , and the development of a national policy dialogue on trade among the various stakeholders in business , government , and civil society .

the oecd finds that where this dialogue has been most robust , tcb has been most effective .

this finding may be key in developing a framework for evaluating tcb .

an ongoing challenge for u.s. tcb is that it is just one area in which the united states provides development assistance , and it must compete with other priorities for limited resources .

some of these other development priorities involve responding to emergencies where lives are at stake , such as aid in response to natural disasters , conflict situations , and severe health concerns .

it may be difficult to argue for funding for tcb when other areas of assistance are needed to help people survive .

tcb may not directly save lives , but it could in the long term reduce countries' vulnerability in dire situations by helping to increase incomes and reduce poverty .

