in september 2007 , congress reauthorized the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ) .

this was the third five - year extension of the original 1992 law .

since 1993 , the program has enabled the food and drug administration ( fda ) to collect and use fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers to review marketing applications concerning prescription drug and biological products .

the law intends those fees to supplement direct appropriations not replace them .

this most recent version of the user fee program , often referred to as pdufa iv , retains the basic structure and elements of the original pdufa .

like pdufa ii and pdufa iii , pdufa iv addresses issues that had been either unnecessary or unrecognized in earlier versions of the law .

the current authority expires october 1 , 2012 .

this report reviews the history the four pdufa authorizations as well as the issues concerning them .

it first describes the situation that led to the introduction of prescription drug user fees .

it then describes the initial pdufa law and the incremental changes made in each of its reauthorizations .

the report closes with a discussion of the intended and unintended effects of the prescription drug user fee program on fda both within the human drug program and agency - wide .

this report presumes some knowledge of the approval process for drugs and biologics .

readers unfamiliar with those activities might benefit by first reading crs report rl32797 , drug safety and effectiveness: issues and action options after fda approval , by [author name scrubbed] .

the 1992 passage of pdufa had its origin in the dissatisfaction from industry , consumers , and fda itself .

all three felt it took far too long from the moment a manufacturer submitted a drug or biologics marketing application to the time fda's reached its decision .

in the late 1980s , that process took a median time of 29 months .

patients had to wait for access to the products .

for some patients , a drug in review — and therefore not available for sale — could be the difference between life and death .

manufacturers , in turn , had to wait to begin to recoup the costs of research and development .

at that time , fda estimated that each one - month delay in a review's completion cost a manufacturer $10 million .

fda argued that it needed more scientists to review the drug applications that were coming in and the ones already backlogged in its files .

it had not received sufficient appropriations to hire them .

for decades fda had asked congress for permission to implement user fees ; the pharmaceutical industry generally opposed them , believing the funds might go into the treasury to reduce federal debt rather than help fund drug review .

the 1992 law became possible when fda and industry agreed on two steps: performance goals , setting target completion times for various review processes ; and the promise that these fees would supplement — rather than replace — funding that congress appropriated to fda .

those steps helped persuade industry groups the fees would reduce review times — and gave fda the revenue source it had sought for over 20 years .

pdufa has attracted both criticism and praise from industry , fda staff , consumers , and members of congress .

the issues they raised played out in the legislative debate leading up to pdufa iv , as they had at each earlier reauthorization .

although specific to pdufa , these issues persist because they reflect broader questions about budget choices under limited resources , the identification and amelioration of conflicts of interest , and the tension between making new drugs available to the public and ensuring that those drugs be safe and effective .

the next section of this report uses data covering the period leading up to pdufa iv to illustrate those key issues likely to resurface , particularly as congress plans for pdufa v , scheduled for 2012 .

based on its stated goals , pdufa has been generally viewed as a success .

fda has added review staff and now completes it reviews of nda / bla applications more quickly and runs less of a backlog .

median time from an nda or bla submission to fda's approval decision was 29 months in 1987 ; for the first two years of pdufa i , it fell to 17 months .

in later years , fda presented separate calculations for standard applications and priority applications .

table 1 shows median approval times for 1993 through 2006 .

in calendar year 2006 , the median review times were 13.0 months for standard applications and 6.0 months for priority applications .

fda attributes shorter approval times to pdufa - funded staff increases .

pdufa also funds fda activities with sponsors before their official nda or bla submissions , resulting in increasingly more complete applications that require fewer extensive resubmissions .

as a result of pdufa , industry faces shorter and more predictable review times .

it has treated the per - application fee — about $100,000 fy1993 and over $1 million fy2008 — as an acceptable cost relative to the estimated $10 million monthly cost of delay in the years immediately before pdufa was enacted .

meanwhile , pdufa has enabled consumers to have quicker access to new drugs .

such quicker access , however , has raised concerns .

first , critics ask whether pdufa's emphasis on speed results in inadequate review .

second , they ask whether the increase in industry funding might lead to undue industry influence .

they are concerned that pdufa , in the name of speed , might lead fda to sacrifice safety and effectiveness .

many overlapping factors influence drug safety , most unrelated to the source of funding .

some safety problems cannot be identified before public marketing .

in its consideration of pdufa and in other plans for fda , the congress has discussed whether fda has the authority and resources to identify and then act on problems during both the premarket and postmarket periods .

it addressed these issues in fdaaa , both in the pdufa title and a broader drug safety title .

the key to the shortening of review times is the influx of funds that pdufa allows .

this section first describes the extent of the collected fees and then discusses that revenue in the context of the budget for both the human drug program and fda overall .

what began as a program to fund new drug review has budget , management , and policy implications beyond that .

figure 1 and figure 2 illustrate the resource ( funding and personnel ) history of the fda human drugs program from fy1989 through fy2007 .

 ( table a - 1 and table a - 2 in the appendix provide detailed actual and inflation - adjusted budget figures , along with full - time equivalent positions , by funding source for selected fiscal years. ) .

beginning in fy1994 , user fees have made up an increasing proportion of fda's budget for human drug activities .

while total funding has increased over the period , this has been entirely due to the increase in user fees .

congressional appropriations have remained essentially flat in real ( i.e. , inflation - adjusted ) terms .

indicating full - time equivalent ( fte ) positions by funding source shows that the overall increase in personnel comes solely from the user fees first collected in fy1993 and that the overall increase in ftes obscures a 19% decrease in ftes funded by congressional appropriations from fy1992 to fy2007 .

the pdufa triggers ( described above ) , in particular , and the relative contributions of appropriations and user fees to fda's budget for human drugs have implications for budget planning both within the human drugs activity area and in agency - level decisions across all activities .

balance between pre - and postapproval activities .

because pdufa initially allowed fda to use the fees on only pre - approval activities ( the review of manufacturer applications to market drugs and biologics ) and still directs a majority of fees to those tasks , it is widely asserted that pdufa is responsible for what some observers view as an inappropriate budget imbalance between fda's premarket drug review and its postmarket safety activities .

they point out how pdufa requirements — the trigger requirements that congressional appropriations for fda's review activities be maintained at least at 1992 levels — and congressional budget trends — increasing fda responsibilities at relatively flat funding levels — result in a squeezing out of non - pdufa related programs .

faced with losing fee revenue if pdufa - authorized activities decrease , fda must prioritize its use of appropriated dollars to those activities .

critics say that non - pdufa activities , such as the review of generic drug applications , therefore suffer .

in part to address this concern , the congress has , with each pdufa reauthorization extended the scope of covered activities .

the top and middle sections of figure 3 illustrate the five stages of drug development , beginning with basic research and continuing through preclinical development ( which could be research in the laboratory or with animals ) , clinical research ( the phase 1 , phase 2 , and phase 3 trials that involve people ) , and fda review ; and the related industry - fda interactions .

the bottom third displays the span of industry r&d activities over which the laws allowed pdufa fees to cover fda activities .

the law authorized fda to use pdufa i fees to fund only those activities from nda submission through the review decision ; pdufa ii allowed fda to use the funds for meetings with manufacturers during the clinical development stages , going , therefore , from the investigational new drug ( ind ) submission through review ; and pdufa iii extended the time range at both ends , to include the pre - clinical development period and up to three years after marketing begins .

pdufa iv removes the three - year limit on postapproval activities .

fda may , therefore , use pdufa funding for authorized activities throughout the life of a product .

industry influence .

some critics think that , through its provision of fees , the industry has too much influence over fda actions .

they believe that , by structuring industry participation into the setting of performance goals , the law creates conflicts of interest .

this is compounded because , they say , the process of setting performance goals is not transparent .

until an amendment in pdufa iv that requires consumer participation as well , the law directed fda and manufacturers to meet , in preparation for each pdufa reauthorization , to discuss workload and revenue needed .

fda then submitted a letter to the authorizing committees that presents performance goals for the following five years .

the performance goals regarding review activities were structured to include a length of time ( in months ) and the percent of applications that would be completed in that time .

the industry participation in goal negotiation and the focus on review time created what some see as actual or the appearance of industry influence on the management of fda resources .

at the least , those speculations could threaten confidence in fda reviews .

at the worst are the concerns of some that the fee system contributes to quick and suboptimal reviews .

fda staff reports of pressure to meet performance goal deadlines suggest to some that safety and effectiveness data are being inadequately evaluated .

interaction with congressional appropriations decisions .

as previously noted , user fees are an increasing part of fda's budget .

in fy2008 , user fees contribute 24.2% of fda budget .

looking only at the agency's human drug program ( basically that is the center for drug evaluation and research and related activities of the office of regulatory affairs ) , as in figure 1 ( and tables a 1 and a - 2 in the appendix ) for fy2008 , user fees contribute 48.4% of the drug program's budget .

not shown on the figure: the fy2008 enacted budget for the human drug program shows user fees contributing 58% of the pre - market activities total and 25.3% of the postmarket activities total .

fda relies on fee revenue for maintaining its expert science base via staff retention .

critics say that fda is becoming too dependent on industry fees to carry out its normal review activities .

a related concern is that the large percentage of fda's budget being covered by user fees may undercut congressional support for increases in direct appropriations to the agency .

leaving aside some critics' distrust of the pharmaceutical industry's motives , other political and health analysts believe that drug application review is a regulatory responsibility that the federal government should shoulder completely .

they believe that rather than rely on user fees , congress should appropriate the full amount necessary to support fda in its mission to protect the public's health .

