in the early stages of its development , the internet presented a challenge to chinesegovernment control over information flows and public opinion .

in pursuit of economic growth andmodernization , however , the government actively promoted internet development .

because it issubject to prc censorship , yet continues to spread news across national borders , the internet hasplayed a role in bringing international attention to issues forbidden in china , including prccensorship itself .

since the country's first connection in 1993 , the internet has experienced exponential growthin china .

 ( 4 ) according toprc data , the number of internet users in china ( not including hong kong , macau , and taiwan ) ,which has the second largest internet population in the world , reached 111 million in 2005 .

 ( 5 ) an official report also findsthat over half of the users have broadband access ( 51% ) , 55% have a college degree , 60% are male,and 71% are young ( under age 30 ) .

 ( 6 ) another study estimates that there are currently up to 134 millionchinese internet users , approximately a fivefold increase from 23 million in 2001 .

 ( 7 ) although 103 million or 134million would account for only 8% or 10% of china's population , respectively , internet usage isexpected to rise as china continues to promote internet development and enjoy rapid economicgrowth .

as in the united states , the internet has already transformed the daily lives of many peoplein china .

chinese citizens are able to use the internet to communicate with others , findentertainment , engage in commercial activities , obtain government services , access a wide varietyof cultural , social , and academic information , and , for some users , learn about or discuss sensitivepolitical news , if only fleetingly .

 ( 8 ) despite censorship of news , the internet in china oftendisseminates forbidden information and opinions through e - mail , instant messaging , blogs , andbulletin board forums or through political expressions disguised as non - political comments .

however , nearly all such communications are eventually censored and offending texts are deletedby prc authorities .

 ( 9 ) chinese studies have found that the majority of internet users in china use the internet forentertainment purposes .

 ( 10 ) notwithstanding , the prc government strictly controls news andpolitical content online , which has drawn the attention and criticism of many analysts and u.s.policymakers .

in order to suppress politically sensitive or undesirable content online , the prc has adoptedtwo main strategies .

first , the chinese government employs a complex system of regulations,surveillance , and punitive action to promote self - censorship among the public .

second , thegovernment uses technology and human monitors to physically filter unwanted content .

within the united states , there has been considerable discussion surrounding the allegedcomplicity of private u.s. companies in the development and maintenance of prc internet filtering .

some contend that when presented with large profit potential , u.s. corporations are willing tooverlook violations of freedom of expression in china .

others argue that , despite problems withcensorship regarding a limited number of topics , u.s. investment in china's internet industry has ledto the greater flow of global information in the country .

some analysts suggest that china's sophisticated internet infrastructure would not be possiblewithout technology and equipment imported from u.s. and other foreign companies .

for china'slatest network upgrade , "cn2," which began in mid - 2004 , two u.s. companies , cisco systems andjuniper networks , were granted four out of six contracts .

cisco systems , a u.s. telecommunicationsequipment company , has previously faced allegations that it assisted china in developing censorshipcapabilities .

 ( 39 ) in itsrecent router contract for cn2 , cisco will provide china with its 12000 series routers , which areequipped with filtering capability typically used to prevent internet attacks ( i.e. , worms and viruses ) .

this technology can also be used by prc authorities to block politically sensitive content .

 ( 40 ) derek bambauer , aresearcher at the opennet initiative , believes that without this upgrade , routers in china are notsearching deeply within packets of data for banned keywords , because it would put an enormous loadon the routers .

some contend that cisco routers and the cn2 network upgrade may enable chineseauthorities to employ more sophisticated keyword filtering .

 ( 41 ) cisco denies allegationsthat it has altered its products to suit the objectives of prc cyber - policing .

cisco has declared thatit does not tailor its products to the china market , and the products it sells in china are the same asthose in other countries .

 ( 42 ) in addition to u.s. companies , such as cisco , that provide hardware , a number of u.s.software and internet service providers , such as yahoo and microsoft , have been accused ofcomplying with censorship in china .

 ( 43 ) in 2002 , yahoo was condemned by human rights groups forvoluntarily signing a pledge of "self - discipline," promising to follow china's censorship laws .

injune 2005 , microsoft's blog - hosting service , msn spaces , began removing words like "democracy"and "human rights" from use in chinese blog titles and postings .

 ( 44 ) in december 2005 , humanrights activists criticized microsoft after the company , at the prc government's behest , removed themsn spaces web log of a well - known chinese journalist , zhao jing .

zhao , who worked for thebeijing bureau of the new york times , occasionally broached sensitive political topics on his blog,such as a recent strike at a city newspaper .

in january 2006 , microsoft announced a new policy forforeign countries whereby the company would close personal web logs only if presented with alegally - binding order , inform its users of the reason for the removal , and continue to make such blogsaccessible in other countries .

 ( 45 ) in january 2006 , google announced that it would launch a search engine in china .

google'su.s. - based site currently is the second - most popular search engine in china , despite the prcgovernment's occasional blocking of it , with an estimated 23% share of the market , after the chineseinternet content provider baidu ( 37% ) and followed closely by yahoo ( 21% ) .

google will not offere - mail or blog services in china in order to avoid the possibility of having to divulge private internetuser information to the prc government .

google reportedly will comply with prc laws regardingcensorship of information deemed inappropriate or illegal , but plans to disclose when suchinformation was removed for censorship purposes .

 ( 46 ) paris - based reporters without borders reacted to the googleannouncement by stating that "it was a black day for freedom of expression in china. .

 ( 47 ) other u.s. companies , such as secure computing , fortinet , and websense , have also beenaccused of aiding china's internet filtering capabilities , but the evidence currently available does notappear to indicate their direct involvement in the prc government's national censorship system .

in2004 , secure computing , which makes internet filtering software , sold authentication systems , oruser identification systems , to china's major telecommunications companies .

fortinet sellsanti - virus firewall technology to internet , governmental , educational , retail , and foreign businessinstitutions and establishments in china .

websense reportedly provides web filtering andmonitoring software to chinese companies .

websense spokespersons have stated that the companyhas not licensed the prc government to use its technology to censor personal internet access andthat it would decline to sell its products to the prc government if they would be used for nationwidecensorship purposes .

 ( 48 ) yahoo and shi tao case .

yahoo has come underfire for giving the personal e - mail address of a chinese journalist , shi tao , to prc governmentauthorities , which led to his criminal conviction and sentence of 10 years in prison .

in april 2004,shi , who was an editor at contemporary business news based in hunan province , attended aneditorial meeting in which government officials read an internal document outlining mediarestrictions before the 15th anniversary of the 1989 tiananmen square crackdown in june 2004 .

shisent copies of his notes via his personal yahoo e - mail account to a pro - democracy organization inthe united states .

prc state security authorities later requested information from yahoo thatenabled them to identify shi and use it in his conviction .

jerry yang , co - founder and seniorexecutive of yahoo , confirmed that his company gave chinese authorities information and describedthe company's compliance as part of the legal burden of doing business in china .

 ( 49 ) .

some u.s. officials have expressed their belief that the growth of the internet and otherinformation technologies will help bring about wide - scale democratization abroad .

former u.s.secretaries of state james a. baker and madeleine albright are quoted as supporting informationtechnologies in foreign countries as a way to promote their eventual democratization .

 ( 50 ) u.s. secretary of defensedonald rumsfeld has also made statements on the importance of political freedoms in china: "every society has to be vigilant against another type of great wall ... a wall that limits speech,information , and choices. .

 ( 51 ) the state department has censured the chinese government byincluding an explanation of the prc's media and internet controls and related persecution of politicaldissidents in its annual human rights report .

 ( 52 ) however , aside from diplomatic rebukes of china's restrictionson freedom expression , u.s. actions to combat internet censorship in china have primarily been inthe form of funding for anti - censorship software .

human rights organizations , u.s. government officials , u.s. internet companies , and expertson the development of the internet and censorship in china have made wide - rangingrecommendations for expanding internet freedom in china .

these policy suggestions includeenacting legal prohibitions on u.s. companies that would aid prc government censorship efforts ; creating u.s. governmental institutions for promoting global internet freedom ; funding thedevelopment of counter - censorship technologies ; applying greater pressure at thegovernment - to - government level ; and establishing codes of conduct for u.s. internet companies inchina that promote free expression within the confines of prc political and business realities .

some analysts recommend making laws that would prohibit u.s. companies from locatingtheir servers , offering e - mail services , or selling surveillance and filtering technology in countrieswith repressive regimes such as china .

the u.s. - china economic and security review commissionadvocates the creation of an executive branch office that would monitor global internet censorshipand promote the development of anti - censorship technology .

 ( 60 ) in its annual report for2005 , the congressional - executive commission on china recommended that congress shouldappropriate funds to support technologies that would help chinese citizens access internet - basedinformation that is officially censored .

some u.s. internet companies in china argue that their ownefforts to resist prc government demands to comply with censorship norms would be enhanced byhigher profile u.s. government pressure on the chinese government .

u.s. internet companies inchina reportedly are also considering how to develop common responses that would attempt to strikea balance between promoting free expression or protesting censorship and operating within anauthoritarian political system .

for example , some u.s. internet companies have announced policiesof informing users when content is unavailable due to government censorship restrictions anddemanding that prc authorities provide clear legal bases for complying with chinese governmentdemands regarding censorship and the investigation of internet users .

 ( 61 ) some observers hold that there needs to be more demand from chinese people themselvesto obtain uncensored information .

they posit that if demand for free information is great enoughfrom within china , the government will be more inclined to loosen its grip on internet informationcontrols .

 ( 62 ) when thepopular search engine , google , was blocked in 2002 , some observers believe that the chinesegovernment gave into pressure and lifted the block after only 10 days because of the flood ofcomplaints received from chinese researchers and internet users .

 ( 63 ) .

