at the june 2005 group of eight ( g8 ) ( 1 ) finance ministers meeting , member nations agreed on a financingplan for 100% debt relief for countries that complete the international monetary fund ( imf ) andworld banks' heavily indebted poor countries ( hipc ) debt relief program .

if the proposal is fullyimplemented , 18 countries that have completed the hipc program would receive complete andimmediate forgiveness of their multilateral debts , approximately $40 billion .

an additional 20countries are eligible for debt relief , but are currently implementing pre - requisite economic reforms .

if all of the 38 hipc - eligible countries receive debt cancellation , total debt relief would beapproximately $55.6 billion .

according to the proposal , creditor nations will provide additionalfunding for the world bank and the african development bank ( afdb ) to fund their debt relief .

imf debt relief will be funded by the remaining proceeds of a 1999 sale of imf gold reserves .

to date , the bush administration has not requested new funds to contribute toward the u.s.share of the g8 debt relief proposal .

congress , however , is currently considering appropriations forthe world bank and the afdbs' concessional lending facilities and , although none of this fundinghas been specifically earmarked for hipc , it appears that the administration would like to use someof this funding for the increased debt relief .

there are also two pieces of legislation ( h.r .

1130 and s. 1320 ) that if enacted would allow for higher levels ofdebt relief than is provided for in the g8 proposal .

this report addresses the hipc debt burden and the various debt relief initiatives , bothbilateral and multilateral , that have been implemented and proposed .

following a brief backgroundand a discussion of the economic literature on debt relief , this report addresses: ( 1 ) previous u.s.debt relief initiatives ; ( 2 ) multilateral debt relief through the hipc program ; ( 3 ) the june 2005 g8proposal for 100% debt cancellation ; and ( 4 ) congressional action .

in recent decades , the rapid growth in poor country debt has emerged as a key foreign policyconcern .

as early as 1967 , the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) argued that debt service payments in many poor nations had reached "critical situations. .

 ( 2 ) since then , and notably in thelast ten years , there has been pressure exerted on national bilateral creditors and multilateral lenders ( such as the international monetary fund or the world bank ) by non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) and several western nations for creditors to cancel all debts owed to them by the poorestand least developed countries .

in a speech to the united nations in 2002 , uk chancellor of theexchequer [author name scrubbed] challenged developed nations to help build "a virtuous circle of debtrelief , poverty reduction and sustainable development for the long term" for the world's poorestcountries .

 ( 3 ) according tou.s .

secretary of the treasury john snow , debt has been "locking these poorest countries intopoverty and preventing them from using their own resources [for development]. .

requiringrepayment of the debt is , he added , "morally wrong. .

 ( 4 ) much of the recent debt relief momentum has been spurred by the jubilee ( formerly thejubilee 2000 ) debt campaign .

initially launched in 1996 , the jubilee campaign's mission is toconvince major creditor nations to cancel the unpayable debts of the poorest countries under a fairand transparent process .

 ( 5 ) the international campaign is spearheaded primarily by various catholic and protestantorganizations that have had longstanding involvement in debt relief issues and includes numeroushigh - profile supporters such as sir bob geldof , an irish rock singer and activist , and bono , leadsinger of the irish band u2 .

debt relief proponents often maintain that poor country debt is illegitimate , or according tobono , "immoral and unjust. .

 ( 6 ) this claim rests on the so - called "odious debt" argument .

odiousdebt is normally considered to be debt which benefits ruling elites in a borrowing country ( throughgraft and corruption ) but has little or no benefit for the general population .

debt critics questionwhether successor regimes should be obligated , under international law , to repay money that wasstolen , wasted , or otherwise used in ways having little benefit for their people .

although the odiousdebt concept has gained popularity in the ngo community , it has not been endorsed by anyinternational legal or financial body .

moreover , there is almost no likelihood that debts incurredthrough world bank or imf projects could be legally determined to be odious , since they wereundertaken for nominally development - related projects .

nonetheless , many agree that high levelsof debt are a major burden for the poorest countries and that any effort to promote economic growthand reduce poverty needs to address the hipc debt burden .

the poor country debt burden is indeed staggering .

for the 38 international developmentassociation ( ida ) ( 7 ) countries that have been designated as the most heavily indebted poor countries , total external debtrose from $19.7 billion in 1975 to a peak of $222 billion in 1995 , a major increase over otherdeveloping countries .

 ( 8 ) table 1 compares debt as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) for three tiers of poorcountries: hipcs , other ida countries , and other lower middle income countries .

 ( 9 ) ( see appendix 1 forinformation on the world bank debt and poverty classification systems. ) .

table 1 .

external debt as a percentage of gdp ( periodaverage ) source: world bank .

in the 1980s and early 1990s , as the debts of the poorest countries increased rapidly comparedto other low - income countries , several debt relief efforts were introduced .

in 1988 , a group of majorcreditor nations , known as the paris club , ( 10 ) agreed for the first time to cancel debts owed to them instead ofrefinancing them on easier terms as they had done until then .

in 1996 , the international monetary fund , the world bank , and the regional developmentbanks agreed to allow a portion of debts owed to them to be cancelled as well , and created the debtrelief initiative for heavily indebted poor countries ( hipc ) .

at the meeting of the g8 financeministers on june 11 , 2005 , member nations extended debt relief and committed themselves tocancelling permanently all remaining multilateral hipc external debt , providing up to $55 billionin additional debt relief .

according to the proposal , the 18 countries that have completed the hipcprogram would receive immediate debt relief ( worth $40 billion at face value ) .

countries that arein the middle of the program , or have not yet begun , would receive total debt relief upon completionof the program .

if the remaining 20 countries complete the hipc program , total debt relief couldexceed $55 billion .

there are several root causes of the hipc debt burden .

a 1999 imf study concluded thatthe rise in hipc debt had its origins in weak macroeconomic policies , a lack of economic structuralreform , and poor debt management practices on the part of debt - stressed countries , as well as adversetrade shocks and political factors such as war , famine , and social strife .

 ( 11 ) the debt problem wascompounded by the willingness of creditor nations and multilateral institutions to provide loans andaccept risks that the private sector would not .

william easterly , formerly a world bank economistand currently a professor at new york university , points out that between 1979 and 1997 , the imfand world bank provided more financing to hipcs than other countries of their income level,despite hipc countries' often poor economic policies .

 ( 12 ) .

among economists , the likely success of debt relief in spurring meaningful economic reformor make substantial inroads against poverty is often questioned .

critics maintain that money to funddebt relief must be transferred from other resources and there is a risk that donors will take all orsome of these resources from other parts of their foreign assistance budgets .

if this occurs , overallresources for promoting development may not increase , or may increase by less than the amount ofdebt relief provided .

moreover , many analysts argue that there are foreign aid activities , such asadditional investments in the legal , financial , education , or public health systems that may have agreater impact on promoting economic growth and providing resources for poverty reductionactivities than debt relief .

a second problem is determining whether the actual debt load is itself sobig as to impede growth and development .

advocates of debt relief argue that such a "debtoverhang" must be relieved if a country is to resume growth .

debt overhang: theory .

most debt relief isgrounded in the "debt overhang" theory which holds that the accumulation of a large stock of debtwill frighten off potential lenders and investors .

it originated in the 1980s and was based on thelargely positive economic growth that several heavily indebted countries experienced following a1989 debt relief initiative known as the "brady plan," named after then - u.s. treasury secretarynicholas brady .

 ( 13 ) thetheory suggests that if investors expect a country's debt level to impair its ability to repay its loans,they will not invest out of a concern that the government may resort to distortionary measures , suchas expanding the money supply ( which promotes inflation ) or raising taxes on their profits to financedebt payments .

 ( 14 ) evenif the debt is not being serviced , the theory suggests that it is still an impediment to economic growthbecause of the effect the large debt stock has dissuading private investors .

when a large stock of external debt is present , creditor countries could continue to lend atconcessional rates in the hope that continued aid will spur economic growth and that the recipientcountry will one day be able to repay its debts .

according to the debt overhang theory , however , itis better to forgive the debts , either entirely or to some reduced "sustainable" level so that investorconfidence will be restored .

it is presumed that at a "sustainable" level debtor nations would be ableto make some debt payments to their creditors without sacrificing economic growth .

debt overhang: evidence .

a 2002 study of 93developing countries between 1969 and 1998 , and a follow - up study of 61 countries over the sametime period , were cited as strong support for the debt - overhang theory .

the first study found thatexternal debt began to have a negative impact on growth when its net present value ( 15 ) exceeded 160% to 170%of exports and 35% to 40% of gdp .

study simulations suggest that doubling the average stock ofexternal debt in these countries would slow down annual per capita growth by â½% to 1% .

thesecond study found that doubling a country's average external debt level would reduce growth ofboth per capita physical capital and productivity by almost 1% .

the studies concluded that largedebt stocks negatively affect growth by slowing both the accumulation of physical capital andproductivity , often at the expense of investment .

 ( 16 ) although the debt overhang theory may be true in general , several new studies have arguedthat it does not hold for hipc countries .

one study points to two key differences between the bradyand hipc countries .

 ( 17 ) in contrast to the brady countries , there never was a significant amount of private investment in thehipc countries , and the hipc countries have never suffered a negative net flow of resources becauseinflows of foreign aid are typically more than sufficient to cover debt payments .

 ( 18 ) moreover , debt relief thatthe hipc countries have received has not been sufficient to allow them access to private sector creditmarkets .

thus , rather than a debt overhang , some argue that lack of institutional capacity ( legal,political , educational , health , etc. ) .

are the hipcs' major impediments to economic growth , and thatin the absence of additional funds dedicated for debt relief , other forms of targeted assistance maybe more effective in boosting economic growth than debt relief .

if the economies of countries grew,they argue , the debt would not be a problem .

instead of forgiving debts , creditor nations may be ableto help the poorest countries by helping to improve their domestic institutions , expand their exportsectors , and by providing greater market access for their goods .

u.s. bilateral debt relief is accomplished two ways .

one is through legislation enacted bycongress granting authority to the president to cancel country debt obligations .

 ( 19 ) the second is throughthe paris club .

the paris club is the major forum where creditor countries renegotiate official sectordebts .

by definition , 'official sector' debts are those that have been either issued , insured , orguaranteed by creditor governments .

a paris club 'treatment' refers to either a reduction and / orrenegotiation of a developing country's paris club debts .

the paris club includes the united statesand 18 other permanent members , the major international creditor governments .

besides the unitedstates , the permanent membership is composed of austria , australia , belgium , canada , denmark,finland , france , germany , ireland , italy , japan , netherlands , norway , russia , spain , sweden,switzerland , and the united kingdom .

other creditors are allowed to participate in negotiations onan ad - hoc basis .

by contrast , a separate informal , voluntary group of private sector participants meets torenegotiate some of the developing country debt they are owed .

the london club , a parallel,informal group of private firms , meets in london to renegotiate commercial bank debt .

unlike theparis club , there is no permanent london club membership .

at a debtor nations request , a londonclub meeting of its creditors may be formed , and the club is subsequently dissolved after arestructuring is in place .

the paris club does not exist as a formal institution .

it is rather a set of rules and principlesfor debt relief that have been agreed on by its members .

five 'principles' and four 'rules' currentlygovern paris club treatments .

any country that accepts the rules and principles may , in principle,become a member of the paris club .

yet since the paris club permanent members are the majorinternational creditor countries , they determine its practices .

the five paris club 'principles' stipulate the general terms of all paris club treatments .

theyare: ( 1 ) paris club decisions are made on a case - by - case basis ; ( 2 ) all decisions are reached by full consensus among creditor nations ; ( 3 ) debt renegotiations are applied only for countries that clearlyneed debt relief , as evidenced by implementing an international monetary fund ( imf ) program andits requisite economic policy conditionality ; ( 4 ) solidarity is required in that all creditors willimplement the terms agreed in the context of the renegotiations ; and ( 5 ) the paris club preserves the comparability of treatment between different creditors .

this means that a debtor country cannotgrant to another creditor a treatment on more favorable terms than the consensus reached for parisclub members .

 ( 20 ) while paris club 'principles' are general in nature , its 'rules' specify the technical details ofparis club treatments .

the 'rules' detail ( 1 ) the types of debt covered - - paris club arrangementscover only medium and long - term public sector debt and credits issued prior to a specified"cut - off"date ; ( 2 ) the flow and stock treatment ; ( 21 ) ( 3 ) the payment terms resulting from paris club agreements ; and ( 4 ) provisions for debt swaps .

 ( 22 ) since the paris club is an informal institution , the outcome of a paris club meeting is nota legal agreement between the debtor and the individual creditor countries .

creditor countries thatparticipate in the negotiation sign a so - called 'agreed minute. .

the agreed minute recommends thatcreditor nations collectively sign bilateral agreements with the debtor nation , giving effect to themultilateral paris club agreement .

prior to u.s. involvement , paris club members began providing outright debt cancellationin 1988 .

previously , debt treatments involved rescheduling of debts on increasingly concessionalterms .

at the 1988 toronto meeting of g7 finance ministers , it was agreed that paris club memberswould extend to some countries up to one - third forgiveness of their bilateral debts .

 ( 23 ) over the next decade , the paris club gradually increased the amount of debt that it would bewilling to write off from 33.33% in 1988 to 90% in 1999 .

 ( 24 ) there are currently two paris club debt cancellation options,"naples" terms for non - hipc ida countries and "cologne" terms for hipc countries ( see box ) .

these terms are named after the cities where they were negotiated by g7 countries .

the united states joined paris club debt forgiveness negotiations in 1994 , under authoritygranted by congress in 1993 ( foreign operations appropriations , section 570 , p.l .

103-87 ) .

annually re - enacted since 1993 , this authority allows the administration to cancel various loansmade by the united states .

these may include u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) loans , military aid loans , export - import bank loans and guarantees , and agricultural creditsguaranteed by the commodity credit corporation .

between 1990 and 2005 , the united states forgave $23.1 billion in foreign debt owed to theunited states , only a small part of which - - $3.14 billion - - was reduced via the paris club .

 ( 25 ) debt has also beenreduced through various legislative measures and congressionally authorized u.s. bilateralnegotiations .

these include ( appendix 2 provides u.s. bilateral debt relief data ) : section 411 debt relief .

under section 411 of the agricultural tradedevelopment and assistance act of 1954 ( pl 83-480 ; 7 usc sec .

1736e ) , congress authorized thepresident to cancel concessional food aid loans to poor and indebted countries under an imf orworld bank economic program .

section 572 debt relief .

under section 572 of the foreign operations,export financing , and related appropriations act for fiscal year 1989 ( p.l .

100-461 , 22 usc2151 ) , the u.s. president was authorized to forgive debt during fiscal years 1990 and 1991 fromconcessional development assistance loans to african and other poor and indebted countries thatmaintained an economic reform program with the imf or the world bank .

enterprise for the americas initiative ( eai ) .

the enterprise for theamericas ( eai ) initiative supports trade , investment and economic growth in latin america and thecarribean .

debt reduction legislation in support of the eai initiative was enacted in 1990 to forgiveu.s .

food aid loans for eai countries that did not meet the necessary criteria for section 411 debtrelief ( p.l .

102-549 , enterprise of the americas act of 1992 , which added part iv to the foreignassistance act of 1961 ; 22 usc 2430 et seq. ) .

and in 1992 for usaid and export - import bank debt ( p.l .

102-429 , export enhancement act of 1992 , which added section 12 to the export - import bankact of 1945 ; 12 usc 635-6 ) .

conservation of tropical forests .

the tropical forest conservation actof 1998 ( tfca ) ( p.l .

105-214 , which added part v to the foreign assistance act of 1961 ; 22 usc2431 et seq. ) .

authorizes the president to request debt relief for low and middle - income countries withtropical forests to support conservation of endangered forests .

 ( 26 ) debt swaps under the seed act .

the support for east europeandemocracy ( seed ) act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-170 , usc 5401 et seq. ) .

authorized debt relief to supporteastern european countries as they progressed towards democracies with free - marketeconomies .

special debt reduction programs .

the u.s. government has reduced thedebts of egypt , poland , jordan , and pakistan for various national security reasons .

each of thesedebt relief activities was provided pursuant to special legislation .

for much of their history , the international financial institutions ( ifis ) argued that since theywere lenders of last resort , providing assistance to poor countries that could not borrow money fromthe global financial markets , they required preferred creditor status .

this means that the world bankand the imf would be paid first in the event that borrowers ran into financial difficulties , and thatdebts owed to them would not be reduced under any circumstances .

forgiving their debts , theyargued , would diminish their resources available for other poor and developing countries and set abad example for other indebted countries as they undertook often painful , albeit economicallycrucial , reforms .

this is the so - called "moral hazard" problem with debt relief .

some creditors arguethat by providing debt relief , they are creating a "moral hazard" by convincing borrowers that theyneed not worry about repayment .

despite initial reservations , and at the g8's request , the world bank and the imf created thehipc debt relief program in 1996 to reduce some multilateral debt in conjunction with bilateral debtforgiveness .

according to the imf and the world bank , the goal of the hipc program would be tohelp the poorest and most indebted countries meet their "current and future external debt serviceobligations in full , without recourse to debt rescheduling or the accumulation of arrears , and withoutcompromising growth. .

 ( 27 ) in 1999 , the program was expanded to provide deeper , faster , and broader debt relief .

initially , the hipc program determined that a debt service - to - exports ratio ( 28 ) of 250% was determinedto be sustainable .

moreover , it took a minimum of six years for borrowers to qualify for debt relief .

critics charged that this ratio was too high and the time - frame too long .

when the program wasredesigned in 1999 , the debt service - to - exports ratio was reduced to 150% , and the time period wasshortened .

the hipc program was also modified to include a greater focus on poverty reductionefforts .

countries receiving debt relief were now be required to use money freed up by debt relieffor poverty reduction as specified in a poverty reduction strategy paper ( prsp ) approved by itslenders .

according to a 2004 imf study , significant additional donor support and structural reformsare necessary for hipc countries to reach debt sustainability .

the study found that hipc completionpoint countries had more robust economic policies and institutional frameworks than other hipccountries but they still fared poorly when compared to other developing countries .

in addition theirdebt management capacity remained weak .

 ( 38 ) many argue that these countries need additional donor supportfor other reasons as well , in areas such infrastructure , education , and aids prevention .

other similarresearch , as well as ngo pressure , led in 2004 to active discussions proposing 100% multilateraldebt relief for hipcs and other poor indebted countries .

discussion of 100% debt relief began in earnest among the g8 nations at the february 5,2005 finance ministers meeting in london .

at the meeting , ministers announced their "willingnessto provide as much as 100% multilateral debt relief. .

 ( 39 ) moreover , ministers intended to work with the africandevelopment bank and the world bank "to bring forward proposals ... to achieve this [additionaldebt relief] without reducing the resources available to the poorest countries through theseinstitutions. .

 ( 40 ) central to the multilateral debt cancellation debate was whether to compensate theinternational financial institutions for the amount of debt they would write off .

u.s. officials hadreportedly argued that the cost of multilateral debt relief could be borne by the institutionsthemselves without compromising new assistance .

the world bank's ibrd resources haveincreased steadily over the past several years , and many argued that some of this money could bediverted to provide ida debt relief without harming the bank's financial situation .

 ( 41 ) other creditors , includinggreat britain , believed the institutions should be compensated for their debt forgiveness so as notto possibly weaken the credit standing of the world bank and force it to raise borrowing rates toibrd borrowers .

 ( 42 ) on july 11 , 2005 , g8 finance ministers compromised on a plan to cancel all remaining hipcmultilateral debt .

 ( 43 ) thecompromise was that the multilateral development banks would receive new money from creditornations to offset their debt reductions and the imf would absorb the cost of debt relief using internalresources , principally the remaining proceeds of the 1999 off - market gold transactions with braziland mexico .

new gold sales had been proposed during the 2005 discussion but , like earlierproposals , were strongly opposed by the gold industry , the bush administration , and many membersof congress .

 ( 44 ) according to british chancellor of the exchequer , [author name scrubbed] , "we are presenting themost comprehensive statement that finance ministers have ever made on the issues of debt,development , health and poverty. .

he further added that the agreement represents a "new dealbetween the rich and poor of the world. .

 ( 45 ) u.s. treasury secretary john snow called the agreement "anachievement of historic proportions. .

 ( 46 ) according to officials at the meeting , the cost of forgiving this debt will be $16.7 billion - - the net present value of payments that the ifis would have received from the hipcs between nowand 2015 .

of this , the united states reportedly agreed to pay up to $1.75 billion over the next tenyears in compensation to the development banks over the next ten years to fund the debt relief .

 ( 47 ) according to british andgerman officials , britain will pay $700 million to $960 million , and germany will pay $848 millionto $1.2 billion to offset future lost repayments to the world bank and the african developmentbank .

 ( 48 ) reaction from poor countries not included in the debt deal was critical .

many have longargued that debt relief benefits countries that have poor economic performance and that are lesswilling to service their debts than other developing countries .

some countries , such as kenya , areineligible for debt relief , yet suffer from many of the same economic constraints as many hipccountries and are servicing their debts .

"those faithful in servicing their debt like kenya are beingignored while hipcs who have failed to service the debt are getting more attention .

this is not goodfor africa," asserted kenyan planning and national development minister peter anyangnyongo .

 ( 49 ) both imf managing director rodrigo rato and world bank president paul wolfowitzcautiously welcomed the proposal but stressed the importance of providing debt relief withoutdiverting resources from other developing countries .

according to mr. rato , although internationalmonetary fund member countries are committed to canceling debts of the world's poorest nations,debt relief should be carefully designed and implemented .

he stressed that there is a "clearconsensus" among imf directors that writing off the debt should not affect the fund's ability tocontinue to lend to poor countries .

 ( 50 ) mr. wolfowitz has also voiced support for the proposal .

 ( 51 ) however , several worldbank concerns with the proposal were reported in the press .

these will be discussed below .

indebtedness is measured by the world bank primarily using two debt service ratios: theratio of the present value of total debt service to gross national income ( pvgni ) and the ratio of thepresent value of total debt service to exports of goods and service ( pv / xgs ) .

according to thebank , these ratios reflect two of most important aspect of a country's ability to service its debts:gross national income , since this is the broadest measure of a country's total income , and exports,since these are the revenue generating mechanism for debt service ( exports provide foreign reserveswhich are needed to service debt ) .

if any of the 136 countries that the world bank collects debt data on exceeds a critical value: 80% for the debt service to gni ratio , or 220% for the debt service to exports ratio , the country isclassified as severely indebted .

a country is classified as moderately indebted if both of its debtratios are three - fifths or more of the critical value ( 48% for the debt service to gni ratio and 132%for the debt service to exports ratio ) and less indebted if its debt ratios are below the three - fifthsthresholds .

the world bank also breaks out countries based on their level of income .

countries areclassified as low income if their 2003 gni per capita is $765 or less .

middle income countries area much larger grouping including countries with gni per capita between $766 and $9,385 .

bycombining these two sets of indicators , the poorest and most indebted countries can be identified .

table 4 .

world bank debt categories source: world bank , 2005 global development finance .

table 5 .

world bank debt ratings ( hipc countries are highlighted ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance .

 ( in u.s. $ millions ) source: the department of the treasury and the office of management and budget , u.s. government foreign credit exposure as of december 31,2004 .

 ( 2003 , in u.s. $ millions ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance .

 ( 2003 , in u.s. $ millions ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance .

