hurricane katrina struck florida and the gulf coast states in the last days of august 2005 , followed within weeks by hurricanes rita and wilma .

these disasters will long be remembered for disrupting families , changing and ending lives , and forcing americans to rethink vulnerability and risk assumptions .

in addition to these impacts , the hurricanes served as catalysts for significant changes in federal policy and the organization of responsible federal entities , notably within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

most of those changes were included in title vi of the dhs appropriations legislation for fy2007 .

among other provisions , title vi , officially titled the "post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006" ( hereafter referred to as the post - katrina act ) , established new leadership positions and position requirements within the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , brought new missions into fema and restored some that had previously been removed , and enhanced the agency's authority by directing the fema administrator to undertake a broad range of activities before and after disasters occur .

the post - katrina act contains provisions that set out new law , amend the homeland security act ( hsa ) , and modify the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) .

in addition to the post - katrina act , congress enacted five other statutes that have long - term implications for the administration of federal emergency policies .

these include: sections of p.l .

109-347 ( h.r .

4954 ) , the security and accountability for every port act of 2005 , known as the safe port act ; p.l .

109-308 ( h.r .

3858 ) , the pets evacuation and transportation standards act of 2006 ; p.l .

109-63 ( h.r .

3650 ) , the federal judiciary emergency special sessions act of 2005 ; p.l .

109-67 ( h.r .

3668 ) , the student grant hurricane and disaster relief act ; and sections of p.l .

109-364 ( h.r .

5122 ) , the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 .

through these enactments the 109 th congress acted on findings and conclusions reached by house and senate investigators , white house staff , offices of federal inspectors general ( especially those published by the dhs office ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) , among others , who evaluated the consequences of and response to hurricane katrina .

the investigators and their studies presented findings on major shortcomings , and most urged a reconsideration of existing policies and practices .

this crs report summarizes information on the emergency management modifications adopted by congress in response to the widespread calls for change .

the following terms identify the acronyms used in this crs report .

cdl: community disaster loan cem: comprehensive emergency management system chco: chief human capital officer cmo: chief medical officer cog: continuity of government coop: continuity of operations core: cadre - on - response employees dae: disaster assistance employees dhs: department of homeland security dod: department of defense emac: emergency management assistance compact emi: emergency management institute fcc: federal communications commission fco: federal coordinating officer fema trailers: temporary housing units fema: federal emergency management agency fletc: federal law enforcement training center g&t: office for grants and training gao: government accountability office hhs: health and human services hspd - 5: homeland security presidential directive - 5 hspd - 8: homeland security presidential directive - 8 hsa: homeland security act ihp: individual and household program ndpc: national domestic preparedness consortium nfa: national fire academy nic: national integration center nims: national incident management system nisac: national infrastructure simulation and analysis center noc: national operations center npg: national preparedness goal nps: national preparedness system nrp: national response plan pa: public assistance pets act: pets evacuation and transportation standards act of 2006 post - katrina act: post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ramp: remedial action management program safe port act: security and accountability for every port act of 2005 shsgp: state homeland security grant program stafford act: robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act trade: training and data exchange grou .

