indexation of the minimum wage was considered some years prior to enactment of the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) in 1938 .

it continues to be an issue of discussion and , in some cases at the state level , has been introduced as a part of the general minimum wage structure .

this report provides an evolutionary history of minimum wage indexation and of the federal legislative interest in the concept .

in 1937 , congress decided that certain low - wage workers should be protected by a federal minimum wage law , and set in motion initiatives that would evolve into the fair labor standards act of 1938 .

as amended through the years , the flsa has become the primary federal statute dealing with wage rates for low - wage workers .

as the law now stands , the general minimum wage is $5.85 per hour — to increase , in steps , to $7.25 per hour by july 2009 .

the federal minimum is fixed by statute and altered whenever there is sufficient support to do so in congress .

the result has been a fluctuation in the real ( or inflation - adjusted ) value of the minimum wage .

it reached its highest level in 1968 , and has since , intermittently , been allowed to decline in value .

to reach the 1968 level in real terms , the current minimum would need to be slightly in excess of $9.50 per hour .

in order to eliminate fluctuations in its real value , some have suggested that the federal minimum should be pegged to an outside economic variable: for example , to a component of the cost - of - living index or to some other relatively neutral series .

the concept of a minimum wage , initially , was to provide workers with a minimum income .

but how minimal ? .

what might be included within a minimal standard ? .

to whom should not less than the minimum be paid ? .

and by whom ? .

men , it was assumed , would need at least the minimum wage to support themselves and their families .

but what about women , especially those with an employed spouse ? .

and young persons: youth workers ? .

are certain types of work , by definition , minimum wage work — deserving payment at the minimum wage or below ? .

early in the past century , some proposed a living , family , saving wage : that is , to allow for safe and healthful living , for procreation , and for setting aside a little for one's old age .

still , there were problems with definitions .

how safe and how healthful ? .

how much procreation: one child, two , or perhaps five or six ? .

setting aside a little for one's old age may be appropriate , but how much ? .

during 1937 and 1938 when the future flsa was under consideration by the congress , tensions arose that kept the bill from being enacted in its initial form .

speaking generally , a compromise was developed that allowed the several parties to claim victory in the negotiations .

the northern states would have preferred a higher wage ( 40 cents an hour ) ; the south agreed to settle for 25 cents an hour — leading up to 40 cents some years later .

representative mary norton ( d - nj ) , then chair of the committee on labor , argued that "a bill of this kind is very necessary if we are going to help the underpaid workers of our country , reduce the relief rolls , and spread employment. .

the initial minimum wage ( 1938 ) was enacted as the united states was coming out of the great depression and just as it was about to enter world war ii .

though it appears to have had little disruptive impact , the circumstances may not have been ideal for a test .

the 1949 amendments may have been , similarly , obscured by the war in korea .

thus , as congress considered new legislation that would adjust the minimum wage , it seems to have done so with some measure of circumspection .

in 1975 , representative john dent ( d - pa ) , chair of the subcommittee on labor standards , introduced h.r .

10130 , a bill that would have increased the minimum wage , in steps , to $3.00 per hour .

thereafter , an indexation formula , based upon the consumer price index ( or cpi ) would take effect .

noting the increase in the cost - of - living , the afl - cio's andrew biemiller , agreed .

"some such escalator provision is essential if we are to maintain the purchasing power of the minimum wage...." john erlenborn ( r - il ) , the ranking member , opposed indexation .

you talk about inflation "and the loss of purchasing power of the dollar and a need to index the minimum wage so we can have automatic increases in it," he chided biemiller , when "it is the wage demands of the people you represent that caused a good deal of the inflation that we are experiencing .

so," he continued , "having caused the problem , you now come here and seek relief from it. .

in february 1977 , representative dent introduced h.r .

3744 , a bill to increase the minimum wage , to repeal the tip credit , and to provide "an automatic adjustment in such wage rate. .

diverse other provisions would be added .

the fair labor standards act amendments of 1977 provided for establishment of a minimum wage study commission ( mwsc ) .

among the mandates given to the commission was to explore "the economic consequences ( if any ) " of indexation .

the mwsc would have 36 months in which to prepare and to transmit a report to the president and to the congress with legislative recommendations .

the commission reviewed the various aspects of the minimum wage , produced a seven volume report , and ceased to exist in 1981 .

the cost of the commission was reported to have been $17 million .

former congressman james o'hara ( d - mi ) was named as chairman , presiding over a blue ribbon panel of representatives from industry , labor , and the public , with an in - house staff of seven economists .

in 1977 , when the minimum wage study commission was created , there was every reason to suspect that its report would be read avidly and that at least some of its recommendations might be adopted .

that would not be the case .

in early 1987 , several bills were introduced that dealt with the minimum wage .

two bills ( h.r .

1834 and s. 837 ) proposed step increases , followed by indexation .

in this case , the mechanism was to create a rate "equal to 50 percent of the average private , nonsupervisory , nonagricultural hourly wage" rounded upward to 5 cents .

early in the 101 st congress , new minimum wage legislation was quickly introduced .

with the change of administrations in 1989 , there was also a change of focus on the minimum wage — though the new president was very specific as to what he would ( and would not ) accept .

again , indexation became an issue .

john dent , who had evinced an early interest in minimum wage indexation , retired from congress in 1979 .

augustus hawkins , who had fought for indexation in the 1980s , retired in 1990 .

in the senate , jacob javits and harrison williams left office in the early 1980s .

one might have anticipated a shift away from the issue of indexation of the minimum wage .

the reverse , however , may have been true .

minimum wage workers , for the most part , accept low - wage work because no other work is available .

whether they are very young , lack training , suffer infirmities , or have other responsibilities ( for example , care for family members or academic scheduling ) , work at the minimum wage would likely not have been their first choice if higher - paying jobs were available .

absent alternative and more remunerative employment opportunities , some do use entry - level work as an interim measure .

some also remain at such work through the better part of a lifetime — presumably not by choice .

for persons who have entered the workforce at a minimum wage level , wages may be of some importance .

some employers already pay a rate above the minimum ; others pay only the wage that is required by law: that is , the minimum wage under the fair labor standards act .

few minimum wage workers , it would appear , are union members and work under a collectively negotiated agreement .

in the case of non - union employees , their wage may be determined by congressional action .

congress over the years has acted sporadically in this area .

it is possible that the resultant gaps in mandating an increase have occurred by design: a conviction that the minimum wage , per se , is bad public policy and that its inflationary erosion would , over time , render its use as a wage floor less important .

it may also have been the result of indifference or the urgency of competing national priorities .

for proponents of a higher minimum wage for the working poor , such gaps may have produced a renewed interest in indexation .

with indexation , regardless of the mechanism used , there would be "regular , predictable , wage rate increases" for minimum wage workers .

for the workers themselves , at least that minimal amount would be automatically added to their paycheck .

for employers , such a rate increase ( generally in response to inflationary pressures ) could reasonably be anticipated and prepared for .

were indexation to be adopted , however , some things may be lost and some parties may be adversely affected .

by not indexing the minimum wage ( and by allowing its continuing decline in real terms ) , certain employers are freed from having to pay higher wages .

further , with indexation , low - wage workers could expect progressively higher wages — and may feel less need of trade unions .

although indexation might alleviate the need for oversight of the rate of worker remuneration , it might also eliminate discussion of overtime pay , child labor , and related subjects .

finally , for members of congress , a periodic review of the minimum wage may have a certain resonance with voters: permitting some to claim credit for an increased wage while others may want to show how firmly they opposed such an increase .

would indexation ( whatever its merits ) resolve the matter of minimum wage increases ? .

with a formula established ( whether based on social security , a percentage of average hourly earnings , or the cpi ) , might a new campaign arise to take its place ? .

for example , if indexation were based on a percentage of average hourly earnings ( 40% or 50% or 53% ) , would proponents of a "living , family , saving wage" now protest that the rate continues to provide a poverty level income and that some adjustment may be necessary: to 60% or 70% ? .

a more practical side may emerge to the indexation question .

first .

there is no perfect methodology for indexation , though that issue might be addressed through hearings .

second .

if an increase in the minimum wage could be made automatic during good times , might a decrease also be made automatic during periods of high unemployment or other economic upheavals ? .

if the minimum wage goes up when times are good , some might argue , then might it not come down when conditions are more problematic ? .

third .

how might indexation ( whether an increase or a decrease ) be factored into other areas of policy , such as trade policy or immigration ? .

fourth .

is there a nexus between productivity and a wage increase ? .

if there is a merit system in place , how might that be affected by an automatic increase in wage rates ? .

fifth .

inflation may be yet another matter .

some view indexation as a method through which lower wage workers can cope with pressures of the cost of living .

but , others view indexation , in its own right , as an engine of inflation that , once in place , would be basically unstoppable .

through the years , at least since the 1940s , indexation has been frequently discussed but , perhaps , not actually explored in its varied aspects .

several of the states now have indexation in place: several more will soon have such a system installed .

such experimentation by the states may hold promise — or a threat — for policy makers .

