before adjourning sine die in december 2006 , congress passed legislation to reauthorize the clean water act's lake pontchartrain basin program ( h.r .

6121 ) .

president bush signed this bill into law on december 12 ( p.l .

109-392 ) .

house and senate committees reported several other bills near the end of the 109 th congress , but none of these was enacted .

the house transportation and infrastructure committee reported h.r .

4126 , to reauthorize the act's chesapeake bay program .

two other bills reported by the senate environment and public works committee dealt with security of wastewater treatment facilities ( s. 2781 ) , and incentives to promote remediation of inactive and abandoned hardrock mines ( s. 1848 ) .

although much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established 30-plus years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters , problems persist .

the types of remaining water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to metals , as well as organic and inorganic toxic substances discharged from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa ( amended by p.l .

95-217 in 1977 , p.l .

97-117 in 1981 , and p.l .

100-4 in 1987 ) .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state and local governments have major responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , and enforcement .

the objective declared in the 1972 act of restoring and maintaining the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters was accompanied by statutory goals to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 and to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 .

while those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and municipal sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in minute amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 39% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 45% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants in lakes , rivers , and coastal waters , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted , due to toxic pollutant contamination .

for mercury — a contaminant of growing concern — as of 2003 , 45 states had issued partial or statewide fish or shellfish consumption advisories .

the most recent major amendments were enacted in 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) ; this was the first comprehensive revision to the law in a decade .

authorizations for some programs , such as general grant assistance to states , research , and general epa support authorized in that law , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement the act .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public , but lately some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but recently many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental groups believe that further fine - tuning to strengthen the act is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

the year 2002 marked the 30 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 15 years since the last major amendments to the law .

while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: evaluating actions to implement existing provisions of the law , assessing whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained , and defining the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy , taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty , and allocating governmental responsibilities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently favored focusing legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also are at work .

these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) ; and , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , more prominent congressional focus on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection .

national research council , national academy of sciences .

assessing the tmdl approach to water quality management .

national academy press , washington , dc .

june 2001 .

82 p. u.s. congressional budget office .

future investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure .

washington , november 2002 .

58 p. u.s. environmental protection agency .

the national water quality inventory: 2000 report .

washington , september 2002 .

"epa - 841-r - 2-001. .

207 p. — — .

the clean water and drinking water infrastructure gap analysis .

washington , september 2002 .

"epa - 816-r - 02-020. .

50 p. — — .

clean watersheds needs survey 2000 , report to congress .

washington , august 2003 .

"epa - 832-r - 03-001. .

1 vol .

u.s. government accountability office .

key epa and state decisions limited by inconsistent and incomplete data .

 ( gao / rced - 00-54 ) march 2000 .

73 p. — — .

water infrastructure: information on financing , capital planning , and privatization .

 ( gao - 02-764 ) august 2002 .

79 p .

