the u.s. constitution allocates specific roles to both the president and the senate with respect to the appointment of certain government officials .

the constitution provides two methods by which the president may make appointments .

first , the appointments clause establishes that the president shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for and which shall be established by law .

under the appointments clause , a nominee cannot assume the powers of the office for which he or she has been nominated until confirmed by the senate .

the second method for appointing certain government officials is provided under the recess appointments clause .

this clause establishes that the president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate , by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session .

it has generally been opined that the recess appointments clause was designed to enable the president to ensure the operation of the government during periods when the senate was not in session and therefore unable to perform its advice and consent function .

several declarations were made during the founding era regarding the purpose of the clause ; however , these declarations do not definitively indicate how the recess appointment power should be interpreted .

for example , alexander hamilton referred to the recess appointment power as "nothing more than a supplement ... for the purpose of establishing an auxiliary method of appointment , in cases to which the general method was inadequate. .

similarly , thomas mckean , a prominent figure of the american revolution , stated during the ratification debates in pennsylvania that the senate need not "be under any necessity of sitting constantly , as has been alleged , for there is an express provision made to enable the president fill up all vacancies that may happen during their recess ; the commissions , to expires at the end of the next session. .

the ambiguities of the recess appointments clause and how it should be interpreted have been further complicated by the fact that the congressional schedule and travel limitations it appears to have been designed to address have undergone tremendous change since the founding period .

until the civil war , congress consistently met for relatively short sessions followed by long recesses , or breaks , of six to nine months .

congress largely adhered to this practice during and after the civil war , but began to schedule habitually an "intra - session recess" of approximately two weeks from the end of december until the beginning of january .

the recess practice of congress further changed in the mid - 20 th century , and has been characterized by more frequent intra - session recesses of shorter durations .

additionally , the length of an "inter - session recesses," that is , the adjournment between sessions of congress , has also become shorter .

interpretations of the clause have been further complicated by the evolution of its use by successive presidents .

though used to foster administrative continuity , presidents also have exercised their recess appointment power for political purposes throughout the history of the republic , giving rise to significant political and legal controversy .

for instance , president madison's recess appointments of albert gallatin , john quincy adams , and james a. bayard as envoys to negotiate a peace treaty with great britain in 1813 prompted heated debate in the senate .

presidents jackson , taylor , and lincoln also made hundreds of recess appointments during their terms .

recess appointments to the judiciary were also common during the early years of the republic , with the first five presidents making 31 such appointments , including 5 to the supreme court .

in total , 12 justices have received recess appointments to the supreme court , and many of these justices participated in court business prior to senate action on their nominations .

with the mid - 19 th century phenomena of long congressional adjournments , frequent resort to recess appointments , and the rise of the spoils system in the federal government , congress responded by imposing statutory restrictions on the president's appointment and removal power , including restrictions on paying certain classes of recess appointees .

accordingly , the circumstances that give rise to the president's ability to rely on the recess appointments clause have been a matter of debate .

there have been numerous contrary opinions from attorneys general , legislators , and scholars , each promoting opposing interpretations particularly with regard to the meaning of the phrases — "the recess of the senate" and "vacancies that may happen. .

some have argued that these phrases should be interpreted narrowly , such that only very limited circumstances trigger use of the recess appointment power , while others have argued that these phrases should be interpreted broadly , such that various circumstances trigger use of the clause .

for the past several decades , these questions of interpretation had been deemed to be settled by the executive branch as the president applied , and the senate generally accepted , a broad interpretation of the recess appointments clause .

however , with evolving legislative responses meant to curb the president's use of his recess appointment power , the supreme court had occasion to address the scope of this clause and the meaning of these phrases for the first time .

in 2014 , the court in nat'l labor relations bd .

v. noel canning ( nlrb v. noel canning ) addressed three questions: 1 .

whether the president's recess appointment power may be exercised during a recess that occurs within a session of the senate ( i.e .

 , intra - session recess ) , or is instead limited to recesses that occur between enumerated sessions of the senate ( i.e .

 , inter - session recess ) ; 2 .

whether the president's recess appointment power may be exercised to fill vacancies that exist during a recess , or is instead limited to vacancies that first arose during that recess ; and 3 .

whether the president's recess appointment power may be exercised when the senate is convening every three days in pro forma sessions .

in addition to reviewing the court's analysis regarding these key interpretive questions , this report subsequently discusses statutory pay restrictions as a congressionally devised method to curb potentially politically motivated utilization of the recess appointment power , and concludes with a discussion on the authority and tenure of recess appointees .

the president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate , by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session ( emphasis added ) .

~ art .

ii , §2 , cl .

3 as mentioned above , a functionalist interpretation of the phrases "the recess of the senate" and "vacancies that may happen" has traditionally prevailed , permitting the president to exercise his recess appointment power during either an inter - or intra - session recess of the senate and to fill any vacancy that exists regardless of when it arose .

however , in 2013 , the united states court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) in noel canning v. nlrb resurrected a formalist interpretation of these phrases that would have significantly curbed the president's authority under the clause .

in its decision , the d.c .

circuit declared that the president could only make recess appointments when the senate entered into an inter - session recess at the end of congress , and only to vacancies that arose during that inter - session recess .

because neither of those conditions were met in the facts underlying the noel canning appointments , the d.c .

circuit declared the three recess appointments made by president barack obama to the nlrb constitutionally invalid .

upon review , the supreme court unanimously affirmed that the recess appointments were invalid .

however , the majority , in an opinion authored by justice breyer , rejected the d.c .

circuit's interpretation of these key phrases , while four justices , concurring in judgment only , issued an opinion authored by justice scalia agreeing with the d.c .

circuit's formalist interpretation .

before delving into the supreme court's opinion in noel canning , this section first provides an overview of the historical interpretations of the phrases "the recess of the senate" and "vacancies that may happen. .

congress , in an attempt to check the president's use of the recess appointment clause and preserve its role in the appointments process , has enacted legislation that would restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances .

as a fundamental matter , a recess appointee possesses the same legal authority as a confirmed appointee .

the commission of a recess appointee expires "at the end of [the senate's] next session," whereas the service of a confirmed appointee continues until the end of the statutory term or at the pleasure of the president , subject to the requirements laid out by congress in creating the position .

when the senate reconvenes after a recess during the same session , this is considered a continuation of the session and is not regarded as the "next session" within the meaning of the clause .

the supreme court's decision in noel canning did not alter this understanding of the clause .

in practice , this means that a recess appointment could last for almost two years .

 ( see textbox. ) .

on the one hand , if an individual receives an intersession recess appointment — that is , an appointment between sessions of the same or successive congresses — such individual could serve until the end of the following session .

on the other hand , if the president makes an intrasession recess appointment — that is , an appointment during a recess of the senate in the middle of a session , like the traditional august recess — that appointment would expire at the end of the second session .

in the latter case , the duration of the appointment will include the rest of the session in progress plus the full length of the session that follows .

the president may remove a recess appointee before the expiration of his term , either by outright removal ( assuming he otherwise has discretionary removal authority with respect to the office ) or by having another nominee confirmed by the senate .

while generally perceived as a straightforward , pragmatic provision designed to foster administrative continuity , the history of the recess appointments clause shows that it has been the source of recurrent controversy , beginning with the administration of george washington , and continuing to the current administration of barack obama .

the application of the recess appointments clause had been left to the interpretations of the executive and legislative branches , with differing and inconsistent opinions regarding the scope of the clause for almost 100 years before an apparent general acceptance of a broad interpretation .

in 2014 , the supreme court examined the scope of the recess appointment power for the first time in nlrb v. noel canning .

the court held that the president may make recess appointments to any existing vacancy during an inter - or intra - session recess of the senate of "sufficient length. .

the court held that a recess of the senate must be 10 days or longer because a recess between 3 and 9 days is "presumptively too short. .

the use of the word "presumptively" left open the possibility for exigent circumstances , not including political disagreement between the branches , during which the president may have need to make a recess appointment when the senate has been in recess for less than 10 days .

the decision does not appear to have affected other judicial interpretations of provisions that are related to recess appointees .

however , the future impact of the noel canning decision on the actions of both the president and the senate remains to be seen and may very well be dependent upon the political parties that control the executive and legislative branches .

