the philippine islands became a u.s. possession in 1898 , when they were ceded from spain following the spanish - american war ( 1898-1902 ) .

in 1934 , congress passed the philippine independence act ( tydings - mcduffie act , p.l .

73-127 ) , which set a 10-year timetable for the eventual independence of the philippines and in the interim established a commonwealth of the philippines vested with certain powers over its internal affairs .

in 1935 , the philippine constitution was adopted and the first president of the philippines was elected .

the granting of full independence was ultimately delayed until 1946 because of the japanese occupation of the islands from 1942-1945 .

among other things , p.l .

73-127 reserved to the united states the power to maintain military bases and armed forces in the philippines and , upon order of the president of the united states , the right to call into the service of the u.s. armed forces all military forces organized by the philippine government .

on july 26 , 1941 , president franklin d. roosevelt issued an executive order inducting all military forces of the commonwealth of the philippines under the command of a newly created command structure called the united states armed forces of the far east ( usaffe ) .

these units remained under usaffe command through the duration of world war ii ( wwii ) , until authority over them was returned to the commonwealth at the time of independence .

from time to time since 1946 , congress has passed laws providing , and in some instances repealing , benefits to filipino veterans .

this report , which will be updated as legislative events warrant , provides an overview of major filipino veterans legislation enacted by congress since 1946 .

the report begins by defining the specific groups of filipino nationals who served under the command of the united states , outlines the rescission acts of 1946 , the changes to benefits for filipino veterans since 1946 , and recent legislative proposals .

table 1 , at the end of this report , shows the current benefits for filipino veterans and survivors .

in 1946 , congress passed the first supplemental surplus appropriation rescission act ( p.l .

79-301 ) and the second supplemental surplus appropriation rescission act ( p.l .

79-391 ) , which came to be commonly known as the "rescission acts of 1946. .

it should be noted that the rescission acts of 1946 applied only to filipino veterans who were members of the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , or the new philippine scouts .

veterans who served as regular , or "old," philippine scouts were categorized as u.s. veterans .

they were , and remain , generally entitled to all veterans' benefits for which any other u.s. veteran is eligible .

h.r .

760 and s. 57 would have eliminated the distinction between the regular or "old" philippine scouts and the other three groups of veterans — commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts — making them all fully eligible for va benefits similar to those received by u.s. veterans .

h.r .

760 was reported out of committee .

s. 66 would have required the secretary of the army to validate claims by filipinos that they performed military service in the philippine islands during world war ii that would qualify them for benefits under u.s. law and issue a certificate of service .

s. 1315 , as passed by the senate , incorporated provisions from s. 57 .

s. 1315 would have altered current law to deem certain service with philippine forces during world war ii as active service and establish rates for the improved pension and the death pension for veterans who served with the philippine forces and their survivors living outside the united states .

under the provisions of s. 1315 , single filipino veterans living outside the united states would receive $3,600 a year , married veterans would receive $4,500 a year , and veterans' survivors would receive $2,400 a year .

however , under the bill , veterans living outside the united states who are eligible for , or receiving , the social security benefit for world war ii veterans living overseas would not be not eligible for the new improved pension rates .

the bill also would not have applied the current income or net worth limitations for the improved pension and the death pension for veterans who served with the philippine forces and their survivors living outside the united states .

in addition , the bill would not have required any veteran who served with the philippine forces or their survivors receiving other federal benefits at the time of enactment to apply for the improved pension or the death pension if receiving the new benefits would have made them ineligible for their other federal benefits or reduced the amount of their other federal benefits .

s. 1315 provided that disability compensation ( for service - connected disabilities ) would be paid to all recipients at the same rate regardless of residence , while maintaining the general payment rate of 50 cents per dollar for other benefits to filipino veterans and survivors living outside the united states .

on september 22 , 2008 , the house passed an amended version of s. 1315 that did not contain the filipino benefit provisions .

h.r .

6897 , as passed by the house on september 23 , 2008 , would have provided a one - time payment to filipino veterans who served in the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts .

the payment would be $15,000 for u.s. citizens and $9,000 for non - u.s citizens .

payments are made from the filipino veterans equity compensation fund and are subject to funds being available ( appropriated ) .

p.l .

110-329 appropriated $198 million for the filipino veterans equity compensation fund .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) authorizes a one - time payment from the filipino veterans equity compensation fund to filipino veterans who served in the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts .

the one - time payment is $15,000 for u.s. citizens and $9,000 for non - u.s citizens .

filipino veterans currently receiving benefits will continue to receive those benefits .

the one - time payment does not impact eligibility for federally assisted programs .

the one - time payment is considered a settlement for all future claims for benefits based on service in the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts .

the exception is that a veteran may receive benefits that the veteran would have been eligible for based on the laws in effect on the day before enactment ( september 17 , 2009 ) .

