this report examines the specialty metal clause in the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) , potential oversight issues , and options for congress .

the specialty metal clause prohibits dod from acquiring end units or components for aircraft , missile and space systems , ships , tank and automotive items , weapon systems , or ammunition unless these end items or components have been manufactured with specialty metals that have been melted or produced in the united states .

specialty metals are used in components procured through dod contracts , primarily for military aircraft , weapons , equipment , and within integrated circuits , wiring , and electrical components .

specialty metals covered by this clause include certain types of cobalt , nickel , steel , titanium and titanium alloys , zirconium , and zirconium base alloys .

thousands of products used for defense , aerospace , automotive , and renewable energy technologies rely on specialty metals for which there are often few , if any , substitutes .

the availability of sources of supply of some elements that comprise some metals , particularly the access to rare earth elements , is an issue raised in recent news reports and congressional hearings .

policy makers are interested in the specialty metal clause because the specialty metal clause affects defense contractors who produce components for commercial weapons systems .

in order to preserve and protect the united states industrial base so that it could meet dod requirements during periods of adversity and war , in 1941 congress passed a set of domestic source restrictions which became known as the berry amendment .

in 1973 , specialty metals become one of the items covered under the berry amendment , a domestic preference law requiring dod to procure items that are wholly domestic .

the specialty metal clause first appeared in the 1973 defense appropriations act .

at that time , congress was concerned with protecting domestic source materials for the vietnam war .

at that time , the domestic specialty metal sector was hurt by subsidized imports into the united states .

in order to insure an adequate domestic base for domestic items , congress provided a guarantee to domestic suppliers for a portion of dod's specialty metal business .

over three decades later , specialty metals are no longer part of the berry amendment and are now covered in a separate citation in the united states code ( u.s.c. ) .

congress took action in the fy2007 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-364 ) to separate specialty metal from the berry amendment ( title 10 , u.s.c .

2533a ) .

specialty metals are defined in 10 u.s.c .

2533b and were revised as part of the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) .

the specialty metal clause prohibits dod from procuring metal that is not produced in the united states .

three issues stand out as policy questions that congress may choose to consider in its oversight role .

first , how does the specialty metal clause affect competition among the different contractor tiers in the u.s. defense industrial base ? .

second , what are the factors that contribute to the success or failure of the administration of the specialty metal clause ? .

third , how does one weigh the reliability of having a domestic supplier base in times of urgent and compelling need , coupled with the desire to promote global trade ? .

congress may want to consider whether recent revisions in the specialty metal clause have adequately addressed the purpose of the law , as well as concerns raised about how the new rules are implemented .

it is important to note that the specialty metal clause in the berry amendment had been in place for over three decades .

any change in the law could likely have both upstream and downstream effects in the defense supply chain .

how will the change affect prime contractors and subcontractors on the second , third , and fourth tiers , as well as domestic suppliers ? .

at least seven possible options for policy makers to consider are listed below: ( 1 ) eliminate the specialty metal clause ; ( 2 ) require an assessment of compliance with new exceptions to the specialty metals clause ; ( 3 ) require a review of waivers issued under the revised specialty metals clause , including requiring dod to publicly disclose when waivers are granted ; ( 4 ) require congressional approval before non - compliant specialty metal can be used in certain defense contracts ; ( 5 ) require a congressional report for each platform / component where non - compliant specialty metals are used in defense contracts ; ( 6 ) encourage the use of domestic specialty metal ; and ( 7 ) appoint a special metals protection board .

h.r .

4310 , the national defense authorization act for fy2013 , contains a provision which broaden the definition of specialty metals produced within the united states .

section 817 would amend 10 u.s.c .

2533b to include "melted , or processed in a manner that results in physical or chemical property changes that are the equivalent of melting. .

the term "produced" does not include finishing processes such as "rolling , heat treatment , quenching , tempering , grinding , or shaving. .

h.r .

4310 also contains a provision , section 901 , which reconfigures the membership and scope of the strategic materials protection board ( smpb ) by requiring that the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy serve as chair .

the congressional intent of such a restructuring can be found in a statement of findings that accompanies the bill .

excerpts from the bill follow .

title ix — department of defense organization and management subtitle a — department of defense management sec .

901 .

additional duties of deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy and amendments to strategic materials protection board .

 ( a ) findings - congress finds the following: ( 1 ) the defense logistics agency has made little progress in addressing the findings and recommendations from the april 2009 report of the department of defense report titled `reconfiguration of the national defense stockpile report to congress' .

 ( 2 ) the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy has historically analyzed the united states defense industrial base from the point of view of prime contractors and original equipment manufacturers and has provided insufficient attention to producers of materials critical to national security , including raw materials producers .

 ( 3 ) responsibility for the secure supply of materials critical to national security , which supports the defense industrial base , is decentralized throughout the department of defense .

 ( 4 ) the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy should expand its focus to consider both a top - down view of the supply chain , beginning with prime contractors , and a bottom - up view that begins with raw materials suppliers .

 ( 5 ) to enable this focus and support a more coherent , comprehensive strategy as it pertains to materials critical to national security , the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy should develop policy , conduct oversight , and monitor resource allocation for agencies of the department of defense , including the defense logistics agency , for all activities that pertain to ensuring a secure supply of materials critical to national security .

 ( 6 ) the strategic materials protection board should be reconfigured so as to be chaired by the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy and should fully execute its duties and responsibilities .

h.r .

3449 , defense supply chain and industrial base security act , was introduced on november 16 , 2011 , and referred to the house armed services committee .

the bill would require the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) develop a defense supply chain and industrial base strategy , and subsequent plan , designed to secure the supply chain and industrial base sectors determined to be critical to u.s. national security ; ( 2 ) review the strategy and plan on a biennial basis ; and ( 3 ) report to congress on the strategy and plan , as well as on the results of each review .

p.l .

110-181 , the fy2008 national defense authorization act , contained three new provisions which affect the specialty metal clause: section 803 required the strategic materials protection board to perform an assessment of the viability of domestic producers of strategic materials , the purpose of which is to assess which domestic producers are investing , or plan to invest on a sustained basis , in the development of a continued domestic production capability of strategic materials to meet national defense requirements .

such an assessment would be evaluated and weighted in any decision to grant future waivers to the specialty metal clause .

sections 804 and 884 included these provisions: applies to contracts or subcontracts for the acquisition of specialty metals , including mill products , such as bar , billet , slab , wire , plate , and sheet , that have not been incorporated into end items , subsystems , assemblies , or components ; applies to contracts or subcontracts for the acquisition of forgings or castings of specialty metals , unless such forgings or castings are incorporated into commercially available off - the - shelf end items , subsystems , or assemblies ; applies to contracts or subcontracts for commercially available , high performance magnets unless such high performance magnets are incorporated into commercially available , off - the - shelf - end items or subsystems ; applies to contracts or subcontracts for commercially available off - the - shelf fasteners ( some exceptions noted ) ; applies to contracts for electronic components unless the secretary of defense , upon the recommendation of the strategic materials protection board pursuant to section 187 of this title , determines that the domestic availability of a particular electronic component is critical to national security ; provides exceptions for the secretary of defense or the secretary of a military department to accept delivery of an item containing specialty metals that were not melted in the united states , if the total amount of noncompliant specialty metals in the item does not exceed 2% of the total weight of specialty metals in the item ( excludes high performance magnets ) ; provides exceptions for the secretary of defense or the secretary of a military department to acquire commercial derivative military articles , under certain conditions ; and provides waivers for national security if the secretary of defense determines in writing that acceptance of such end items is necessary to the national security interests of the united states , under certain conditions .

congress enacted provisions in the fy2007 national defense authorization act that changed the statutory authority for the special metal clause .

p.l .

109-364 created a new specialty metal clause separate from the berry amendment , moving it into a separate section of title 10 .

also , section 842b established a one - time waiver of the berry amendment for non - compliant specialty metal incorporated into items produced , manufactured , or assembled in the united states before the date of the act's enactment .

dod can grant waivers provided the noncompliance was not knowing or willful .

creates a new section , 10 u.s.c .

2533b , in the u.s. code ; reaffirms that any specialty metal ( eg , raw stock ) acquired directly by the government or by a prime contractor for delivery to the government , must be melted or produced in the united states .

this restriction applies to all tiers of subcontractors when acquiring aircraft , missile and space systems , ships , tank and automotive items , weapons systems , or ammunition ; restricts not only the procurement of the specialty metal in these items , but restricts procurement of the end items , and components thereof , that contain specialty metals ; prohibits the practice of withholding contract payment while conditionally accepting noncompliant items in these categories ; provides a national security exemption , where the secretary of defense or the secretary of the military service can waive the specialty metal compliance requirement when compliant specialty metal , of a satisfactory quality , quantity , and in the required form cannot be procured as needed and when needed ; exempts procurement outside the united states in support of combat or contingency operation ; exempts sole source procurements based on unusual and compelling urgency of need ; provides exceptions for procurements related to international agreements ( eg , qualifying countries ) , non - appropriated fund contracts , and small purchases ( i.e. , less than the simplified acquisition threshold ) ; and provides for a "de minimis" exception which means that up to 2% of non - compliant specialty metal can be included in electronic components .

section 843 of fy2007 national defense authorization act required the creation of a strategic materials protection board to determine which items should be designated as critical to national security , and to recommend changes for future domestic sourcing .

the board held its first meeting on july 17 , 2007 , and reached the following conclusions as described here: the term "materials critical to national security" would be taken to mean "strategic materials critical to national security" or simply "strategic materials," and would include those specialty metals listed in 10 u.s.c .

2533b , and any other materials that the board chose to so designate ; the board's efforts would initially focus on determining the need to take action to ensure a long - term domestic supply of specialty metals as designated in 10 u.s.c .

2533b ; the board adopted certain terms of reference to shape its deliberations ; and the board directed its executive secretary to conduct an initial analysis of national security issues associated with strategic materials , and to report the results of that analysis at the next smpb meeting .

the board held its second meeting on december 12 , 2008 , and reached the following conclusions as described here: approved a definition of "strategic material" and "critical material" proposed by the executive secretary were discussed and approved by the board ; reviewed and validated the work of the strategic and critical materials working group in response to congressionally directed requirements of h.rept .

109-89 and s.rept .

110-55 ; validated an "initial analysis of national security issues associated with strategic materials" and authorized its publication in the federal register ; and revised the terms of reference to reflect their new definitions for strategic and critical materials , providing the board with more flexibility to examining future issues , and broadening their scope to address additional matters associated with strategic materials .

based on the recommendations of the december 2008 meeting of the strategic materials protection board , dod has determined that specialty metals no longer require domestic source protection , as described below in excerpts from the report to congress .

the key finding of this analysis is that specialty metals , as defined in 10 u.s.c .

2533b , are not "materials critical to national security" for which only a u.s. source should be used ; and there is no national security reason for the department to take action to ensure a long term domestic supply of these specialty metals .

the "criticality" of a material is a function of its importance in dod applications , the extent to which dod actions are required to shape and sustain the market , and the impact and likelihood of supply disruption .

the analysis showed that specialty metals are "strategic materials" which may require special monitoring and attention / action ; but not , in general , a domestic source restriction .

should reliable supplies / capacities be insufficient to meet potential requirements for a projected conflict , other risk mitigation options , including stockpiling , could represent an effective alternative .

high purity beryllium , however , is a critical material .

even in peacetime , defense applications dominate the market ; it is essential for important defense systems and unique in the function it performs .

in addition , domestic production capabilities have atrophied , and there are no reliable foreign suppliers .

accordingly , the department should continue to take those special actions necessary to maintain a long term domestic supply of high purity beryllium .

in fact , the department has established a title iii of the defense production act project with u.s. supplier brush - wellman to build and operate a new high purity beryllium production facility .

the strategic materials protection board ( smpb ) should review and validate any internal or external recommendations that identify strategic materials that are essential for a wide variety of important defense applications and for which there is a relatively high potential for supply disruption .

for example , a relatively high potential for supply disruption would be represented by a situation in which reliable supplies ( u.s. or non - u.s. ) are projected to be insufficient to support the defense needs of the united states during peacetime and / or during a conflict .

in such circumstances , dod market intervention such as increasing or establishing reliable production capability and / or stockpiling may be an effective risk mitigation strategy .

title 10 of the united states code , section 2504 , requires the secretary of defense to report to the house and senate armed services committees on the viability of the defense industrial base including the following information: ( 1 ) a description of the departmental guidance prepared pursuant to section 2506 of this title .

 ( 2 ) a description of the methods and analyses being undertaken by the department of defense alone or in cooperation with other federal agencies , to identify and address concerns regarding technological and industrial capabilities of the national technology and industrial base .

 ( 3 ) a description of the assessments prepared pursuant to section 2505 of this title and other analyses used in developing the budget submission of the department of defense for the next fiscal year .

 ( 4 ) identification of each program designed to sustain specific essential technological and industrial capabilities and processes of the national technology and industrial base. .

the 2012 annual industrial capabilities report to congress can be accessed online .

