although much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established 30-plus years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters , long - standing problems persist , and new problems have emerged .

water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to "point" source discharges of metals and organic and inorganic toxic substances from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state and local governments have major responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , and enforcement .

the water quality restoration objective declared in the 1972 act was accompanied by statutory goals to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 and to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 .

although those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 45% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 47% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

in 2006 epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers and reported that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the biological condition of these waters .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants in lakes , rivers , and coastal waters , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted , due to toxic pollutant contamination .

mercury is a contaminant of growing concern — as of 2003 , 45 states had issued partial or statewide fish or shellfish consumption advisories because of elevated mercury levels .

the last major amendments to the law were the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

these amendments culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and were the most comprehensive amendments since 1972 .

authorizations of appropriations for some programs provided in p.l .

100-4 , such as general grant assistance to states , research , and general epa support authorized in that law , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement them .

epa , states , industry , and other citizens continue to implement the 1987 legislation , including meeting the numerous requirements and deadlines in it .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public , but lately some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental groups believe that further fine - tuning is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

the year 2007 marked the 35 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 20 years since the last major amendments to the law .

while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: evaluating actions to implement existing provisions of the law , assessing whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained , ensuring that progress made to date is not lost through diminished attention to water quality needs , and defining the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy , taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty , and allocating governmental responsibilities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently favored focusing legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also are at work .

these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) ; and , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , more prominent congressional focus on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection .

as a result of the 2006 mid - term elections and changed congressional leadership , many observers anticipated that the 110 th congress would pursue oversight of clean water and other environmental programs .

a particular legislative focus is water infrastructure financing legislation , specifically reauthorization of the act's financial aid program .

also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the clean water act over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear .

a number of other issues of interest included implementation of current programs to manage stormwater discharges and nonpoint sources of pollution , as these are major contributors to water quality impairments across the country ; implementation of rules governing discharges of wastes from large animal feeding operations ; and implications of a number of court rulings concerning the scope of the act's discharge permit requirements .

clean water funding questions continue to arise and be addressed by congress in the context of appropriations .

the president's fy2008 budget request was presented to congress on february 5 , 2007 .

the budget requested $687.6 million for clean water srf grants , the same amount requested for fy2007 .

the budget sought reduced funding for several other water quality programs below levels enacted for fy2007 in p.l .

110-5 , including nonpoint pollution management grants ( proposed 5% cut ) , grant funding for states for watershed protection ( proposed to be eliminated ) , and funds for the national estuary program ( proposed 28% cut ) .

other water quality programs would receive increased funding under the proposal , including cleanup of contaminated sediments in the great lakes ( proposed 21% increase ) , funds for the chesapeake bay program ( 30% increase ) , and grants to states for water quality monitoring ( 3% increase ) .

on june 27 the house passed h.r .

2643 , providing fy2008 appropriations for epa .

this bill included $1.125 billion for clean water srf grants , plus $175.5 million for 143 congressionally designated water infrastructure project grants .

it also included increases above the administration's request for nonpoint pollution management grants , targeted watershed protection grants , and the national estuary program , as well as great lakes and chesapeake bay programs .

the senate appropriations committee approved companion legislation ( s. 1696 ) that similarly included higher funding levels for several water quality programs .

the senate committee's bill provided less funding for clean water srf grants than the house bill ( $887 million ) , but slightly more for congressionally designated water infrastructure project grants ( $180 million ) .

the senate did not take up s. 1696 .

by october 1 , the start of the fiscal year , congress had not enacted any fy2008 appropriations bills .

congress enacted several short - term continuing appropriations resolutions to temporarily fund epa and other government agencies until final agreement , which occurred in december 2007 .

full - year funding for epa's water infrastructure programs was included in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( division f , title ii ) , signed by the president december 26 , 2007 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

the final bill included $689 million for clean water srf grants ( $1.5 million more than requested , but $395 million less than in fy2007 ) , plus $177 million for 282 earmarked grants in listed communities , alaska native villages , and u.s. - mexico border projects .

the president's fy2009 budget was presented on february 5 , 2008 .

overall , the budget sought $7.1 billion for epa programs and activities , 5% less than congress appropriated for fy2008 .

the request included a number of reductions for water quality programs .

it sought $555 million for the clean water srf program ( 20% below the fy2008 level ) and , as in previous budgets , requested no funding for congressionally earmarked water infrastructure grants .

in addition , the budget asked for 8% less for nonpoint pollution management grants ( $184.5 million , compared with $200.8 million in fy2008 ) and sought no funding for the targeted watershed grants program , a competitive grant program that provides funding for community - driven watershed restoration projects ; it received $10 million in fy2008 appropriations .

on june 11 , a house appropriations subcommittee approved a bill with fy2009 funds for epa .

the bill included $850 million for clean water srf capitalization grants ( which is $295 million above the administration's request and $161 million above the fy2008 level ) and $150 million for congressionally earmarked water infrastructure grants .

no further action occurred before the start of the new fiscal year .

however , at the end of september congress and the president agreed to legislation providing partial - year funding for epa and most other agencies and departments .

this bill , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing resolution act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) provides funding through march 6 , 2009 , at fy2008-enacted levels .

final action on fy2009 appropriations is expected to occur early in 2009 .

