september 22 , 2008: the united states launches negotiations to join the trans - pacific economic partnership agreement .

july 29 , 2008: a wto negotiating ministerial ends without agreement on doha round modalities in geneva .

july 14 , 2008: the united states and malaysia held a round of fta negotiations .

june 25 , 2008: korean government announces resumption of u.s. beef imports from cattle less than 30 months of age .

april 18 , 2008: the united states and south korea reach an agreement to fully open the korean market to u.s. beef exports .

april 10 , 2008: the house passed a rule ( h.res .

1092 ) to suspend trade promotion authority procedures governing the consideration of legislation implementing the u.s. - colombia fta by a vote of 224-195 .

april 8 , 2008: legislation implementing the u.s. - colombia fta was introduced in the house ( h.r .

5724 ) and the senate ( s. 2830 ) .

for over 50 years , u.s. trade officials have negotiated multilateral trade agreements to achieve lower trade barriers and rules to cover international trade .

during the 108 th congress , u.s. officials negotiated and congress approved four bilateral free - trade agreements with australia , chile , morocco , and singapore .

in the 109 th congress agreements were concluded and congress approved the central american - dominican republic fta and bilateral agreements with bahrain and oman .

the bush administration is making bilateral and regional free - trade agreements more important elements of its trade policy .

the multilateral arena is no longer the only means , or perhaps even the principal means , by which the united states is pursuing liberalized trade .

trade agreements are negotiated by the executive branch , although congress has the ultimate constitutional authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce .

trade promotion authority ( tpa ) requires that the president consult with and advise congress throughout the negotiating process .

after the executive branch signs an agreement , congress may consider implementing legislation if any statutory changes are required under the agreement .

there is no deadline for submission of the legislation , but once a bill is submitted , tpa requires a final vote within 90 legislative days .

u.s. negotiating strategy is based on a concept known as "competitive liberalization. .

as explained by the administration , this strategy is designed to push forward trade liberalization on multiple fronts: bilateral , regional , and multilateral .

it is meant to further trade negotiations by liberalizing trade with countries willing to join free trade agreements , and to put pressure on other countries to negotiate in the wto .

according to former united states trade representative ( ustr ) robert b. zoellick , we want to strengthen the hand of the coalition pressing for freer trade .

it would be fatal to give the initiative to naysayers abroad and protectionists at home .

as we have seen in the league of nations , the un , the imf and the world bank , international organizations need leaders to prod them into action .

critics assert that the emphasis on regional and bilateral negotiations undermines the world trade organization ( wto ) and increases the risk of trade diversion .

trade diversion occurs when the existence of lower tariffs under a trade agreement cause trade to be diverted away from a more efficient producer outside the trading bloc to a producer inside the bloc .

what also results from the plethora of negotiated ftas , according to one economist , "is a 'spaghetti bowl' of rules , arbitrary definitions of which products come from where , and a multiplicity of tariffs depending on source. .

more recently , new ustr susan schwab described the negotiation of bilateral and regional ftas as a way to "establish the breadth and scope of potential multilateral agreements in years to come by setting precedents and by demonstrating the real benefits of free and fair trade. .

the manner in which the administration chooses potential fta partners has been the subject of scrutiny by some members of congress .

traditionally , regional and bilateral trade agreements have been negotiated for a mixture of economic , political , and development reasons .

the u.s. - canada free - trade agreement ( fta ) was primarily economic in nature: recognizing the largest bilateral trade relationship in the world between two countries at a similar stage of development .

the partnership with mexico to create nafta brought in a country at a different stage of development and gave attention to trade as a lever to encourage economic advancement .

it also had a geopolitical rationale of encouraging stability in the u.s. neighbor to the south .

the fta with israel was seen by supporters as an affirmation of u.s. support for the jewish state , while the fta with jordan could be seen as a reward for jordan's cooperation in the middle east peace process .

in may 2003 , then - ustr zoellick enumerated several factors used to evaluate countries seeking to negotiate trade agreements with the united states , but he said there were no formal rules or procedures to make the determination .

a gao study released in january 2004 reported that an interagency process had been established to assess fta partners using six factors .

these factors include a country's readiness in terms of trade capabilities , the maturity of its political and legal system , and the will to implement reforms ; the economic benefit to the united states ; the country's support of u.s. trade liberalization goals ; a partner's compatibility with u.s. foreign and economic policy interests ; congressional or private sector support ; and u.s. government resource constraints .

the ability of the united states to attract future fta negotiating partners may now depend on the reauthorization of trade promotion authority , which lapsed on july 1 , 2007 .

some members of congress have questioned the manner in which potential fta partners are chosen .

senator baucus , now chairman of the senate finance committee , criticized the administration for overlooking high volume trading partners in asia and was quoted saying that "this administration's trade policy is dictated largely by its foreign policy , not by economics. .

in addition , some business groups have expressed a desire to concentrate more on the multilateral negotiations of the wto , which potentially could yield greater commercial gains .

the administration cites the negotiation of free trade agreements in multilateral , regional , and bilateral settings as an integral part of its strategy to enhance prosperity and freedom for the rest of the world .

in its september 2002 national security strategy , the administration seemed to equate the concept of 'free trade' with a basic freedom or moral principle , "the freedom for a person or a nation to make a living. .

according to this document , free - market economic and trade policies , more than development assistance , provides nations with the ability to lift themselves out of poverty and to ensure stability .

although the administration is pursuing trade agreements on multiple fronts , some critics question whether the united states should be negotiating trade agreements at all .

they contend that american jobs are lost because of cheaper imports , and that relocation of u.s. production to other countries has been facilitated by trade agreements .

some argue that trade agreements do not adequately address the problem of countries with lower labor and environmental standards that are able to produce at lower cost .

some critics believe that the u.s. economy will be harmed by the administration's pursuit of free - trade agreements .

with party control switching in the 110 th congress , democratic leaders have sought to make changes in u.s. trade negotiating strategy .

on march 27 , 2007 , house ways and means committee chairman rangel and trade subcommittee chairman levin unveiled a set of democratic trade principles , including some that likely will require , if implemented , the modification of the currently notified ftas with colombia , panama , peru , and south korea .

after several weeks of negotiations , congressional leaders and the bush administration announced a conceptual agreement on may 10 on several issues that may clear the way for consideration of the peru and panama agreements .

the conceptual template provides for enforcement of international labor standards in an fta partner's domestic laws and regulations , adherence of fta partners to certain multilateral environmental agreements , an assurance that trade agreements accord "no greater substantive rights" to foreign investors in the united states than u.s. investors in the united states , a clarification that each agreement's "essential security" provision is not subject to challenge , insurance that government procurement policies promote basic worker's rights , and the incorporation of certain flexibilities concerning test data and the approval of pharmaceutical products in developing countries .

the result of the competitive liberalization strategy is that the united states has been involved in an unprecedented number of trade negotiations during this administration .

the united states has concluded agreements with peru , colombia , panama , and south korea .

legislation to implement these agreement likely will be considered by the 110 th congress under the timetable set forth by trade promotion authority ( see table 1 ) .

during the 109 th congress , the united states ratified ftas with bahrain , oman , and a combined fta with the dominican republic and the countries of the central american common market ( costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua ) .

implementing legislation for these agreements has been passed by the united states , but the agreements have not yet entered into force with oman or costa rica .

later sections of this report refer to formal notifications by the administration to congress .

under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation passed in 2002 ( title xxi , p.l .

107-210 ) , the president must notify congress before starting negotiation of a trade agreement and before signing a completed agreement .

tpa legislation applies to trade agreements entered into before july 1 , 2007 .

if the administration meets the notification requirements , consults as required , and satisfies other conditions in the tpa legislation , the 2002 legislation calls on congress to consider implementing legislation for a trade agreement under expedited ( "trade promotion" or "fast - track" ) procedures .

the following briefly reviews the notification and consultation requirements .

on may 9 , 2003 , president bush announced an initiative to create a u.s. - middle east free trade agreement by 2013 .

this initiative would create a multi - stage process to prepare countries in the region for an fta with the united states .

countries would begin the process by negotiating accession to the world trade organization and subsequently by concluding bilateral investment treaties ( bit ) and trade and investment framework agreements ( tifa ) with the united states .

as domestic reforms progress , countries would then negotiate ftas with the united states , possibly linking to other existing or in - progress ftas , such as with jordan , morocco , bahrain , oman , or the united arab emirates .

qatar and kuwait have also been mentioned as a near - term fta candidates .

the ustr has stated that ftas with middle eastern countries are consistent with the 9 / 11 commission recommendation that the united states encourage development in the middle east by expanding trade .

the administration's rationale for this potential fta is to provide the incentive for the transformation of the economies of the middle east and their integration into the world economy .

one study reports that , since 1980 , the share of world exports emanating from middle eastern countries has dropped from 13.5% to 4% , and that per capita income has fallen by 25% in the arab world .

this initiative , announced by president bush on october 26 , 2002 , provides the impetus for the negotiation of bilateral ftas with individual countries of the association of southeast asian nations , or asean ( brunei , cambodia , indonesia , laos , malaysia , myanmar , philippines , singapore , thailand , and vietnam ) .

the first stage of this process is expected to be the negotiation of a region - wide trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) , which is seen as the first step in the process of negotiating individual ftas with asean member states .

thailand is the first candidate for an fta under this initiative ( see earlier section on " thailand " ) .

as seen by the administration , the principal benefits to the united states of ftas with asean member states are the potential to reduce high tariffs on agricultural products and to eliminate restrictive tariff - rate quotas on other u.s. exports , while the major benefit to asean countries would be improved access to the u.s. market .

the initiative is also seen as a way of countering growing chinese influence in the region .

two - way trade with asean countries reached $166.9 billion in 2007 , consisting of imports of $111.7 billion and exports of $55.2 billion .

egypt was the 51 st largest trading partner of the united states with u.s. imports in 2007 of $2.4 billion , u.s. exports of $5.3 billion , and two - way trade totaling $7.7 billion .

major export to egypt include cereals , aircraft and parts , machinery , vehicles and parts , telecommunications equipment , and arms ; imports include textiles , apparel , carpets , petroleum , and iron and steel .

with a population of 65.3 million , egypt is the largest country in the middle east .

egypt has been a member of the world trade organization since 1995 , and it has concluded a tifa with the united states .

egypt's central position in the arab world has led to speculation that the united states would seek to launch fta negotiations .

the two sides reportedly have established a number of exploratory "subcommittees" to prepare for the negotiations .

in november 2004 , a house ways and means committee delegation led by former chairman thomas found reforms in customs administration , tariff reduction , and tax reform encouraging , but they cited continuing intellectual property rights violations and egyptian restrictions on u.s. agricultural imports as impediments to an agreement .

in addition , discriminatory taxes on imports and poor labor rights standards have also been mentioned as impediments to an agreement .

in january 2005 , the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) indicated that it opposed launching fta negotiations with egypt after the egyptian ministry of health granted marketing approval to generic drugs without , phrma alleges , providing legally required data exclusivity periods .

the united states has reportedly suspended consideration of an fta with egypt due to continuing human rights issues , including imprisonment of a presidential candidate in the 2005 elections and concerns over the treatment of sudanese refugees .

an fta with taiwan has been advanced by proponents in the last several years .

in the 110 th congress , h.con.res .

137 ( berkley ) was introduced on may 1 , 2007 calling for the launch of fta negotiations with taiwan .

taiwan is the ninth largest u.s. trading partner with total two - way trade in 2007 of $62.7 billion .

the united states is now taiwan's second largest trading partner after mainland china .

in 2007 , the united states imported $38.1 billion in merchandise from taiwan with computers , circuitry , vehicle parts , television transmission , and telecommunications equipment leading .

u.s. exports to taiwan , which totaled $24.6 billion , included integrated electronic circuits , electrical machinery , aircraft parts , corn , and soybeans .

while the bush administration has indicated support for the concept of a u.s. - taiwan fta , it cites several outstanding trade disputes , including taiwan's enforcement of intellectual property rights , the imposition of excessive standards , testing , certification and labeling requirements , and taiwanese rice import quotas .

in addition , the negotiation of an fta with taiwan likely would encounter the ire of the mainland chinese government , which considers taiwan to be a province of china .

taiwan acceded to the wto on january 1 , 2002 , and signed a trade and investment framework agreement with the united states in 1994 .

