the island republic of cyprus gained its independence from great britain in 1960 .

the 784,000 cypriots are 77% of greek ethnic origin , and 18% of turkish ethnic origin .

 ( maronite christians , armenians , and others constitute the remainder. ) .

at independence , the republic's constitution defined elaborate power - sharing arrangements between the two main groups .

it required a greek cypriot president and a turkish cypriot vice president , each elected by his own community .

simultaneously , a treaty of guarantee signed by britain , greece , and turkey ensured the new republic's territorial integrity and a treaty of alliance among the republic , greece , and turkey provided for 950 greek and 650 turkish soldiers to help defend the island .

however , at that time , the two major communities aspired to different futures for cyprus: most greek cypriots favored union of the entire island with greece ( enosis ) , and turkish cypriots preferred to partition the island ( taksim ) and unite a turkish zone with turkey .

cyprus's success as a new republic lasted from 1960-1963 .

after president ( and greek orthodox archbishop ) makarios iii proposed constitutional modifications in favor of the majority greek cypriot community in 1963 , relations between the two communities deteriorated , with turkish cypriots increasingly consolidating into enclaves in larger towns for safety .

in 1964 , turkish cypriots withdrew from most national institutions and began to administer their own affairs .

intercommunal violence occurred in 1963-64 , and again in 1967 .

on both occasions , outside mediation and pressure , including that by the united states , appeared to prevent turkey from intervening militarily on behalf of the turkish cypriots .

on march 4 , 1964 , the u.n. authorized the establishment of the united nations peacekeeping force in cyprus ( unficyp ) to control the violence and act as a buffer between the two communities .

it became operational on march 27 and still carries out its mission today .

 ( see " u.n. peacekeeping forces " below for details. ) .

in 1974 , the military junta in athens supported a coup against president makarios , replacing him with a more hardline supporter of enosis .

in july , turkey , citing the 1960 treaty of guarantee as a legal basis for its move , sent troops in two separate actions and , by august 25 , took control of more than 36% of the island .

this military intervention had many ramifications .

foremost was the widespread dislocation of the cypriot population and related refugee and property problems .

the athens junta fell , civilian government was restored in athens and in nicosia , greece withdrew from nato's military command to protest nato's failure to prevent turkey's action , and turkey's civilian government entered an extended period of instability .

u.s. relations with all parties , each of which blamed its fate on washington's lack of support , suffered .

after 1974 , turkish cypriots emphasized a solution that would keep the two communities separate in two sovereign states or two states in a loose confederation .

in february 1975 , they declared their government the "turkish federated state of cyprus" ( tfsc ) .

in 1983 , turkish cypriot leader rauf denktash declared the "turkish republic of northern cyprus" ( trnc ) — a move considered by some to be a unilateral declaration of independence .

only turkey has recognized the trnc .

denktash argued that creation of an independent state is a necessary precondition for a federation with the greek cypriots .

he ruled out a merger with turkey and pledged cooperation with u.n. settlement efforts .

after 1974 , u.n. negotiations focused on reconciling the two sides' interests and reestablishing a central government .

they foundered on definitions of goals and ways to implement a federal solution .

turkish cypriots emphasized bizonality and the political equality of the two communities , preferring two nearly autonomous societies with limited contact .

greek cypriots emphasized the freedoms of movement , property , and settlement throughout the island .

the two parties also differed on the means of achieving a federation: greek cypriots wanted their internationally recognized national government to devolve power to the turkish cypriots , who would then join a cypriot republic .

for the turkish cypriots , two entities would join , for the first time , in a new federation .

these views could affect resolution of property , citizenship of turkish settlers , and other legal issues .

since 1974 , there have been many unsuccessful rounds of u.n. - sponsored direct and indirect negotiations to achieve a settlement .

the united nations has had forces on cyprus since 1964 .

as of november 2007 , unficyp consisted of 858 military personnel and 69 civilian police from 19 countries .

it emphasizes liaison , observation , and mediation rather than the interposition of forces .

the general assembly appropriated $54.9 million for unficyp for the period from july 1 , 2008 to june 30 , 2009 .

the government of cyprus contributes one - third of the cost and the government of greece contributes $6.5 million annually .

unficyp costs not covered by contributions are treated as assessed u.n. expenses .

the united states provided an estimated $6.412 million for unficyp in fy2008 and the bush administration requested $4.54 million for fy2009 .

the secretary - general has proposed a budget of $54.9 million for the period from july 1 , 2008 to june 30 , 2009 .

it is still under consideration by the general assembly .

s. 695 , the american - owned property in occupied cyprus claims act .

to amend the international claims settlement act of 1949 to allow for claims against turkey by u.s. nationals excluded from property they own in turkish - occupied cyprus .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign relations , february 27 , 2007 .

s.res .

331 , to express the sense of the senate that turkey should end its military occupation of cyprus , particularly because turkey's pretext has been refuted by over 13 million crossings of the divide between north and south without incident .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign relations , september 25 , 2007 .

h.r .

1456 , introduced and referred to the house committees on foreign affairs and on the judiciary on march 9 , 2007 , is the same as s. 695 above .

h.res .

405 , expresses strong support for implementation of the papadopoulos - talat july 8 , 2006 agreement .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs , may 15 , 2007 .

the committee agreed to seek consideration under suspension of rules , september 26 .

the house agreed to a motion to suspend the rules and agree to the resolution , as amended , by a voice vote ; motion to reconsider laid on the table and agreed to without exception on october 9 .

h.res .

407 , expresses strong support for the government of cyprus aimed at opening additional crossing points along the cease - fire line .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs , may 15 , 2007 .

h.res .

620 , introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs , august 3 , 2007 , is the same as s.res .

331 above .

h.res .

627 , supporting the removal of turkish occupation troops from the republic of cyprus .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs , august 4 , 2007 .

