in civil cases , courts sometimes award punitive ( or exemplary ) damages in addition to compensatory damages .

compensatory damages are meant to redress the "loss the plaintiff has suffered by reason of the defendant's wrongful conduct," in an attempt to "compensate" the injured person for the loss suffered .

where a defendant has engaged in particularly egregious conduct , however , punitive damages can be awarded in addition to compensatory damages .

a punitive damages award will generally exceed the actual value of the harm caused by the defendant .

although the permissible motivations behind awarding punitive damages are somewhat unsettled , it is generally accepted that punitive damages serve the dual purposes of deterrence and retribution .

the u.s. supreme court , for instance , has characterized the imposition of punitive damages as "quasi criminal … private fines" that act as "an expression of [the jury's] moral condemnation. .

the supreme court's view of the constitutional limitations on punitive damages awards is continually evolving .

after initially assessing the validity of punitive damage awards based on "general concerns of reasonableness," the modern court now applies a more detailed , multi - factor framework in reviewing punitive damages .

however , the fundamental underlying principle — that punitive damages awards that are grossly excessive or imposed without adequate procedural protections violate due process — continues to hold .

still , questions remain , especially in relation to the scope of the federal government's authority in an area traditionally within the purview of the states .

this report summarizes decisions by the u.s. supreme court on punitive damages , synthesizes key factors the court has employed in considering the constitutionality of punitive damages awards , and discusses the uncertainty surrounding the future of the court's punitive damages jurisprudence .

in the last 20 years , the supreme court has decided nine cases on punitive damages , of which this report discusses the seven most relevant .

historically , large punitive damages awards have been alleged to violate both the eighth amendment's prohibition on excessive fines and the fifth and fourteenth amendment's due process clause .

the court , however , has rejected the notion that large punitive damage awards can violate the former provision , holding that the eighth amendment is inapplicable where "the government neither has prosecuted the action nor has any right to receive a share of the damages awarded. .

the due process clause , on the other hand , has been interpreted to limit large punitive damages awards .

although the court has been ambiguous as to whether punitive damages limits exist as a result of procedural or substantive due process , the court has been clear that while the states have "broad discretion … with respect to the imposition of … punitive damages," the due process clause bans punitive damages awards that are grossly excessive or imposed without adequate procedural protections .

the court's key decisions are now discussed in greater detail .

the following section will provide a synthesis of the constitutional requirements and considerations , as gleaned from the above cases , employed by the supreme court in reviewing punitive damages awards .

although the court's analysis of challenges to punitive damages has been somewhat amorphous , the basic limitations on punitive damages under the due process clause are generally considered either procedural or substantive .

however , because the court has been hesitant to characterize the imposition of constitutional limits on punitive damages as an aspect of substantive due process , it can be difficult to clearly differentiate between substantive and procedural limitations .

the court itself , for instance , has disagreed as to whether the court imposed limits on punitive damages have been based on substantive or procedural due process .

the court's composition has changed since it last considered the application of the due process clause to punitive damages awards in philip morris .

the presence of a new justice , in conjunction with a consistent pattern of strong dissents in previous cases , raises the potential for an alteration of the court's current approach to due process limitations on excessive punitive damages awards .

with four justices historically supporting existing limits on punitive damages , three historically objecting to existing limits , one justice questioning the recent extension of limits , and one new justice , the current dynamic suggests an environment in which a modification of the court's current jurisprudence is possible .

multiple justices have dissented from each supreme court opinion that has invalidated a punitive damages award as inconsistent with the constitutional requirements of due process .

justice thomas and justice scalia have consistently expressed their position that punitive damages can never violate substantive due process .

the constitution , in their view , simply "does not constrain the size of punitive damages awards. .

neither thomas nor scalia has ever signed onto an opinion that applies a substantive due process limitation to punitive damages .

justice ginsberg has also consistently disagreed with the majority on the extent to which the constitution places limitations on punitive damages .

the justice considers the court's attempts to place limits on punitive damages a subjective intrusion into an area of state concern .

justice ginsberg also questions the court's method for determining the point at which a punitive damages award becomes excessive , arguing: "too big is , in the end , the amount at which five members of the court bridle. .

though initially supportive of due process limitations on punitive damages awards , justice stevens balked at the court's latest decision to prohibit the consideration of harm to nonparties in assessing punitive damages .

in philip morris , stevens reiterated that he believed that the court's prior cases announcing due process constraints on punitive damages "were correctly decided. .

he disagreed , however , with the court's additional imposition of a "novel limit" on the state's power to impose punishment , through punitive damages , in civil litigation .

contrary to the majority view , stevens considered harm to nonparties a "relevant factor" in reviewing the validity of a punitive damages award .

the exact import of this position , as well as the impact justice steven's position will have on future cases , remains uncertain .

although he disagreed with the due process constraints established in philip morris , justice stevens continued to conclude that the due process clause "imposes both substantive and procedural constraints on the power of the states to impose punitive damages on tortfeasors. .

at the very least , however , justice stevens seems to believe the court went too far in excluding harm to nonparties as a consideration in assessing punitive damages , and may be reluctant to extend constraints in future cases .

with the recent departure of justice souter , a reliable vote in favor of constitutional limits on punitive damages , the composition of the court , with regard to positions on punitive damages , has changed significantly .

chief justice roberts , along with justices alito , breyer , and kennedy have previously supported due process limits on punitive damage awards .

justices ginsberg , thomas , and scalia have consistently opposed such limitations .

this leaves justices stevens and sotomayor as potential votes in either direction depending on the facts of the particular case .

justice stevens historically has supported some procedural limitations on punitive damages awards , though his dissent in philip morris and his vote with the majority in txo to uphold a 526:1 damages ratio seem to suggest that he differs with the current majority position as to the degree to which the constitution limits the size and nature of punitive damage awards .

justice sotomayor , the court's newest justice , was not yet a member of the court for either philip morris or exxon .

moreover , commentators have generally been unable to "pigeonhole" justice stotomayor as either "pro - business" or "pro - plaintiff. .

many have referred to the new justice as a "moderate" who analyzes business issues on a case - by - case basis .

accordingly , it is difficult to predict whether justice sotomayor , like the justice she replaced , will be a reliable vote in favor of limitations on punitive damages awards .

in the u.s. court of appeals for the 2 nd circuit , judge sotomayor encountered two constitutional challenges to punitive damages awards , upholding both awards as comporting with the due process clause .

these cases , however , provide little insight into the justice's stance on more controversial punitive damages awards that vastly outweigh their compensatory counterparts .

in both cases before the 2 nd circuit , the ratio of compensatory to punitive damages was approximately 1:1 .

