[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade ( [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , specialist in national defense ( [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , specialist in russian and eurasian affairs ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] a number of challenging issues in foreign , defense , and trade policy are likely to confront the 110 th congress , starting with what the baker / hamilton - led iraq study group ( isg ) calls the "grave and deteriorating" situation in iraq .

in early 2007 , the administration is expected to ask for supplemental appropriations for military operations in iraq and afghanistan and to enhance social and political stability , democratization , and reconstruction in those countries .

after iraq , other high priorities will be the continuing fight against terrorism and efforts to dissuade or restrain iran and north korea from pursuing nuclear weapons programs .

congress will also consider a number of free trade agreements ( ftas ) and whether to extend presidential trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

with both chambers set to pass from republican to democratic control , the 110 th congress is likely to intensify its oversight over these and other administration policies and activities .

as the 110 th congress convenes , the issue that overshadows all others is what to do in iraq .

although not all members agree entirely with the isg's grim assessment of the situation in iraq , the predominant issue in congress no longer seems to be whether to stay the course , but what to do differently .

a key corollary question for congress is what its role should be in redirecting policy .

a key recommendation of the isg calls for a major u.s. diplomatic initiative throughout the region to help stabilize the deteriorating situation in iraq .

the group's report proposes u.s. diplomatic engagement with iran and syria , among others , and intensified u.s. efforts to help resolve the israel - palestinian conflict and the crisis in lebanon .

the 110 th congress may want to consider to what extent it supports this recommendation and what , if any , legislative measures might be called for to promote it .

among the central recommendations of the isg are to make training of iraqi security forces the primary u.s. military mission and to aim to withdraw all u.s. combat brigades not necessary for force protection by the first quarter of 2008 .

congress faces an evaluation of these recommendations and a decision as to what , if any , legislative measures might be helpful to promote these or other policies .

following that , a central issue may be whether congress should insert any specific , enforceable policy prescriptions into upcoming legislation to provide supplemental funding for the war .

in early february , the defense department is expected to request supplemental appropriations to cover costs of military operations in iraq and afghanistan for the remainder of fy2007 .

during the war in vietnam , congress frequently debated amendments to defense spending bills to reduce troop strength or to cut off funding for u.s. military operations .

congress finally approved a funding cutoff in 1973 .

though congress may not be inclined to go so far in iraq , there may well be support for linking funding to achievement of political benchmarks , such as those that the isg laid out .

some may propose a specific timetable for withdrawing forces .

alternatively , there has been some support in congress for adding troops in iraq .

congressional action on the fy2007 supplemental appropriations bill may also be the first round of what may be an ongoing debate in the 110 th congress over the preparedness of u.s. military forces and the sufficiency of planned funding for military personnel , training , and equipment .

in recent years , congress has provided progressively larger amounts of money for war - related costs in annual supplemental appropriations bills as well substantial and growing amounts in regular defense budget requests .

in fy2006 congress provided over $530 billion for the department of defense , of which about $120 billion were additional funds for the war .

the 109 th congress also approved a "down payment" of $70 billion for war costs in fy2007 , of which almost $25 billion was to repair and replace army and marine corps equipment lost or worn down by the war .

now it appears that the army , in particular , has toted up a much larger bill than had earlier been expected as the cost of equipping and reorganizing its forces to prepare , not only for operations in iraq and afghanistan , but also for possible future operations abroad .

initial reports are that the army and the other services have requested an additional $125-130 billion in war - related expenses , which would bring the total for fy2007 to almost $200 billion , although it is not yet known how much of that the white house will request from congress .

for congress , a central issue is how to ensure adequate readiness while also maintaining some degree of fiscal discipline .

a key aspect of that issue is how to manage budgetary tradeoffs between pressures to add to the size of the army and marine corps and also preserve sufficient funds to modernize military forces in the longer term .

in addition to iraq and afghanistan , other central foreign policy issues facing the administration and 110 th congress are how best to deal with the challenges posed by the nuclear activities of north korea and iran .

in 2007 , there is likely to be a good deal of political and diplomatic activity regarding both countries' nuclear programs .

the 110 th congress may exercise oversight of administration conduct in this area and may address aspects of the issue more directly through legislative action .

european issues that the 110 th congress may address include nato's role in afghanistan , the status of kosovo , and relations with russia .

nato's expanding engagement in afghanistan is the alliance's largest and most problematic military operation to date .

there is controversy over restrictions some allies have placed on the role of their forces there .

the disputed status of kosovo is set to be resolved in early 2007 , possibly in some form of independence .

russia presents a complex set of challenges and opportunities for the united states , particularly with regard to its policies toward neighboring states and the implications of its growing influence as an energy supplier for europe .

security issues in asia that may draw the attention of the 110 th congress include flashpoints along the taiwan strait , on the korean peninsula , between india and pakistan , and along the pakistani border with afghanistan , as well as terrorist activity in indonesia , the philippines , india , and pakistan .

two other long - term trends in asia that may warrant congressional attention are the rise of china and its increasing influence in the region and globally and increasingly negative attitudes toward the united states , particularly among southeast asian nations with large muslim populations and in south korea .

legislative and oversight attention to latin america and the caribbean in the 110 th congress will likely focus on continued counternarcotics efforts , especially in the andean region ; potential immigration reform efforts as well as efforts to increase cooperation on border security , which have been key issues in relations with mexico ; efforts to deal with threats to democracy in such nations as venezuela as well as the rise of leftist populism in several latin american countries , and debate over the best means to foster political change in cuba .

key u.s. policy issues pertaining to africa are likely to center on efforts to promote peace and security in the region ; counter - terrorism initiatives ; bilateral military cooperation and training in support of international peacekeeping ; the programmatic focus , funding levels , and objectives of diverse u.s. assistance efforts , with a particular emphasis on fighting the hiv / aids pandemic ; and promoting democracy , human rights , trade , and market - driven economic growth .

in january 2006 , secretary of state rice announced a major foreign policy initiative that she called transformational diplomacy , "...a bold diplomacy to match the president's bold mission of supporting democracy around the world with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world. .

pursuant to this goal , state department personnel are to be shifted largely from europe and washington , d.c. to designated critical locations in africa , south asia , east asia , and the middle east .

they are to be trained in public diplomacy skills and encouraged not merely to report on the country in which they are posted , but to promote democratic principles there .

this initiative will likely require increased funding for the foreign operations budget .

the 110 th congress may seek to exercise oversight on how the money is spent , whether transformational diplomacy is effective , and how foreign governments respond to this u.s. promotion of democracy in their countries .

trade issues have become increasingly controversial in congress during the last few years .

this is likely to continue to be the case during the 110 th congress as many members grapple with the real and perceived effects of globalization and how to balance the benefits and costs of trade liberalization .

many members of congress have raised concerns over lost jobs and lower wages , over the growing income gap in the united states , over the burgeoning u.s. trade deficits with trading partners , especially china , and the undervaluing of china's currency .

while mainstream economists generally assert that trade policy has a very limited role in these areas , for many members the trends serve as backdrop to a debate on the shape and conduct of u.s. trade policy .

that debate could be launched early in the 110 th congress with the scheduled expiration on july 1 , 2007 , of the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

tpa is the authority that the congress has delegated to the president to negotiate reciprocal trade agreements that receive expedited congressional consideration ( limited debate and no amendments ) .

under this authority , the bush administration completed and the congress approved free trade agreements with chile , singapore , australia , morocco , the dominican republic , central american countries , bahrain and oman .

also , the administration signed agreements with colombia and peru and announced it would send implementing legislation for these agreements for congressional approval under the tpa procedures .

if the president requests renewal of tpa , congress would face a decision of whether to accede to his request and , if so , what form the new authority should take .

congress's decision could have major implications for pending fta negotiations , such as those with malaysia , south korea , and panama , and for u.s. participation in the doha development agenda ( dda ) negotiations in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the debate over tpa renewal and its outcome could have major implications for u.s. trade policy as a whole and for the working relationship between congress and the president on trade for the foreseeable future .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance , ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] trade issues have become increasingly controversial in congress during the last few years .

this is likely to continue to be the case during the 110 th congress as many members grapple with the real and perceived effects of globalization and how to balance the benefits and costs of trade liberalization .

many members of congress have raised concerns over lost jobs and lower wages , over the growing income gap in the united states , and over the burgeoning u.s. trade deficits with trading partners , especially china .

that debate could be launched early in the 110 th congress with the scheduled expiration on july 1 , 2007 , of the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

tpa is the authority that congress delegates to the president to enter into certain reciprocal trade agreements and to have their implementing legislation receive expedited congressional consideration .

congress's decision could have major implications for pending fta negotiations , such as those with malaysia , south korea , and panama , and for u.s. participation in the doha development agenda ( dda ) negotiations in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

there are a number of other countries with which the united states has been engaged in free trade agreement negotiations and congress may consider legislation implementing those agreements .

in addition to trade promotion authority ( tpa ) renewal and implementing legislation for free trade agreements described earlier , other trade issues could be the subject , directly or indirectly , of legislation during the 110 th congress .

during the 109 th congress , legislation was introduced targeting china's exchange rate and trade practices , reflecting , in part , widespread congressional concerns over the widening u.s. trade deficit , particularly with china , and its potential impact on the u.s. economy .

as u.s. trade with china continues apace , these concerns may be an impetus for trade legislation in the 110 th congress .

promotion of u.s. exports and foreign investment may be the subject of legislation in the 110 th congress .

for example , the congress may take up re - authorization for the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) .

during the 109 th congress , the senate and the house did not reconcile differences on legislation to change how proposed foreign investments are reviewed in the inter - agency committee for foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) .

the legislation was passed in the wake of concerns over the assumption of control by the dubai ports company of operations at some u.s. ports .

the 110 th congress could return to this issue .

furthermore , the congress could take up legislation to re - authorize the export administration act that controls exports of dual - use technology and products and may consider legislation funding for the international monetary fund ( imf ) , the world bank , and other multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) .

in addition , the 109 th congress extended for six months trade preferences under the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) , and for an additional six months if a country enters into a free trade agreement with the united states .

atpa extends special duty treatment to certain u.s. imports from bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru that meet domestic content and other requirements .

the intention is to promote economic growth in the andean region and to encourage a shift away from dependence on illegal drugs by supporting legitimate economic activities .

the 110 th congress will face the issue of whether to consider a longer - term extension of atpa as the june 30 , 2007 expiration date of the preferences approaches .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] on july 1 , 2007 , trade promotion authority ( tpa — formerly fast track ) is scheduled to expire , and with it a special authority that congress grants the president to enter into certain trade agreements , specifically , those that reduce non - tariff barriers ( ntbs ) as well as tariffs , and to have legislation to implement them considered under expedited legislative procedures — mandatory introduction , deadlines for committee consideration , limited floor debate , and no amendments — provided the president observes certain statutory obligations in negotiating them .

tpa reflects a pragmatic response to accommodate the two branches' responsibility for making trade policy .

the procedures allow congress to exercise its constitutional authority over trade and gives the president added negotiating leverage by assuring u.s. trade partners that final agreements are given swift and unamended consideration .

the united states is currently engaged in multiple trade negotiations that may not be completed before the current tpa expires , raising the question of its prospects for renewal .

the core provisions of the tpa / fast track legislative procedures have remained virtually unchanged since they were first enacted in 1974 , although congress has expanded trade negotiation objectives , oversight , and presidential notification requirements .

while early versions of fast track / tpa received broad bipartisan support , renewal efforts became increasingly controversial over time as fears mounted over the perceived negative effects of trade , and as the trade debate became more partisan in nature .

congress last renewed tpa in the trade act of 2002 following a pitched debate and largely partisan - line vote .

two key issues dominated: the treatment of labor and environment provisions , and assurance of a bipartisan congressional role in trade policy making .

as the debate over tpa renewal takes off , these two issues are still on center stage , flanked by a handful of other trade policy concerns .

congressional decision will be important given the number of trade negotiations , including the world trade organization's ( wto ) doha round and bilateral agreements with south korea , malaysia , and panama , among others , that are close to being concluded before tpa expires .

congress can choose among various options: no action ; temporary extension ; revision and renewal ; permanent authority ; or some hybrid solution .

how this issue plays out depends on a host of variables including the status of uncompleted negotiations , the economic effects of pursuing trade liberalization as perceived by various stakeholders and the political will to compromise between the bush administration and congress .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the wto's doha development round of multilateral trade negotiations was suspended in july 2006 after key negotiating groups failed to break a deadlock on agricultural tariffs and subsidies .

the negotiations , which were launched at the wto doha ministerial in 2001 , have been characterized by persistent differences between the united states , the european union ( eu ) , and developing countries on major issues , such as agriculture , industrial tariffs and non - tariff barriers , services , and trade remedies .

the impasse has almost certainly put negotiators beyond the reach of agreement before u.s. trade promotion authority ( tpa ) expires on july 1 , 2007 .

 ( under tpa , the president must give a 90 day notification to congress of his intent to sign an fta , thus making the de facto deadline april 1 , 2007 for reaching an agreement. ) .

the agricultural negotiations have become the most visible cause of deadlock within the doha round negotiations .

the aims of the talks have been to make substantial improvements in market access ; to reduce , or to eliminate , all forms of export subsidies ; and to achieve significant reductions in trade - distorting domestic support .

these three aims have come to be termed the three pillars of the agriculture negotiations .

yet major differences in the agricultural proposals of the united states , the eu , and the g - 20 group of developing countries have hampered progress in the negotiations .

the united states , for example , has conditioned its offer to substantially reduce domestic subsidies on gaining substantial market access from the eu and , especially , from the developing countries .

the eu , however , has indicated it will not move further on market access liberalization unless developing countries agree to open markets for services and industrial products , and the united states makes concessions on the treatment of geographical indications for food and agricultural products .

the g - 20 , for its part , has indicated it will not make substantially improved offers on non - agricultural market access ( nama ) and services , until there is progress on domestic farm subsidies and market access .

perhaps the most concrete result of the talks to date has been the decision to amend the trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement to enable developing countries to obtain generic drugs through compulsory licenses to fight public health epidemics such as hiv / aids , tuberculosis , malaria , and other infectious diseases .

because of the negotiating stalemate , it is considered unlikely that an agreement can be reached before the expiration of tpa .

more likely , the parties will attempt to restart the negotiations in order achieve some measure of progress in the hope that congress will extend tpa .

the state of the negotiations may also impact the 2007 farm bill .

many had looked to a doha round agreement to curb trade - distorting domestic support as a catalyst to change u.s. farm subsidies , but this source of pressure for change has dissipated with the doha impasse .

in addition , congress may consider legislation to amend u.s. patent law to implement the trips access to medicine decision .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] congress may be asked to approve one or more proposed free trade agreements ( ftas ) in the first months of the 110 th congress .

proposed ftas with peru and colombia have been signed and may be considered under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

other negotiations are in progress with panama , malaysia , and south korea .

negotiations with thailand and the united arab emirates are currently suspended .

one or more of these negotiations may be completed in time to be considered under tpa , which expires on july 1 , 2007 .

 ( under tpa , the president must give a 90 day notification to congress of his intent to sign an fta , thus making the de facto deadline april 1 , 2007 for reaching an agreement. ) .

these proposed ftas are an important component of the bush administration's policy of competitive liberalization , in which simultaneous negotiations are undertaken to advance trade liberalization at the bilateral , regional , and multilateral levels .

in the 110 th congress , legislators may first consider the proposed ftas reached with peru and colombia .

the rationale for these agreements , in part , is to bolster the legitimate economies of these countries in order to combat the narcotics trade .

some members of congress , however , have advocated the modification of these agreements to provide additional labor standards .

other agreements that may be completed in time for consideration under tpa are those with korea , malaysia , and panama .

korea is the 7 th largest trading partner of the united states ; u.s. negotiators are seeking to open the country's well protected agricultural sector and to address non - tariff barriers in the automobile and other manufacturing sectors .

malaysia is the 10 th largest trading partner of the united states ; u.s. concerns include import restrictions on automobiles , restrictions on government procurement and financial services , and intellectual property rights .

in its negotiations with panama , the united states is seeking greater liberalization in the financial and commercial services sector and in government procurement in the panama canal zone .

in the 109 th congress , members approved implementing legislation for the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) and ftas with bahrain and oman .

of these agreements , ftas have been proclaimed in force with bahrain , and with the cafta - dr countries of el salvador , honduras , nicaragua , and guatemala .

cafta - dr proved to be the most contentious of the agreements , passing the house by a vote of 217-215 on july 28 , 2005 , and by 55-45 in the senate later the same day .

in debating future implementing legislation , congress may , explicitly or implicitly , question several aspects of the administration's trade policy .

do these proposed agreements fulfill the obligations of trade promotion authority ? .

do the labor protection provisions in these agreements reflect the intention of congress ? .

do these ftas serve broader u.s. trade and foreign policy interests ? .

do these ftas provide an economic benefit commensurate with the negotiating resources needed to conclude them , or would resources be better spent negotiating in multilateral or large regional forums such as the wto or with the asia - pacific economic community ( apec ) ? .

do geopolitical considerations have a disproportionate influence on the selection of fta partners , and if so , is that justified ? .

of primary importance to legislators , however , may be the manner in which a potential trade agreement affects the employment or business prospects of constituents .

individual members face the decision of whether the threat of lost jobs , and lost market - share to import - competing industries , outweigh the prospect of new employment or new markets for exporters .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] by year - end 2006 , the u.s. current account , a broad accounting of the net difference between the goods and services the country exports and imports annually , is to surpass the record $717 billion deficit recorded in 2005 .

the cumulative amount of successive deficits is raising concerns about the long - term impact on the economy as a result of financing the current account deficit through inflows of foreign capital .

given current macroeconomic conditions , however , these capital inflows are bridging the gap between domestic supplies of and demand for capital , including the federal government's budget deficit .

foreign investors are now major investors in u.s. corporate stocks and bonds and hold more than 50% of the publicly - traded u.s. treasury securities .

at some point , foreign investors may become uncomfortable with the large share of u.s. assets in their holdings and reduce their purchases of u.s. assets .

such a reduction would place added strains on the u.s. economy and likely increase pressures on the 110 th congress to address difficult budget and spending issues .

international capital flows now far surpass flows of goods and services in the global economy and are the driving force behind the international exchange value of the dollar .

demand for u.s. assets , such as financial securities , translates into demand for the dollar , since u.s. securities are denominated in dollars .

as demand for the dollar rises or falls according to overall demand for dollar - denominated assets , the value of the dollar changes .

over the past three years , the average exchange value of the dollar has fallen by more than 10 percent against the euro and other currencies that float freely .

a sustained change in capital inflows would affect the value of the dollar , which , in turn , would have a direct impact on the u.s. current account balance by altering the level and composition of u.s. exports and imports of goods and services .

although foreign trade is still a relatively small part of the overall u.s. economy , changes in the trade accounts alters the composition of jobs in the economy and can affect the overall level of economic activity .

as a result , actions or events that cause a sustained change in capital inflows would also affect the value of the dollar .

the changing value of the dollar would then have a direct impact on the u.s. current account balance by altering the level of u.s. exports and imports of goods and services .

in turn , such a change could affect a broad range of sectors in the u.s. economy .

such events could increase pressure on congress to pursue policies which promote u.s. exports and to confront more aggressively those countries that attempt to deflect economic adjustments by supporting their currencies through official purchases of u.s. securities , thereby supporting the exchange rate of the dollar relative to their own currencies .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the united states stands distinct in the world as the leading source of direct foreign investment and as the leading destination for such investment .

generally , the public and congress view such investment favorably , although some groups are concerned about foreign investment in "critical" industries and sectors they believe could impair the economic security of the country and about job losses associated with u.s. investment abroad .

these concerns sparked a national debate about the merits of such investment and the course of u.s. economic policies and led some members to introduce more than two dozen measures to address such concerns during the 109 th congress .

many of these issues remain unresolved and may resurface in the 110 th congress .

on the whole , most u.s. communities welcome foreign direct investment for the taxes and potential employment that it can bring , but these gains are being weighed against national security concerns and the potential for job losses as u.s. companies seek out foreign locations and foreign workers to perform work that traditionally has been done in the united states .

other observers are concerned by the large inflows of capital that foreign investors are bringing into the u.s. economy .

foreign investors now hold more than 50% of the publicly traded u.s. treasury securities .

this large and growing foreign accumulation of u.s. securities has spurred some observers to argue that the large foreign presence in u.s. financial markets increases the risk of a financial crisis , adds uncertainty to the value of the dollar , and is affecting the u.s. trade balance .

at the same time , the capital inflows are accommodating the current mix of u.s. economic policies and are keeping u.s. interest rates below the level they otherwise might reach without the capital inflows .

while the risk of a financial crisis associated directly with the capital inflows seems slight , congress likely would find itself embroiled in any such financial crisis through its direct role in conducting fiscal policy and in its indirect role in the conduct of monetary policy through its supervisory responsibility over the federal reserve .

some observers are also concerned by the seemingly unlimited access foreign investors have to invest in or to acquire u.s. firms , especially firms that are involved in economic activities that some view as critical to u.s. economic security .

placing restrictions on foreign investment , however , is potentially at odds with provisions of u.s. law and with u.s. efforts within the wto and the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) to promote international standards that relax national rules concerning foreign investment , including granting foreign firms national treatment .

in an earlier response to similar concerns , congress passed the exon - florio provision , which gives the president the authority to block foreign investments that are deemed to threaten u.s. national security .

efforts begun in the 109 th congress to amend this process may continue in the 110 th congress with some members moving to strengthen congressional oversight over the exon - florio process .

[[author name scrubbed] , analyst in international trade ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] several u.s. government agencies promote exports of u.s. goods and investment abroad .

congressional focus in the 110 th congress may concern funding levels at a time of budgetary pressure , adherence of u.s. export promotion practices with wto rules , and the extent to which these programs are providing value to the u.s. economy .

export promotion programs of the department of agriculture and the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) are authorized through fy2007 and the ex - im bank through fy2006 .

in the 109 th congress , legislation was passed to reauthorize the bank's charter , which expired on september 30 , 2006 , for five years through september 30 , 2011 .

in the 110 th congress , there may be efforts to reauthorize export promotion programs of the department of agriculture and opic .

funding for these programs recently has not been controversial , especially because many of these programs relating to credit guarantees and insurance are self - sustaining through fee collection and interest payments .

however , export promotion funding for non - revenue generating activities may receive renewed scrutiny at a time of tight budgets .

export promotion can be categorized into seven distinctive functions: ( 1 ) combating foreign export subsidies ; ( 2 ) developing foreign markets ; ( 3 ) financing and insuring u.s. trade ; ( 4 ) providing information , counseling , and export assistance services ; ( 5 ) negotiating reductions in foreign trade barriers ; ( 6 ) funding feasibility studies ; and ( 7 ) government - to - government advocacy efforts .

there are 19 federal agencies that promote exports , most notably the foreign agricultural service of the department of agriculture , the international trade administration of the department of commerce , export - import bank ( ex - im ) , overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , the trade and development agency , economic and business bureau of the department of state , the small business administration , and the u.s. trade representative .

the u.s. trade policy coordinating committee ( tpcc ) , established by the export enhancement act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-429 ) , coordinates and sets priorities for these and other federal agencies involved in promoting exports .

the latest available tpcc estimates show that the u.s. government agencies spent $1.4 million on export promotion activities , approximately one - half going to agricultural promotion activities .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] in the 110 th congress , there may be a new effort to rewrite and reauthorize the export administration act of 1979 ( eaa ) .

the eaa provides the statutory authority for export controls on sensitive dual - use goods and technologies: items that have both civilian and military applications , including those items that can contribute to the proliferation of nuclear , biological and chemical weaponry .

the eaa , which originally expired in 1989 , periodically has been reauthorized for short periods of time , with the last incremental extension expiring in august 2001 .

at other times , the export licensing system created under the authority of eaa has been continued by the invocation of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

4572 ( hyde ) was introduced on december 16 , 2005 , but no action was taken on the bill .

this legislation would have increased penalties for export control violations , amended certain enforcement provisions in the act , established objectives for u.s. participation in multilateral control regimes , and reauthorized the 1979 act for two years .

the last instance in which eaa renewal legislation received extensive consideration was in the 107 th congress .

s. 149 ( enzi ) was passed by the senate on september 6 , 2001 ; a companion bill , h.r .

2581 ( hyde ) , was heavily amended to reflect the national security concerns of members of the house international relations committee and house armed services committee .

although approved by both committees , this bill was not considered by the full house .

the bush administration publicly supported the enzi bill .

the debate of dual - use export controls ultimately becomes one of choosing the right balance between national security concerns and commercial considerations .

some claim the current system compromises national security goals by failing to prevent the spread of dual - use goods and technologies to countries suspected of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or to countries in support of international terrorism .

according to this opinion , foreign countries have no right to import u.s. technology , but rather such imports are a privilege that should take into account other u.s. policy interests including nuclear non - proliferation , human rights , and suppression of terrorism .

they contend that export controls can be effective because the united states possesses advantages in high - technology areas such as encryption , high - powered computing , synthetic materials , specialized manufacturing and testing equipment , and precision machine tools that cannot be replicated overseas .

other critics claim that current export controls disadvantage u.s. business by subjecting exports of goods and technology to cumbersome and ineffective licensing procedures that cedes sales and market share to overseas competitors that do not face such a comprehensive control regime .

they maintain that most technology cannot be controlled and is available from foreign sources .

furthermore , they claim that it is necessary to sell current technology overseas in order to provide the funds for research and development necessary to develop new technology vital to u.s. security interests and to remain competitive in the future .

[[author name scrubbed] , analyst in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] congress has annual legislative and oversight responsibilities regarding u.s. involvement in the international financial institutions ( ifis ) .

the ifis are comprised of the international monetary fund ( imf ) and the multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) : the world bank , the african development bank , the inter - american development bank , the european bank for reconstruction and development , the asian development bank , and several smaller sub - regional institutions .

three key mdb funding initiatives were authorized during the 109 th congress for mdb concessional lending facilities .

since these facilities lend to the poorest member countries at below - market interest rates , their resources are periodically replenished by donor nations .

the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations bill ( pl109-102 ) authorized the u.s. contribution over three years of $2.85 billion to the fourteenth replenishment of the world bank's international development association ; $461 million to the eighth replenishment of the asian development fund , and $407 million to the tenth replenishment of the african development fund .

the 110 th congress may consider appropriations to complete these replenishments by fy2008 .

in addition to ifi funding , the 109 th congress addressed several policy issues through legislation and oversight hearings regarding the institutions .

it appears that many of these issues may be of continued interest to the 110 th congress .

five potential ifi issues that congress may address during the 110 th congress are the future of multilateral debt relief ; the anti - corruption policies of ifis ; the environmental impact of ifi programs ; efforts to reform the governance structure of the imf to provide greater representation to poor and developing country members ; and the role of the imf in monitoring international exchange rates .

