the united states does not just believe , as some people say , that india is a rising power ; we believe that india has already risen .

india is taking its rightful place in asia and on the global stage .

and we see india's emergence as good for the united states and good for the world .

 - president barack obama , mumbai , india , november 7 , 2010 with the lifting of cold war geopolitical constraints and the near - simultaneous opening of india's economy in early 1990s , the world's largest democracy has emerged as an increasingly important player on the global stage .

india dominates the geography of the now strategically vital south asia region , and its vibrant economy , pluralist society , cultural influence , and growing military power have made the country a key focus of u.s. foreign policy attention in the 21 st century .

this attention is to some degree motivated by china's longer - standing and more rapid rise , with many analysts viewing u.s. and indian geopolitical interests as convergent on many fronts , perhaps especially in the area of asian power balances .

president george w. bush is credited with building on the breakthrough visit by president bill clinton in 2000 , which ended the estrangement of the post - 1998 indian nuclear weapons tests .

under president bush and continuing with president barack obama the u.s. and indian governments have been seeking to sustain a substantive "strategic partnership," even as bilateral commercial and people - to - people contacts flourish of their own accord .

the u.s. - india partnership is based on shared values such as democracy , pluralism , and rule of law .

numerous economic , security , and global initiatives , including unprecedented plans for civilian nuclear cooperation , are underway .

the two countries inked a ten - year defense framework agreement in 2005 to facilitate expanded bilateral security cooperation .

in the new century , large - scale combined military exercises have become commonplace , and bilateral cooperation on intelligence and counterterrorism is increasing .

unprecedented major u.s. arms sales to india are underway ; more are anticipated .

the influence of a geographically dispersed and relatively wealthy indian - american community of some 2.7 million is reflected in congress's largest country - specific caucus .

more than 100,000 indian students are attending american universities .

notably , a number of indian - americans now occupy senior positions in the obama administration , agency for international development administrator rajiv shah among them .

further u.s. interest in south asia focuses on ongoing tensions between india and pakistan rooted largely in competing claims to the kashmir region and in "cross - border terrorism" in both kashmir and major indian cities .

in the interests of regional stability , in particular as a means of forwarding u.s. interests in nearby afghanistan , the united states strongly endorses an existing , but until recently moribund india - pakistan peace initiative , and remains concerned about the potential for conflict over kashmiri sovereignty to cause open hostilities between these two nuclear - armed countries .

the united states also seeks to curtail the proliferation of nuclear weapons and missiles in south asia .

president obama desires to continue expanded engagement and cooperation with india .

his may 2010 national security strategy noted that , "the united states and india are building a strategic partnership that is underpinned by our shared interests , our shared values as the world's two largest democracies , and close connections among our people. .

yet there are concerns among observers in both countries that momentum has waned ( by some accounts due to u.s. inattention ) , that outstanding areas of friction continue to hinder optimal levels of cooperation , and that india's geostrategic , economic , and security circumstances combine with new delhi's lingering skepticism over america's global and regional role to preclude the kind of "special relationship" that many boosters of u.s. - india ties envisage .

while u.s. - india engagement under the obama administration has not ( to date ) realized any groundbreaking initiatives as was the case under the bush administration , it may be that the apparently growing "dominance of ordinariness" in the relationship is a hidden strength that demonstrates its maturing into diplomatic normalcy .

indeed , there is a pervasive sense in policy circles that dramatic new breakthroughs in u.s. - india relations are not on the horizon , and that president obama's november 2010 travel to india may have brought the two countries to a plateau of sorts whereupon routinized , but still meaningful interactions take place in the near term .

both national governments have been dealing with serious domestic issues in 2011 ( the united states with federal budget issues , india with major corruption scandals ) , as well as with more pressing foreign policy concerns .

given a setting in which the private sectors of both countries are impatient with the pace of economic reform in india and with rampant corruption there , some analysts call on the two governments to concentrate on limited goals with clear chances for success , such as in defense trade and with the development of multilateral and asian architectures , in both the economic and security realms .

one leading indian commentator urges american patience and recognition that new delhi views engagement with the united states as its highest foreign policy priority .

the contention here is that india's four purported top long - term foreign policy objectives — a stable afghanistan - pakistan region ; exerting influence across the indian ocean region ; obtaining status as a "rule - maker" in the international system ; and strengthening "global power" factors such as sustained economic growth and military modernization — all require strategic cooperation with the united states .

yet a more pessimistic view has the bilateral relationship constrained in large part by differences over the u.s. - pakistan alliance and by india's apparent reluctance to exert power in its own region , resulting in years of "a lot of rhetoric but very little substantive movement" in u.s. - india ties .

the sweeping scope of the bilateral relationship , as well as the perceived lack of focus within it , may be found in the various and usually large number of issue - areas listed in joint statements .

however , in may 2011 , the lead u.s. diplomat for the region helpfully summarized u.s. - india relations under the rubric of four major "agendas": an innovation agenda that includes collaboration on energy security , civil nuclear cooperation , agriculture , space , climate , and other sciences ; a security agenda that includes military - to - military relations , arms sales , and nonproliferation ; a people - to - people agenda that encourages civic engagement , and open governance and democracy initiatives ; and a growth agenda focused on increasing bilateral trade and investment by removing barriers to both .

tangible progress is being made in each of these areas despite ongoing u.s. government irritants , in particular obstacles to full implementation of civil nuclear cooperation ; overly restrictive limits on foreign investment ; lingering barriers to trade ; and insufficient protection of intellectual property rights , among others .

even leading american boosters of expanded u.s. - india ties insistently call on new delhi to take more rapid action in these areas .

the end of cold war political constraints and the rapid growth of india's economy has allowed new delhi to more energetically engage global diplomacy .

expanded engagement is evident through the huge increase in the number of bilateral defense arrangements the indian government has made in the past decade , more than tripling from 7 in 2000 to at least 26 today .

during the latter half of 2010 , every major world leader paid a visit to india , including those from all five permanent u.n. security council members .

much of the international attention on india is due to the country's vast market potential — the retail sector alone is worth an estimated $450 billion .

some observers argue that the new delhi government acts too timidly on the global stage , and that the country's regional and domestic difficulties continue to hinder its ability to exert influence in geopolitics .

as a rising power , india has appeared unwilling to take the kinds of policy stances expected of major global players , in particular those who sit on the u.n. security council , as india has been in 2011 .

from vague positions on middle east uprisings to the appearance of fence - sitting on issues such as u.s. - led efforts to isolate iran and burma , new delhi's leaders may be finding it increasingly difficult to avoid taking on the responsibilities many in washington and elsewhere are looking for .

one example is new delhi's largely hands - off response to uprisings in the arab world , with external affairs minister krishna saying india would not "jump into the fray" unless invited and would maintain a "very cautious" approach to the libyan conflict .

in march 2011 , india officially opposed nato's military action in libya and notably abstained — along with brazil , china , russia , and germany — from voting on u.n .

resolution 1973 , which approved of such action .

more recently , secretary of state clinton has sought greater indian assistance in pressuring the faltering syrian regime .

human rights activists have joined foreign governments in prodding india to be more proactive on key foreign policy issues , even those in india's own neighborhood such as in burma and sri lanka .

one such observer has criticized new delhi for issuing "bland propositions" that "can convey indifference to the plight of subjugated people. .

she challenges india's leaders to "stand with people or with dictators. .

many analysts view india's foreign policy establishment — its foreign service , think - tanks , public universities , and relevant media — as being too small and / or too poorly developed for india to achieve true great power status in the foreseeable future .

by one substantive account , without a major modernizing and revamping of this establishment , "india's worldview will be parochial , reactive , and increasingly dominated by business rather than by strategic or political concerns. .

thus , even as india's rising stature commands greater attention in many world capitals , the country's diplomatic influence remains limited — especially in comparison to that of china — and the central government continues to concentrate mainly on domestic development and poverty alleviation .

indeed , india's domestic and social indices continue to rank it as a developing country , or what one former senior indian diplomat called a "premature power. .

moreover , indian bureaucrats' prickly and sometimes distrustful attitude toward their american counterparts survives long after the cold war's end , and is sometimes evident in new delhi's vehement reactions to what many americans would consider minor and essentially meaningless slights .

as one of india's leading trade and investment partners , the united states strongly supports new delhi's continuing economic reform policies .

a u.s. - india trade policy forum was created in 2005 to expand bilateral economic engagement and provide a venue for discussing multilateral trade issues .

according to u.s. trade statistics , u.s. exports to india in 2010 totaled $19.222 billion and imports from india totaled $29.531 billion , for a bilateral trade deficit of $10.309 billion .

with a total trade of $48.753 billion , india was the 12 th largest trading partner for the united states in 2010 .

the leading u.s. exports to india in 2010 were ( in order ) : natural or cultured pearls , precious or semi - precious stones , precious metals , metals clad with precious metal and articles thereof and imitation jewelry ( chapter 71 ) — $4.206 billion ; nuclear reactors , boilers , machinery , and mechanical appliances , or parts thereof ( chapter 84 ) — $ 2.607 billion ; and electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof ( chapter 85 ) — $1.367 billion .

the top imports from india were ( in order ) : natural or cultured pearls , precious or semi - precious stones , precious metals , metals clad with precious metal and articles thereof and imitation jewelry ( chapter 71 ) — $6.850 billion ; pharmaceutical products ( chapter 30 ) — $2.388 billion ; and mineral fuels , mineral oils and products of their distillation ( chapter 27 ) — $2.324 billion .

the cross - trade in items under chapter 71 reflects a strong interrelationship for the industries in both nations .

india is a major global supplier of precious gems and stones , whereas the united states is a major supplier of finished jewelry .

in addition to their merchandise trade flows , india and the united states have significant service trade relations .

in 2009 ( latest available figures ) , u.s. private services exports to india totaled $9.940 billion , and imports from india totaled $12.377 billion .

the leading u.s. service export to india was education ( $3.155 billion ) , and the leading service import from india was "business , professional , and technical services" ( $8.920 billion ) .

annual inward foreign direct investment ( fdi ) to india from all countries rose from about $100 million in fy1990 / 91 to nearly $3 billion in fy2000 / 01 and over $19 billion in fy2010 / 11 .

the stock of u.s. fdi in india as of march 2011 stood at $9.4 billion .

according to the indian ministry of commerce and industry , about 7.5% of fdi in india since 2000 has come from u.s. firms ; in recent years , the major u.s. - based companies microsoft , dell , oracle , and ibm have made multi - billion - dollar investments in india .

wisconsin - based harley - davidson recently opened a motorcycle manufacturing plant in india's northern haryana state , its second outside the united states .

michigan - based ford motor company has plans to expand its operation in india by investing $1 billion in a new factory in gujarat , its second production line in india .

in 2011 , illinois - based boeing , which sees no more important a potential customer in the world , projected that india will spend some $150 billion on more than 1,300 new passenger airplanes over the next two decades .

india is also among the fastest growing investors in the united states ; the administration reports that investment capital from india grew at an annualized rate of 53% over the past decade , reaching about $4.4 billion in 2009 .

among the most important investors has been india's tata group , which reportedly employs some 19,000 people in the united states .

while bilateral relations are generally good , there are a number of economic and trade issues between india and the united states of varying degrees of importance .

for the united states , the more pressing issues are intellectual property rights protection , trade in dual - use technology , access to selective indian markets , and india's participation in the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program .

for india , the key issues are negotiations of a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) , u.s. restrictions on the trade in services ( including the limited supply of h1-b visas ) , high - technology export controls , and the u.s. farm subsidy program .

commerce secretary locke led a trade mission to new delhi , bangalore , and mumbai in february 2011 , accompanied by representatives of 24 u.s. companies , many of them seeking to strike weapons sales deals or capitalize on the 2008 u.s. - india civil nuclear agreement .

in meetings with his indian counterpart , locke raised longstanding issues of friction , including market access barriers and intellectual property protection .

speaking at a confederation of indian industry luncheon , the secretary went into some detail on these and other issues , asserting that seizing the full potential of bilateral cooperation will require india to take further steps to open its economy by reducing an array of tariff and nontariff barriers , and lifting restrictions on foreign direct investment: ultimately , what america seeks is a level playing field for its companies , where the cost and quality of their products determines whether or not they win business .

in seeking a level playing field , we are merely asking for the same treatment foreign companies and investors receive in america .

repeats of this message from the administration have become both firmer and more common in 2011 .

in a major may speech on the future of u.s. - india relations , assistant secretary blake said: [e]conomic impediments make it hard for american exporters to gain access to indian markets , especially in agricultural goods .

restrictions in retail , insurance , defense , and other key areas have also limited the expansion of american firms , and the indian firms with whom they seek to partner .

to maintain this trajectory [of increased trade] , we need to methodically address trade and investment barriers and foster market openings that position us to capitalize on this continued growth , and allow our private sectors to thrive .

the outgoing u.s .

ambassador put it even more bluntly , saying , "india needs to be asking itself: is it delivering on the global partnership ? .

.. .

there's no doubt this needs to be a two - way street. .

commerce department officials and the white house chief of staff have more recently admonished new delhi to move forward with economic reforms .

of particular recent concern to secretary locke and other u.s. officials is new delhi's restrictions on imports of solar power technology .

the central government plans to disburse some $20 billion in subsidies to power - plant developers this decade , but is barring importation of foreign - made solar panels , making it difficult for u.s. firms to get a share of the market .

in june 2011 , treasury secretary tim geithner led the u.s. delegation at the second meeting of the u.s. - india financial and trade partnership in washington , dc , where he and his indian counterpart , finance minister pranab mukherjee , agreed to further expand bilateral trade and investment links .

while acknowledging that reducing barriers to investment was politically challenging for the indian government , he reiterated the u.s. contention that easing such barriers would benefit both national economies and be an important step toward their "integration. .

inadequate intellectual property rights protection is a long - standing issue between the united states and india .

india remained on the u.s. special 301 "priority watch list" in 2011 for failing to provide an adequate level of ipr protection or enforcement , or market access for persons relying on intellectual property protection .

the report recognized the introduction of a copyright amendment bill as an improvement in the regulatory regime , but expressed concerns about its compliance with international standards .

the united states also acknowledged india's progress on enforcement , but maintained that piracy and counterfeiting , including the counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals , remains widespread .

india remains critical of u.s. efforts to pressure developing nations , including india , to adopt laws and regulations governing pharmaceuticals that are overly supportive of the major pharmaceutical companies and could potentially deny poorer nations of access to important medicines .

the year 2003 saw the inaugural session of the u.s. - india high - technology cooperation group ( htcg ) , a forum in which officials can discuss a wide range of issues relevant to creating the conditions for more robust bilateral high technology commerce .

the 8 th htcg meeting was held in new delhi , india , on july 19 , 2011 , with discussion focusing on dual - use technology and ways to foster greater research and development cooperation .

in 2007 , india and the united states concluded a bilateral 123 agreement on civil nuclear cooperation .

while the accord addressed many concerns about india's nuclear program and trade in dual - use technology , there remain concerns in the united states about india's ability to prevent the distribution of potentially dangerous technology and equipment to undesirable recipients .

since 1998 , a number of indian entities have been subjected to case - by - case licensing requirements and appear on the u.s. export control "entity list" of foreign end users involved in weapons proliferation activities .

in 2004 , as part of nssp implementation , the united states modified some export licensing policies and removed the indian space research organization ( isro ) headquarters from the entity list .

further adjustments came in 2005 when six more subordinate entities were removed .

in january 2011 , commerce's bureau of industry and security removed several indian space - and defense - related companies from the entity list .

the united states would like greater access to india's domestic markets , particularly for such products and services as agricultural goods , financial services , and retail distribution .

india's extensive trade and investment barriers have been criticized by u.s. government officials and business leaders as an impediment to its own economic development , as well as to stronger u.s. - india ties .

the u.s. government maintains that india is using sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) regulations to restrict the import of certain u.s. agricultural goods .

india denies these claims , arguing that the u.s. farm subsidy program unfairly subsidies u.s. agricultural exports and greater market access would threaten the livelihood of many of india's farmers .

multi - brand foreign retailers such as wal - mart and target continue to be barred from the indian market due to fears that india's small shops ( there are as many as 12 million of them ) would be overwhelmed by the competition .

the u.s. - india business council is among those commercial groups contending that liberalization and greater international participation would benefit india by creating new and better employment opportunities , and by modernizing the country's supply chain management and distribution .

india is designated as a beneficiary developing country ( bdc ) in the u.s. gsp program since its inception in 1974 .

as such , a limited amount of indian imports of selected goods can enter the united states duty - free .

some in congress believe that india is too developed to remain a gsp beneficiary , while others contend that india should be removed from the gsp program because of its stance on various issues related to the world trade organization's doha round negotiations .

india was the third largest gsp beneficiary in 2010 , after angola and thailand .

india is pressing the united states to carry out negotiations of a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) .

a bit is frequently seen as the first step in the possible progress towards a free trade agreement ( fta ) .

in addition , a bit between india and the united states might foster greater fdi flows between the two nations .

preliminary talks were held in 2009 , and there has been only rhetorical progress on the issue since .

the united states may be missing out on multiple business opportunities as india goes forward with comprehensive trade agreements that will lower tariffs on imports into india from countries such as japan and malaysia .

faster movement toward a u.s. - india bit could improve prospects for american investors , as well as reassure those in asia who question the u.s. commitment to a long - term economic role in the region .

during a session of the u.s. - india trade policy forum in washington , dc , in june 2011 , visiting indian commerce minister anand sharma and u.s. trade representative ron kirk agreed to "fast - track technical negotiations for an early conclusion" of a bit .

india would like to have greater access to u.s. services market , particularly the ability of indian nationals to provide services in the united states .

there are two aspects of this issue .

first , via its various certification programs , the united states restricts the ability of many indian professionals ( such as accountants , medical doctors , and lawyers ) from providing services in the united states .

second , the united states limits the number of people who can work in the country under its h1-b visa program for certain high - skilled jobs .

india would like the united states to increase or remove the limit on h1-b visas .

india maintains that the u.s. farm subsidy program — worth an estimated $17.7 billion per year — provides u.s. agricultural exports with an unfair trade advantage .

to the indian government , the u.s. program poses a threat to millions of indian farmers , hence it maintains restrictions on u.s. agricultural imports .

in addition , india sees the u.s. reluctance to curtail or eliminate its farm subsidy program as a major roadblock in making progress in the doha round negotiations .

in 2006 , the world trade organization's "doha round" of multilateral trade negotiations were suspended due to disagreement among the wto's six core group members — which include the united states and india — over methods to reduce trade - distorting domestic subsidies , eliminate export subsidies , and increase market access for agricultural products .

the united states and other developed countries seek substantial tariff reductions in the developing world .

india , like other members of the "g - 20" group of developing states , has sought more market access for its goods and services in the developed countries , while claiming that developing countries should be given additional time to liberalize their own markets .

in particular , india resists opening its markets to subsidized agricultural products from developed countries , claiming this would be detrimental to tens of millions of indian farmers and lead to further depopulation of the countryside .

according to indian officials , the wto's narrow focus on economic issues excludes political and social variables which are equally sensitive for new delhi and which constrain the options available to the indian government .

they seek greater u.s. understanding of this dynamic .

the indian economy could benefit significantly from lowered farm subsidies in developed countries and expanded trade in services , but indigenous industries could also be harmed if new delhi were to reduce tariffs that currently protect india's exporting sectors , especially in textiles and garments .

bilateral space cooperation may be a particularly productive pursuit now that the u.s. commerce department has removed obstacles to trade with india's civil space agencies .

the united states welcomes india's robust participation in multilateral fora such as the committee on earth observation satellites and the group on earth observations , and has engaged in preliminary talks on human space flight cooperation .

earth observation cooperation benefits agricultural productivity through more accurate weather and climate forecasting .

some analysts view bilateral space cooperation as a particularly productive pursuit now that the u.s. commerce department has removed obstacles to trade with india's civil space agencies .

however , india's space program suffered a major setback in late 2010 when the country's geo - synchronous launch vehicle ( gslv ) went out of control 47 seconds after launch and was destroyed along with its telecommunications satellite payload .

with a 50% success rate , the gslv may no longer be considered a viable option for many commercial satellite launches .

india's status as a non - signatory to the 1968 nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) kept it from accessing most nuclear technology and fuels on the international market for more than three decades .

new delhi's 1974 "peaceful nuclear explosion" spurred the u.s. - led creation of the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) — an international export control regime for nuclear - related trade — and washington further tightened its own export laws with the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-242 ) .

new delhi has long railed at a "nuclear apartheid" created by an apparent double standard inherent in the npt , which , they maintain , has allowed certain states to deploy nuclear weapons legitimately while other states cannot .

senior indian officials maintain the widely held indian perspective that reaching a civil nuclear deal with the united states was crucial to the process of removing constraints placed on india by "an increasingly selective , rigorous , and continually expanding regime of technology denial," claiming that only by "turning the nuclear key" would india be able to open the door to global trade in dual use and other sophisticated technologies , including nuclear technologies .

differences over nuclear policy bedeviled u.s. - india ties for decades and — given new delhi's lingering resentments — presented a serious psychological obstacle to more expansive bilateral relations .

in a major policy shift , a july 2005 u.s. - india joint statement notably asserted that "as a responsible state with advanced nuclear technology , india should acquire the same benefits and advantages as other such states," and president bush vowed to work on achieving "full civilian nuclear energy cooperation with india. .

as a reversal of three decades of u.s. nonproliferation policy , such proposed cooperation stirred controversy and required changes in both u.s. law and in nsg guidelines .

india reciprocally agreed to take its own steps , including identifying and separating its civilian and military nuclear facilities in a phased manner and placing the former under international atomic energy agency safeguards .

after extensive and difficult negotiations , u.s. legislation allowing the united states to conclude a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement with india became law in december 2006 ( p.l .

109-401 ) .

president bush signed p.l .

110-369 , which approved the agreement , into law in october 2008 .

secretary of state condoleezza rice and india's external affairs minister pranab mukherjee signed the agreement later that month and it entered into force in december 2008 .

following an intense u.s. lobbying effort , the nsg decided in september 2008 to exempt india from some of its export requirements — a decision that enabled the government to conclude nuclear cooperation agreements with several countries .

in the realm of geopolitics , much of the bush administration's argument for moving forward with the u.s. - india nuclear initiative appeared rooted in an anticipation / expectation that new delhi would in coming years and decades make policy choices that are more congruent with u.s. regional and global interests ( a desire for such congruence is , in fact , written into the enabling legislation , p.l .

109-401 ) .

proponents have suggested that this u.s. "gesture" would have significant and lasting psychological and symbolic effects in addition to the material ones , and that indian leaders require such a gesture in order to feel confident in the united states as a reliable partner on the world stage .

skeptics aver that the potential strategic benefits of the nuclear initiative have been over - sold .

indeed , centuries of indian anti - colonial sentiments and oftentimes prickly , independent foreign policy choices are unlikely to be set aside in the short run , meaning that the anticipated geopolitical benefits of civil nuclear cooperation with india remain largely speculative and at least somewhat dependent upon unknowable global political developments .

it is worth noting that , although proponents of the nuclear agreement argued that it would bring new delhi into the "nonproliferation mainstream," india has not made any significant changes to its nuclear - weapons policies .

u.s. companies have not yet started nuclear trade with india .

washington and new delhi announced march 29 , 2010 , that they had concluded an agreement on a reprocessing facility in india ; the two countries signed the agreement july 30 , 2010 .

the arrangement , which the administration had submitted to congress on may 11 , 2010 , would not have taken effect if congress had adopted a joint resolution of disapproval within 30 days of continuous session ; congress did not adopt such a resolution .

new delhi had reportedly insisted that india and the united states conclude the arrangement before new delhi would sign contracts with u.s. nuclear firms .

despite the subsequent arrangement , u.s. firms may be reluctant to engage in nuclear trade with india if the government does not resolve concerns regarding its policies on liability for nuclear reactor operators and suppliers .

india signed the convention on supplementary compensation for nuclear damage ( csc ) , which has not yet entered into force , october 27 , 2010 .

however , many observers have argued that india's civil liability for nuclear damage bill , which both houses of india's parliament adopted in august 2010 , is not consistent with the csc , citing the provisions which make reactor suppliers , in addition to operators , liable for damages caused by a reactor accident .

u.s. officials have argued that india's law should be consistent with the convention .

assistant secretary of state robert blake stated in a june 9 , 2010 , interview with india abroad that the u.s. interest is to "ensure that the bill that ultimately is enacted is compliant" with the csc .

although under secretary of state william burns described new delhi's signing of the csc as a "very positive step" during an october 27 press briefing , he also indicated that india will need to take additional steps in order to resolve u.s. concerns regarding india's liability policies .

secretary of state hillary clinton indicated during a july 19 , 2011 , press conference that the united states wants india to ratify the csc by the end of 2011 , as well as adopt a liability regulatory regime that "fully conforms with the international requirements" under the csc .

india's then - foreign secretary nirupama rao stated in a july 29 , 2011 , interview that india would ratify the csc "before the end of the year. .

she also explained that "the rules and regulations concerning the civil nuclear liability bill ... are in the process of being framed and in this process we are consulting with both the domestic companies and the foreign companies concerned. .

washington and new delhi are also discussing necessary monitoring arrangements for u.s. nuclear exports .

section 104 ( d ) ( 5 ) of the hyde act requires the president to "ensure that all appropriate measures are taken to maintain accountability with respect to nuclear materials , equipment , and technology sold , leased , exported , or re - exported to india," including a "detailed system of reporting and accounting for technology transfers , including any retransfers in india , authorized by the department of energy pursuant to section 57 b. of the atomic energy act. .

india has provided retransfer assurances covering several state - owned entities , but has not yet provided them for private entities .

defense cooperation between the united states and india remains in relatively early stages of development ( unlike u.s. - pakistan military ties , which date back to the 1950s ) .

since late 2001 , and despite a concurrent u.s. rapprochement with pakistan , u.s. - india security cooperation has flourished ; u.s. diplomats rate military cooperation among the most important aspects of transformed bilateral relations .

the india - u.s. defense policy group ( dpg ) — moribund after india's 1998 nuclear tests and ensuing u.s. sanctions — was revived in 2001 and meets annually .

at the most recent session , in washington , dc , in march 2011 , senior u.s. state department and pentagon officials and their indian counterparts reaffirmed the importance of and expressed satisfaction with ongoing bilateral defense cooperation , especially in the areas of joint military exercises and arms sales .

the dpg operates four subgroups — a military cooperation group , a joint technology group , a senior technology security group , and a defense procurement and production group — which meet throughout the year .

in june 2005 , the united states and india signed a ten - year defense pact outlining planned collaboration in multilateral operations , expanded two - way defense trade , increasing opportunities for technology transfers and co - production , expanded collaboration related to missile defense , and establishment of a bilateral defense procurement and production group .

the agreement may be the most ambitious such security pact ever engaged by new delhi .

a maritime security cooperation agreement , inked in 2006 , commits both countries to "comprehensive cooperation" in protecting the free flow of commerce and addressing a wide array of threats to maritime security , including piracy and the illicit trafficking of weapons of mass destruction and related materials .

the united states views defense cooperation with india in the context of "common principles and shared national interests" such as defeating terrorism , preventing weapons proliferation , and maintaining regional stability .

senior officials in the obama administration's pentagon have assured new delhi that the united states is "fully committed to strengthening ties through the enhancement of our defense relationship. .

in a report accompanying the department of defense authorization act for fy2012 ( s. 1253 , s.rept .

112-26 ) , the senate armed services committee , in expressing its belief that a deepened strategic partnership with india will be "critical" to the promotion of core mutual national interests in the 21 st century , would direct the secretary of defense to report to congress a detailed plan to enhance u.s. - india security cooperation .

many analysts view increased u.s. - india security ties as providing an alleged "hedge" against or "counterbalance" to growing chinese influence in asia , though both washington and new delhi repeatedly downplay such probable motives .

still , while a congruence of u.s. and indian national security objectives is unlikely in the foreseeable future , convergences are identified in areas such as shared values , the emergence of a new balance - of - power arrangement in the region , and on distinct challenges such as wmd proliferation , islamist extremism , and energy security .

there remain indications that the perceptions and expectations of top u.s. and indian strategic planners are divergent on several key issues , perhaps especially on the role of pakistan and policies toward the ongoing afghan insurgency , as well as on india's relations with iran and repressive governments in places such as burma and sudan .

one facet of the emerging "strategic partnership" between the united states and india is greatly increased intelligence and counterterrorism cooperation .

in 2000 , the two governments established a u.s. - india joint working group on counterterrorism to coordinate bilateral efforts in this realm .

in 2002 , india and the united states launched the indo - u.s. cyber security forum to safeguard critical infrastructures from cyber attack .

the 2005 "new framework for the u.s. - india defense relationship" listed "defeating terrorism and violent religious extremism" as one of four key shared security interests , and it called for a bolstering of mutual defense capabilities required for such a goal .

a bilateral counterterrorism cooperation initiative was formally launched in july 2010 .

counterterrorism cooperation is described by the administration as a pillar of the bilateral relationship .

programs include exchanges of law enforcement best practices , reciprocal visits of senior - level officials , joint military training exercises , and joint approaches in relevant international fora .

the fbi's quantico laboratory has hosted visits by senior indian forensics experts and the agency regularly shares best - practices with senior indian law enforcement officials .

the state department's anti - terrorism assistance program has conducted scores of training courses for more than 1,600 indian law enforcement officials .

cia and fbi personnel have worked in india to investigate terrorist attacks , including a major 2006 bombing in mumbai , as well as the 2008 attack on the same city ( fbi forensics experts provided testimony to the indian court trying the sole surviving gunmen in the latter attack ) .

in june 2010 , the indian government was granted access to david headley , an american national who has confessed to participating in planning the november 2008 mumbai assault .

then - u.s .

ambassador to india tim roemer identified the development as "historic in the nature of security cooperation" and expressed optimism about multiple u.s. - india partnerships in this area , including cooperation on launching a national counterterrorism center in india modeled on that in the united states .

yet lingering and significant distrust of the united states — and its close relationship with pakistan's military and intelligence services — became evident after it was learned that u.s. officials had received prior warnings about let intentions to attack mumbai from coleman's former wives .

u.s. officials deny that any useful intelligence information had been withheld from india , but some observers remained skeptical .

homeland security secretary janet napolitano was in new delhi and mumbai in may 2011 , where she meet with indian officials and representatives of private industry to promote counterterrorism and law enforcement cooperation .

under the rubric of the bilateral strategic dialogue , a u.s. - india homeland security dialogue was established , with indian home minister chidambaram as co - chair , wherein agency - to - agency engagements are being fostered on a wide array of law enforcement issues , including counternarcotics counterfeit currency , illicit financing and transnational crime , infrastructure security , transportation and trade , coastal security , and large - city policing .

since early 2002 , the united states and india have held a series of unprecedented and increasingly substantive combined exercises involving all military services .

such military - to - military relations have been key aspect of u.s. - india relations in recent years — india now conducts more exercises and personnel exchanges with the united states than with any other country .

these include "cope india" air exercises , joint special forces training , and major annual "malabar" joint naval exercises are held off the indian coast .

u.s. and indian officials tout ongoing joint maneuvers as improving interoperability and as evidence of an overall deepening of the bilateral defense relationship .

countries such as china and pakistan are acutely interested in the progress of such relations , seeing them as the potential seeds of a more formal defense alliance .

along with increasing military - to - military ties , the issue of u.s. arms sales to india has taken a higher profile .

new delhi is undertaking a major military modernization program , potentially spending $100 billion over the next decade to update its mostly soviet - era arsenal .

u.s. weapons makers are eager to gain a slice of this lucrative pie , and american security companies also see in india a potentially also huge new market for sophisticated equipment such as surveillance and detection systems .

some analysts suggest that increased defense trade could be a means of reviving what are perceived as stagnating u.s. - india relations .

yet many indians continue to be wary of closer defense ties with the united states and are concerned that these could lead to future strings , such as conditionality and / or cutoffs , and perhaps constrain new delhi's foreign policy freedom .

in an unusually open expression of frustration with the united states in this realm , india's army chief in may 2010 informed his defense ministry that the u.s. foreign military sales program had proven troublesome for india .

nevertheless , the value of new and unprecedented major defense sales to india has continued to grow , with the united states now offering to sell india some of its most sophisticated military hardware .

the first - ever major u.s. arms sale to india came in 2002 , when the pentagon negotiated delivery of 12 counter - battery radar sets ( or "firefinder" radars ) worth a total of $190 million .

in 2006 , congress authorized and new delhi approved the $44 million purchase of the uss trenton , a decommissioned american amphibious transport dock .

the ship , which became the second - largest in the indian navy when it was commissioned as the ins jalashwa in 2007 , set sail for india carrying six surplus sikorsky uh - 3h sea king helicopters purchased for another $39 million .

the security cooperation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-266 ) authorized the president to transfer to india two osprey - class coastal minehunter ships as excess defense articles .

in 2008 , washington and new delhi finalized a deal to send to india six c - 130j hercules military transport aircraft ( along with related equipment , training , and services ) .

the deal , which represented the largest - ever u.s. defense sale to india to date , is worth nearly $1 billion to the manufacturer , maryland - based lockheed martin ( the c - 130js , configured to support indian special operations requirements , were delivered in december 2010 ) .

in 2009 , new delhi signed a $2.1 billion deal to purchase eight p - 8i maritime surveillance aircraft from illinois - based boeing .

these aircraft , slated for delivery in 2013 , also provide anti - submarine warfare capabilities , and their sale set a new record as the largest - ever u.s. arms transfer to india .

in 2010 , the pentagon notified congress of a potential sale to india of ten c - 17 globemaster iii military transport aircraft ( with training equipment , spare parts , and other support ) .

yet another new record sale was realized when , in june 2011 , new delhi formally approved the $4.1 billion purchase , the largest - ever indian defense contract with a u.s. company .

washington welcomed the sale as both advancing the u.s. - india partnership and in sustaining some 23,000 american jobs in 44 states .

other potential upcoming sales include 22 boeing ah - 64d apache attack helicopters , along with accompanying general electric engines , and radars , missiles , training , and other support that could be worth an estimated $1.4 billion ; 145 lightweight 155mm m777 towed howitzers with laser targeting systems ( worth $647 million ) ; and 26 harpoon anti - ship missiles for $200 million and 32 mk - 54 torpedoes for $86 million — both weapons intended for use on the indian navy's newly - purchased p - 8i neptune maritime patrol aircraft .

yet by far the most lucrative hoped - for sale would have served india's quest for 126 new medium , multi - role combat aircraft ( mmrca ) in a deal that could be worth some $11 billion .

lockheed martin's f - 16 and boeing's f / a - 18 were competing with aircraft built in russia , france , sweden , and by a european consortium .

hopes of an american firm landing the mmca deal received a boost in 2009 when general electric won in its bid to provide india with 99 jet engines for its tejas light combat aircraft for some $800 million , but in 2011 new delhi announced that it would not look to american firms for this larger sale ( see below ) .

some indian officials express concern that the united states is a "fickle" partner that may not always be relied upon to provide the reciprocity , sensitivity , and high - technology transfers sought by new delhi , and that may act intrusively .

this has contributed to new delhi's years - long political resistance to sign several defense cooperation accords , including the communications interoperability and security memorandum of agreement ( cismoa ) , the basic exchange and cooperation agreement for geospatial cooperation ( beca ) , and the logistics support agreement ( lsa ) .

u.s. law requires that certain sensitive defense technologies can only be transferred to recipient countries that have signed the cismoa and / or the beca .

all three outstanding accords have been opposed by some influential indian politicians for their "intrusive" nature , and the issue was not taken up at the july 2011 strategic dialogue talks .

new delhi did in 2009 sign on to an end user monitoring agreement ( euma ) after two years of protracted negotiations , but only after receiving the concession that the time and location of equipment verification would be determined by indian officials .

then - secretary of defense robert gates , on a visit to new delhi in 2010 , stated that not getting the outstanding agreements signed "is an obstacle to indian access to the very highest level of technology. .

despite u.s. claims that india's military capabilities are hampered by lack of access to u.s. equipment and technologies , senior indian military officers have reported to their government that the absence of these agreements makes no substantial difference in their operational abilities .

by the turn of the new century , new delhi began to address the need to replace their air force's large and aging fleet of russian - built mig - 21 combat aircraft , which were crashing regularly and became known to some indian pilots as "flying coffins. .

refurbishment was deemed impractical , and no indigenously - built replacement could be online for up to two decades so , in 2004 , the government issued formal requests for information ( rfis ) on potentially purchasing 126 new aircraft from one of four vendors: lockheed martin ( f - 16in ) , france's dassault ( rafale ) , sweden's saab ( gripen jas - 39 ) , and russia's mikoyan ( mig - 35 ) .

soon after , boeing ( f / a - 18e / f ) and a european consortium ( eurofighter typhoon ) joined in the bidding .

in april 2011 , seven years after the first rfis were issued , new delhi announced that it had narrowed the list of competitors to two finalists: the french rafale and the eurofighter .

the government described the decision as having been wholly rooted in technical assessments of the contending aircraft .

these assessments determined that the rafale and the typhoon were best suited to the needs of their air forces .

assistant secretary of state blake expressed washington's obvious disappointment , while also stressing that the united states will remain committed to the bilateral defense partnership — he contended that india had "shown confidence in american products" such as c - 130j , c - 17 , and p - 8 military aircraft — as well as to the greater strategic partnership .

blake later said that choosing one of the american - made platforms would have "provided a ladder to even higher levels of u.s. - india technology transfers" and it was "a source of puzzlement" that the indian air force deselected them .

new delhi's decision elicited much criticism both from u.s. - based analysts as well as some indian strategic thinkers , and sparked some debate over the "real" reasons for what seemed a major geostrategic choice .

some commentators considered the indian decision short - sighted and potentially damaging to the greater u.s. - india partnership .

from this perspective , political and geostrategic considerations were given short - shrift or even ignored in new delhi's apparently narrow focus on purely technical variables .

the decision may not have been the great surprise that was perceived by some in washington: indian skepticism about u.s. reliability as an arms supplier is longstanding , and washington's close defense relationship with islamabad over the past decade has added to new delhi's doubts .

indeed , many analysts sought to explain the decision by pointing to indian concerns about u.s. reliability and indian annoyance with u.s. arms supplies to pakistan , with some also viewing the europeans as being more willing than the americans to transfer technologies desired by india .

supply reliability may have played a central role in what may have been a largely political decision .

a few even suspected that deselecting the u.s. - built planes was an indirect statement that new delhi did not seek full alignment with the united states .

when viewed in light of serious obstacles to implementing bilateral civil nuclear commerce , and new delhi's unsc abstention on libya and tepid support for burmese democratization , the mmrca decision was for some observers a ( troubling ) signal that indian decision makers are uncomfortable with developing closer ties with the united states .

others rejected these arguments as unreasonable , given that most major powers seek to diversify their strategic relationships , the united states among them .

for these commentators , the overarching relationship was not diminished by this one development and does best when a transactional approach is avoided .

the judgment here is that there was no "strategic rebuff" of the united states , and indian doubts about american reliability in arms trade is much diminished in recent years ( u.s. firms have won numerous other indian defense contracts ) .

in the words of one close observer , "[t]he current threats to the burgeoning defense partnership derive less from abortive military sales and more from a lack of vision , focus , and determination to create the strategic affiliation that serves common interests. .

moreover , it does appear that the indian procurement process worked exactly as it was supposed to — divorced from political considerations — and that corruption scandals in new delhi and the ruling coalition's recent travails made strategic factors even more unlikely to have played a role .

many of india's more than 1 billion citizens suffer from oftentimes serious human rights abuses .

some analysts are concerned that , as washington pursues a new "strategic partnership" with new delhi , u.s. government attention to such abuses has waned .

in a notable shift , the state department's most recent country report on human rights practices ( released april 2011 ) does not include what had been regular overarching statements in previous reports about the indian government's general respect for the rights of its citizens , nor does its introductory section make note of indian government efforts or improvements in certain areas .

instead , the report moves quickly to a listing of india's "major human rights problems," including reported extrajudicial killings of persons in custody , killings of protesters , and torture and rape by police and other security forces .

investigations into individual abuses and legal punishment for perpetrators occurred , but for many abuses , a lack of accountability due to weak law enforcement , a lack of trained police , and an overburdened court system created an atmosphere of impunity ; lengthy court backlogs prolong the latter .

poor prison conditions and lengthy detentions were significant problems .

unlike in previous years ( 2008 and 2009 ) , there were no instances of officials using antiterrorism legislation to justify excessive use of force ; however , indiscriminate use of force by border security forces was a problem .

corruption existed at all levels of government and police .

there were reports of delays in obtaining legal redress for past attacks against minorities .

the law in some states restricted religious conversion , but there were no reports of convictions under these restrictions .

violence associated with caste bias occurred .

domestic violence , child marriage , bonded labor , dowry - related deaths , honor crimes , and female feticide remained serious problems .

separatist insurgents and terrorists in jammu and kashmir , the northeastern states , and the naxalite belt committed numerous serious abuses , including killing armed forces personnel , police , government officials , and civilians .

insurgents engaged in widespread torture , rape , beheadings , kidnapping , and extortion .

the number of incidents , however , declined compared with the previous year .

international human rights groups echo many of these findings .

according to the 201 1 world report of human rights watch , authorities made little progress [in 2010] in reforming the police ; improving healthcare , education , and food security for millions still struggling for subsistence ; ending discrimination against dalits ( "untouchables" ) , tribal groups , and religious minorities ; and protecting the rights of women and children .

constraints on religious freedom are another matter of concern ; india's muslim and christian minorities continue to face sometimes violent persecution .

moreover , rampant caste - based discrimination is identified as a major societal problem , as are female infanticide and feticide .

"honor killings" of couples accused of violating hindu marriage traditions may be on the rise .

the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor has in the past claimed that india's human right abuses "are generated by a traditionally hierarchical social structure , deeply rooted tensions among the country's many ethnic and religious communities , violent secessionist movements and the authorities' attempts to repress them , and deficient police methods and training. .

government treatment of actual or suspected militants and terrorists can be severe and potentially unlawful .

india's 1958 armed forces special powers act , which gives security forces wide leeway to act with impunity in conflict zones , has been called a facilitator of grave human rights abuses in several indian states .

visits by representatives of the international committee of the red cross in 2002-2004 reportedly revealed evidence of widespread torture by security forces in kashmir .

such evidence was presented to u.s. officials , according to press reports about leaked diplomatic cables .

a senior indian police official in kashmir called the allegations "baseless propaganda. .

a 2010 report by the delhi - based asian center for human rights found that the incidence of torture and prison custody deaths in india is on the rise , and it chastised the current new delhi government for failing to address these problems through legislative changes .

after examining india's nonconflict areas , human rights watch issued a 2011 report detailing what it calls india's "numerous , serious human rights violations" in the treatment of terrorism suspects detained following attacks , saying the "abuses are both unlawful under indian and international law and counterproductive in the fight against terrorism. .

indian authorities have brought and threatened to bring sedition charges against prominent social activists .

according to watchdog groups , india's colonial - era sedition law has been used to intimidate peaceful political dissenters in cases involving activists such as dr. binayak sen and arundhati roy .

human rights watch repeatedly has called for the law's repeal .

sen , who spent in a total of 28 months in what he described as horrific prison conditions , later accused the government of using the sedition laws "to silence voices of dissent. .

an officially secular nation , india has a long tradition of religious tolerance ( with periodic lapses ) , which is protected under its constitution .

the population includes a hindu majority of 82% as well as a large muslim minority of some 150 million ( 14% ) .

christians , sikhs , buddhists , jains , and others total less than 4% .

although freedom of religion is protected by the indian government , human rights groups have noted that india's religious tolerance is susceptible to attack by religious extremists .

in its annual report on international religious freedom released in november 2010 , the state department contended that the new delhi government generally respected , provided incentives for , and intervened to protect religious freedom ; however , some state and local governments imposed limits on this freedom .

there was no change in the status of respect for religious freedom by the government during the reporting period .

the national government , led by the united progressive alliance ( upa ) , continued to implement an inclusive and secular platform that included respect for the right to religious freedom .

despite the national government's rejection of hindutva ( hindu nationalism ) , a few state and local governments continued to be influenced by hindutva... .

the law generally provided remedy for violations of religious freedom , however , due to a lack of sufficient trained police and corruption , the law was not always enforced rigorously or effectively in some cases pertaining to religiously oriented violence .

a may 2011 report of the u.s. commission on international religious freedom found that "india's progress in protecting and promoting religious freedom during the past year continued to be mixed" and that "justice for victims of communal violence ... remains slow and often ineffective. .

while noting the indian government's creation of some structures to address past problems of communal violence , and recognizing positive steps taken by the central and state governments to improve religious freedom , the commission again placed india on a "watch list" of countries where it believes violations of religious freedom require very close attention .

it urged the u.s. government to encourage and assist new delhi in being more vigorous and effective in efforts to better protect religious freedom in india , including those aimed at halting violent attacks on religious minorities , undertaking more timely investigations and prosecutions of those alleged to have perpetrated such violence , among others .

the millennia - old hindu caste system reflects indian occupational and socially defined hierarchies .

sanskrit sources refer to four social categories: priests ( brahmin ) , warriors ( kshatriya ) , traders ( vayisha ) and farmers ( shudra ) .

tribals and lower castes were long known as "untouchables" — a term now officially banned but still widely used — or dalits .

although these categories are understood throughout india , they describe reality only in the most general terms .

national - level legislation exists to protect india's lower castes , yet , according to the u.s. state department , "the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes ( prevention of atrocities ) act lists offenses against disadvantaged persons and prescribes stiff penalties for offenders ; however , this act had only a modest effect in curbing abuse and there were very few convictions. .

in the 110 th congress , h.con.res .

139 , expressing the sense of congress that the united states should address the ongoing problem of untouchability in india , was passed by the full house , but was not considered by the senate .

the state department's latest annual report on trafficking in persons ( issued june 2011 ) again said , "india is a source , destination , and transit country for men , women , and children subjected to forced labor and sex trafficking... .

the government of india does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking ; however , it is making significant efforts to do so. .

moreover , in noting the indian home ministry's more focused efforts and the government's ratification a relevant u.n. protocol in may , india's designation as a "tier 2 watch list" country , which it had held since 2004 , was upgraded to "tier 2," the second highest of four designations .

still , state criticized law enforcement efforts against bonded labor as remaining "inadequate," and said the complicity of public officials in human trafficking "remained a serious problem" and "impeded progress .

given traditional societal discrimination against females , uneven female - to - male ratios are a matter of growing concern for india .

the incidence of female infanticide and gender - selective abortions is identified as a serious human rights problem in india .

the diffusion of enabling medical technology and the existence of unethical doctors have made sex - selective abortions more common there .

prime minister singh has called female feticide a "national shame" and said the government has a responsibility to curtail the widespread practice .

the country's 2001 census found only 927 girls aged 0-6 for every 1,000 boys nationwide .

wealthier states , such as delhi , punjab , and gujarat , have the lowest ratios ( punjab's was the lowest at 798 ) .

a 2006 study published in the british medical journal lancet estimated that up to 10 million indian females are "missing" due to sex - selective abortions and infanticide over the past two decades , and that some 500,000 girls are being "lost" annually .

in subsequent years , the incidence of such practices only appears to be increasing .

the most recent u.s. state department country report on human rights for india ( released april 2011 ) , identified punjab and haryana as states in which female feticide was an especially "serious problem," and noted reports of relatives "forcing" women to engage in female feticide .

a june 2011 survey of gender experts ranked india as the world's fourth most dangerous country for women , citing high rates of female feticide , infanticide , and human trafficking ( neighboring pakistan was ranked third ) .

a total of more than $15.9 billion in direct u.s. aid went to india from 1947 through 2010 , nearly all of it in the form of economic grants and loans , more than half as food aid .

in 2007 , in response to several years of rapid indian economic expansion and new delhi's new status as a donor government , the state department announced a 35% reduction in assistance programs for india .

the bulk of the cuts came from development assistance and food aid programs .

another smaller decrease came in 2008 "in recognition of the continuing growth of the indian economy and the ability of the government to fund more" development programs .

under the obama administration , however , increases in global health and child survival funds , along with some added development assistance , have reverted aid amounts to their previous levels .

table 1 shows u.s. foreign assistance categories and figures for fy2001-fy2012 .

according to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , india has the world's largest concentration of people living in poverty ( more than 700 million earning less than $2 per day ) .

usaid and economic - related state department programs in india , budgeted nearly $120 million in fy2010 , concentrate on five areas: economic growth ; health ; disaster management ; energy and environment ; and opportunity and equity .

the united states has provided about $175 million in military assistance to india since 1947 , more than 90% of this distributed from 1962-1966 .

in recent years , modest security - related assistance has emphasized export control enhancements , counterterrorism and counternarcotics programs , and military training .

