in paul v. virginia ( 75 u.s. ( 8 wall. ) .

168 ( 1868 ) ) , the supreme court ruled that "[i]ssuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of [interstate] commerce. .

united states v. south - eastern underwriters ass ' n. ( 322 u.s. 533 ( 1944 ) ) held that the federal antitrust laws were applicable to an insurance association's interstate activities in restraint of trade .

although the 1944 court did not specifically overrule its prior determination , the case was viewed as a reversal of 75 years of precedent and practice , and created significant apprehension about the continued viability of state insurance regulation and taxation of insurance premiums .

congress' response was the 1945 mccarran - ferguson act .

in addition to preserving the states' ability to tax insurance premiums , mccarran - ferguson prohibits application of the federal antitrust laws and similar provisions in the federal trade commission act , as well as most other federal statutes , to the "business of insurance" to the extent that such business is regulated by state law — except that the antitrust laws are applicable if it is determined that an insurance practice amounts to a boycott .

inasmuch as "[t]he primary purpose of the mccarran - ferguson act was to preserve state regulation of the activities of insurance companies since it was the power of the states to regulate and tax insurance companies that was threatened after ... south - eastern underwriters ...," we first answer the questions , "what is insurance ? .

" ; and , "is it defined pursuant to state or federal law ? .

then , given that the statute addresses itself to the "business of insurance," this report sets out some judicial opinions about just what does — and does not — constitute the "business of insurance," as well as state regulation of such business , and the scope of mccarran's "boycott" exception .

finally , it will note some mccarran - related legislation introduced in the 110 th and 109 th congresses , and discuss , briefly , the possible consequences of the measures , especially in light of the non - statutory state - action doctrine in antitrust law .

in response to the securities and exchange commission's insistence that insurers issuing variable annuity contracts register them as securities under the federal securities laws , the insurers asserted that mccarran - ferguson shielded them from federal regulation , but that even if it did not , they qualified for the insurance exemptions from the federal securities laws .

the supreme court , reversing lower court decisions , held that neither state regulation of variable annuities nor their issuance by insurers qualified the annuities as "insurance. .

accordingly , neither insurers nor state regulators could ( 1 ) invoke mccarran - ferguson as a shield against federal regulation of variable annuities or ( 2 ) qualify as beneficiaries of the insurance exclusions in the federal securities laws .

moreover , the case established that the definition of "insurance" under mccarran - ferguson is a federal , not a state , question .

nationsbank v. valic made a similar determination concerning the sale of fixed annuities , which are sold both by insurers and by banks .

the court agreed with the comptroller of the currency that in the provision of fixed annuities , "banks are essentially offering financial investment instruments of the kind congressional authorization permits them to broker .

hence , [it was reasonable to characterize the] permission nationsbank sought as an 'incidental powe[r] ... necessary to carry on the business of banking.' .

the scope of mccarran - ferguson protection — the statute's applicability in instances in which insurance companies are actors in an area in which the federal government clearly has not ceded its regulatory authority to the states — has been addressed numerous times , both by the supreme court and the lower federal courts .

generally , it has been found that federal statutes are not trumped by mccarran except where the "business of insurance" is directly involved , or where a state insurance regulatory scheme or state insurance administration would be adversely affected .

the state action doctrine , first enunciated by the supreme court in parker v. brown , has come to stand for the proposition that federalism dictates that the antitrust laws are not applicable to the states .

it has , over the years since 1943 , been interpreted , clarified and expanded to the point that it now confers antitrust immunity not only on the states qua states ( including state agencies and officials acting in their official state capacities ) , or those private individuals who act in furtherance of state - directed activity , but also extends to those who act pursuant to state - sanctioned , but not necessarily mandated , courses of action .

its essence is captured in the two - part test set out in california retail liquor dealers ass ' n v. midcal aluminum inc .

there , the court made clear first , that the challenged restraint must be "one clearly articulated and affirmatively expressed as state policy" ( most generally via legislatively enacted statute ) , and second , the policy must be "actively supervised" ( i.e. , enforced ) by the state itself .

it is , thus , apparent that , since at least 1980 , "regulated by state law" has been a prong of the judicially created state action doctrine in antitrust law , a doctrine which was developing simultaneously with mccarran - ferguson case law .

as mccarran - ferguson immunity for activities constituting the "business of insurance" has steadily been narrowed since the act's passage in 1945 , and legislative action toward limiting or abolishing the exemption entirely has increased , the doctrine of state action immunity from prosecution under the federal antitrust laws has steadily been expanded since the doctrine was first announced in 1943 .

presently , entities acting at the behest or authorization of a state regulatory scheme — so long as that scheme is envisioned by the state legislature in "clearly articulated" language , and so long as the state exercises sufficient "active supervision" over the authorized but possibly anticompetitive activities of private entities — become the equivalent of "derivative beneficiaries" of the states' own immunity from prosecution under the federal antitrust laws .

although virtually every state maintains some form of insurance regulation , whether existing state regulation of the insurance industry is sufficient to satisfy the "active supervision" prong of mical may not , however , always be clear or assured .

whether , especially in view of the existence and potential application of the state - action doctrine , legislative efforts to circumscribe the scope of the mccarran - ferguson act will continue , is presently an unanswered question .

