in april 2005 , president bush signed p.l .

109-8 , the bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act of 2005 ( bapcpa ) .

the purpose of bapcpa is not only to "improve bankruptcy law and practice by restoring personal responsibility and integrity to the bankruptcy system," but to ensure fairness of the system for both debtors and creditors .

bapcpa consists of a comprehensive package of reform measures pertaining to both consumer and business bankruptcy cases .

one of its many amendments requires debtors to participate in credit counseling programs before filing for bankruptcy relief .

bapcpa's credit counseling provisions are intended to give consumers in financial distress an opportunity to learn about the consequences of bankruptcy , such as the potentially devastating effect it can have on their credit rating .

bapcpa also requires debtors , after they file for bankruptcy relief , to receive personal financial management training .

this training is intended to provide debtors with guidance about how to manage their finances in order to avoid future financial difficulties .

on august 17 , 2006 , president bush signed the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) .

although the act does not change bapcpa's credit counseling provisions , section 1220 of the pension protection act amends section 501 of the internal revenue code , providing new standards that a credit counseling agency must meet to be eligible for a federal income tax exemption .

section 106 of bapcpa adds credit counseling as a prerequisite to chapter 7 or chapter 13 bankruptcy filing or relief .

section 106 ( a ) of bapcpa amends section 109 of the bankruptcy code to require an individual to receive credit counseling within the 180-day period preceding the date of filing a petition for bankruptcy .

the credit counseling must be provided by an approved "nonprofit budget and credit counseling agency" and must consist of either an individual or group briefing .

this briefing , which may be conducted by telephone or via the internet , must outline the opportunities for credit counseling and must assist the debtor in performing a budget analysis .

under the new section 109 ( h ) of the bankruptcy code , a debtor may be exempt from the mandatory credit counseling requirement in certain circumstances .

for example , the requirement does not apply to a debtor who resides in a district where the u.s. trustee has determined that approved credit counseling agencies in that district are not reasonably able to provide adequate services to such individuals .

a debtor may also be temporarily exempted from the mandatory credit counseling requirement if the debtor submits to the court a certification that ( 1 ) describes exigent circumstances meriting a waiver of this requirement ; ( 2 ) states that the debtor requested credit counseling services from an approved credit counseling agency , but was unable to obtain such services within the five - day period beginning on the date the debtor made the request ; and ( 3 ) is satisfactory to the court .

this exemption terminates when the debtor meets the requirements for credit counseling participation , but not longer than 30 days after the case is filed , unless the court , for cause , extends this period up to an additional 15 days .

the requirements for an exemption from credit counseling under section 109 ( h ) are considered "stringent," and a failure to strictly follow the requirements has led to both denial of exemptions and an inability to file for bankruptcy .

in addition , a debtor may be exempt from the mandatory credit counseling requirement if the court determines , after notice and a hearing , that the debtor is unable to complete this requirement because of incapacity , disability , or active military duty in a military combat zone .

incapacity , under this provision , means the debtor is "impaired by reason of mental illness or mental deficiency so that the debtor is incapable of realizing and making rational decisions with respect to financial responsibilities. .

disability under the 11 u.s.c .

ยง 109 ( h ) provision means that "the debtor is so physically impaired as to be unable , after reasonable effort , to receive credit counseling whether by participating in person , or via telephone or internet briefing. .

bapcpa also amends the bankruptcy code to deny a discharge to chapter 7 and chapter 13 debtors who fail to complete a personal financial management instructional course .

this requirement does not apply if the debtor resides in a district where the u.s. trustee has determined that the approved instructional courses in that district are not adequate .

such determination must be reviewed annually by the u.s. trustee .

in addition , these provisions do not apply to a debtor who the court determines , after notice and a hearing , is unable to complete this requirement because of incapacity , disability , or active military duty in a military combat zone .

section 106 ( e ) adds section 111 to the bankruptcy code .

under section 111 ( a ) , the clerk is required to maintain a publicly available list of approved credit counseling agencies and personal financial management instructional courses .

section 111 ( b ) discusses the determinations that must be made by a u.s. trustee before a credit counseling agency or a personal financial management course can be approved .

under section 111 ( b ) ( 1 ) , the u.s. trustee must undertake a thorough review of the qualifications of the credit counseling agency or personal financial management instructional course to ensure that the counseling services or course meets the standards set forth in section 111 .

the section also allows a u.s. trustee to require that the credit counseling agency or course provider provide information with respect to this review .

if , prior to approval by the u.s. trustee , a credit counseling agency or instructional course did not appear on the list required under section 111 ( a ) , then approval shall be allowed for a probationary period not to exceed six months .

a u.s. trustee may grant subsequent approvals for successive one - year periods thereafter if the counseling agency or instructional course has met the requirements under section 111 for the preceding period and can satisfy these standards in the future .

under prior law , credit counseling organizations were eligible for a federal income tax exemption under internal revenue code section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) or 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) .

section 1220 of the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) amends the internal revenue code and establishes the following additional requirements that credit counseling organizations must meet to claim this income tax exemption: the organization must provide credit counseling services tailored to the specific needs and circumstances of consumers .

the organization does not make loans to debtors ( other than loans with no fees or interest ) and does not negotiate the making of loans on behalf of debtors .

the organization must provide services for the purpose of improving a consumer's credit record , credit history , or credit rating only to the extent that such services are incidental to providing credit counseling services .

separate fees may not be charged for these services .

the organization does not refuse to provide credit counseling services to a consumer due to the inability of the consumer to pay , the ineligibility of the consumer for debt management plan enrollment , or the unwillingness of the consumer to enroll in a debt management plan .

the organization establishes and implements a fee policy that is reasonable and can be waived if the consumer cannot pay .

the fee charged cannot be based on the consumer's debt or the savings a consumer gets from using the services , except as provided by state law .

the organization must have a diverse board of directors ( or other governing body ) that is controlled by persons who represent the broad interests of the public , such as public officials acting in their capacities as such , persons having special knowledge or expertise in credit or financial education , and community leaders .

not more than 20% of the voting power of the board may be vested in persons who are employed by the organization or who will benefit financially , directly or indirectly , from the organization's activities ( other than through the receipt of reasonable directors' fees or the repayment of consumer debt to creditors other than the credit counseling organization or its affiliates ) .

additionally , not more than 49% of the voting power of the board may be vested in persons who are employed by the organization or who will benefit financially , directly or indirectly , from the organization's activities ( excluding only reasonable directors' fees ) .

the organization does not own more than 35% of the total combined voting power of a corporation ( or profits or beneficial interest in the case of a partnership , trust , or estate ) that is in the trade or business of lending money , repairing credit , or providing debt management plan services , payment processing , and similar services .

the organization receives no amount for providing referrals to others for debt management plan services , and pays no amount to others for obtaining referrals .

in addition , organizations that are exempt under irc ยง 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) cannot solicit contributions from current consumers and face limits on their income from debt management plan services .

organizations exempt under irc ยง 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) must notify the irs they are applying for recognition as a credit counseling organization .

the new requirements in section 1220 of the pension protection act are generally effective for taxable years beginning after august 17 , 2006 .

these requirements are only necessary in order to have a tax - exempt status and should not affect approval of a credit counseling agency by a u.s. trustee .

