for over 40 years , the united states has relied on unilateral trade preferences as an integral part of its foreign economic policy .

trade preferences give market access to selected developing country goods , duty free or at tariffs below normal ( ntr ) rates , without requiring reciprocal trade concessions .

they come in many forms and are intended to promote economic growth and development in poor countries by stimulating export promotion and investment , and to encourage the use of u.s. inputs in foreign manufacturing .

trade preference programs must be authorized by congress and are usually done so for specified periods of time .

the caribbean basin ( see figure 1 ) has benefitted from multiple preferential trade arrangements , the best known being those linked to the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) implemented on january 1 , 1984 , and revised periodically by congress .

since 1984 , the growth of free trade agreements ( ftas ) in the region has signaled a shift in u.s. trade policy .

the increase in reciprocal ftas ( particularly the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement — cafta - dr ) with even more generous trade provisions for certain caribbean exports has the effect of "eroding" the relative benefits given to countries covered only by the cbi programs , raising questions about the future path of u.s. trade policy for those countries .

this report reviews unilateral preference programs for the caribbean , discusses how they have been affected by ftas in the region , and considers trade policy options for dealing with countries still relying on trade preferences and that may be considering whether to negotiate an fta with the united states .

the united states has a long history of employing various types of trade incentives to encourage specific trade activities .

motivated by commercial , political , and security interests at times , the u.s. congress has created multiple unilateral trade preference programs that promote developing - country exports , but are often structured so as to limit the negative economic effects on u.s. producers and workers .

over time , bilateral , regional , and multilateral trade agreements have come to eclipse the importance of many preference arrangements , a trend that a review of these developments will show has been particularly visible in the caribbean basin .

to promote diversified , export - led growth in cbi countries , the u.s. congress has approved multiple trade preference programs over the past three decades ( production sharing , gsp , cbera , cbi ii , cbtpa , hope i , hope ii , and help act ) , as well as two free trade agreements ( nafta and cafta - dr ) .

each one amended trade rules and tariff preferences in ways designed to increase u.s. imports from various cbi countries , although some had more far reaching effects than others .

legislative action in the 110 th and 111 th congresses focused on enhancing haiti trade preferences and extending the cbtpa , but the parallel trend in the region has been toward the implementation of free trade agreements , particularly the cafta - dr .

the implementation of cafta - dr has had an overarching direct effect on the use of the unilateral preferences , particularly those offered under the cbtpa , the main benefit of which was duty - free treatment for select apparel goods .

when the major apparel producers ( central american countries and the dominican republic ) began exporting under the cafta - dr , they were no longer eligible as beneficiary countries under cbera or cbtpa , which registered in the import data as a large decline in imports under cbtpa .

this change points to a critical analytical point .

in disaggregating the u.s. import data , it is important to distinguish between two types of trends in the tariff preference programs , those that allow new categories of goods to enter the united states duty free , counted as increased trade because of trade preferences , and those that switch goods from one preference category to another ( eg , from gsp to cbtpa , cbtpa to cafta - dr , or cbtpa to hope ii ) , accounting for little net increase in imports from trade preferences , as discussed in more detail below .

since first implemented in 1984 , caribbean tariff preference programs were intended to assist beneficiary countries with enhancing their export - led development strategies .

they have combined u.s. trade preferences with their own proximity - driven niching strategies in a way that has helped them maintain a relatively small , but important market share in the united states .

it is a strategy that may have led to selective export and economic growth , but the effects may have run their course given the proliferation of large low - cost asian producers and increasing substitution by the united states of the reciprocal fta for unilateral preferential trade arrangements in the region .

in addition , many economists are skeptical about the efficacy of trade preferences as a development strategy , pointing to two areas in particular: design and administration of the preference programs and weak trade effects .

structural design flaws can limit the effectiveness of unilateral trade preferences .

trade preferences are also paternalistic in nature ; designed by developed countries to give "generous" one - way benefits to developing countries , but given the unilateral concessions required , the preference programs can be self - limiting , often for political reasons .

for example , critics argue that unilateral agreements are non - binding , often subject to renewal , and can be denied or suspended ( and have been ) on a product or country basis , which can hinder investors from committing more fully to developing economies ; eligibility criteria are based on foreign policy and political goals of the developed country , often unrelated to enhancing trade performance , so they are not a costless proposition for recipients ; and , program details are subject to domestic economic pressures that typically seek to exclude import - sensitive articles , which can cause the developed country to apply higher than average tariffs on these goods for non - beneficiary countries .

the cbi programs are not immune to these criticisms .

beneficiary countries have no formal say in the design of the tariff preferences , must lobby the u.s. congress and executive branch to make a case for their continuance , must comply with numerous foreign policy and political requirements to maintain eligibility , and have been restricted from exporting key products under preference programs .

results of the cbera program disappointed some because of the many structural limitations .

even with cbi ii making the program permanent and the cbtpa adding many new products to the list of eligible exports , including textile and apparel articles , success has not been overwhelming .

critics also fault preferences for their limited trade effects and the distortions they can introduce into the economies of recipient countries and the global trading system .

u.s. tariff preferences offered to the caribbean countries often replaced tariff with nontariff barriers , usually quantitative restrictions , as is the case for some goods entering under the cbera , cbtpa , and hope act ; have complicated rules of origin that are costly , cumbersome to implement , and frequently inhibit use of preferences ; require use of relatively higher - cost u.s. inputs , offsetting the cost competitiveness benefit of the tariff concessions ; induce trade growth explicitly through trade diversion ( caribbean apparel instead of asian or central american ) and potentially in industries where there is no inherent comparative advantage ; can bias a country's investment pattern toward particular industries , limiting incentives to diversify their economies , and also prolonging other market - based adjustments ; can induce recipients to limit export promotion and increase barriers to entry in industries facing cbi quantitative restrictions , and ; can act as a disincentive to support multilateral trade negotiations , given they can erode regional preference margins .

for over 40 years , the united states has provided some type of trade preference program to the countries of the caribbean basin .

given changing trade relations and policies in the united states and the caribbean , the time for evaluating these programs is ripe .

in particular , with the largest of the ( now former ) cbi economies implementing cafta - dr , an important question for u.s. trade policy is what to do with the smaller , and most vulnerable , caribbean nations that still rely on the cbi preferences to some extent .

options include ( 1 ) allow trade preferences to expire ; ( 2 ) renew them as is or with more generous , targeted , and flexible rules ; or ( 3 ) replace them with an fta .

a number of issues and circumstances have converged that point up challenges for u.s. trade policy in the caribbean region .

among these is the renewed , but as yet unchanged , caribbean basin trade partnership act , the benefits of which have been eroded over time by multilateral trade liberalization and new u.s. reciprocal bilateral ftas .

further , these programs are little used by the smaller beneficiary countries , which also have expressed a reluctance to move toward an fta with the united states without some guarantee of a "development component" to the agreement , despite the promise of permanent market access and increased investment that an fta holds out .

the caribbean countries , although having restructured their trade relationships with europe , appear content to take a cautious and leisurely path toward any new trade arrangement with the united states .

for u.s. trade policy , these circumstances present a formidable challenge to any further thoughts of expanding hemispheric integration and raise a broad question as to what future congressional interest might be for reforming these programs .

in fact , broader integration may be difficult to achieve and still meet the needs of very small developing countries .

their economies are highly vulnerable to the vicissitudes of global economic trends and weather patterns , and may require new and creative solutions to make the adjustment to full reciprocal free trade .

u.s. trade policy toward the region has also had a historical focus on development and regional security issues in addition to trade liberalization , suggesting that trade liberalization likely will not be the only factor to determine policy .

in the context of deciding whether to continue with trade preferences in similar or altered form , or opt for an fta , agreement has yet to materialize .

the existing caribbean preference programs are also part of a larger congressional debate over preference reform that includes the gsp , atpa , and agoa .

congress has signaled that it may be time to consider a wholesale review of the design , scope , and purpose of these programs , particularly in light of evolving trade agreements and relationships worldwide .

although similar in some respects , the different trade preference programs have overlapping constituents and also include countries with dissimilar economic features .

these differences challenge designs to harmonize and equalize the many unilateral trade preference programs .

a .

beneficiary countries designated under the cbera: b .

beneficiary countries designated under the cbtpa: c. caribbean community ( caricom ) countries .

