on december 17 , 2008 , cuban president raúl castro offered to exchange some imprisoned cuban political dissidents for five cubans imprisoned for espionage in the united states since 2001 .

the state department responded that the jailed dissidents in cuba should be released immediately without any conditions .

on december 10 , 2008 , the house appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill , h.r .

7323 , with several provisions that would have eased restrictions on the sale of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba and on family travel to cuba .

a draft version of the bill had been approved by the committee on june 25 , 2008 .

no final action was taken on the measure .

on november 26 , 2008 , cuban president raúl castro stated in an interview that he would be willing to meet with president - elect barack obama , and suggested the u.s .

naval base at guantanamo bay , cuba , as a location .

on november 24 , 2008 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued a second report examining usaid's cuba democracy program .

while gao lauded the efforts taken by usaid to improve oversight and address problems with the program , it also maintained that usaid needed to hire more staff to implement monitoring activities , and that it needed to periodically assess the program's efforts regarding grantees' adherence to internal controls , procurement practices , and compliance with laws and regulations .

 ( u.s. gao , foreign assistance: continued efforts needed to strengthen usaid's oversight of u.s. democracy assistance for cuba , gao - 09-165 , november 2008. ) .

on november 8 , 2008 , hurricane paloma struck cuba devastating the town of santa cruz el sur .

raúl castro stated that overall damages from the series of hurricanes and tropical storm since august amounted to some $10 billion .

on september 18 , 2008 , the house foreign affairs committee's subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held a hearing on u.s. restrictions on cuban - american travel to cuba .

from mid - august through september 10 , 2008 , four major storms ( hurricanes gustav and ike , and tropical storms hanna and fay ) caused widespread damage throughout cuba .

the two hurricanes caused most of the damage .

overall , just 7 people were killed , but the hurricanes severely affected the housing sector ( with almost 500,000 homes damaged and over 63,000 destroyed ) , the power grid , and the agricultural sector .

the united states provided assistance through non - governmental organizations .

u.s. offers of direct assistance to the cuban government were rejected .

instead , cuba called on the united states to allow u.s. companies to sell relief supplies to cuba .

in the aftermath of the hurricanes , several legislative initiatives were introduced – s.amdt .

5581 ( dodd ) to s. 3001 , h.r .

6913 ( flake ) , and h.r .

6962 ( delahunt ) – that would have temporarily eased u.s. embargo restrictions in several areas .

no action was taken on these initiatives .

 ( see " aftermath of 2008 hurricanes and tropical storms " below. ) .

on july 21 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 agriculture appropriations bill , s. 3289 ( s.rept .

110 - 426 ) , with a provision ( section 737 ) that would have eased restrictions on travel to cuba for the sale of agricultural and medical goods .

no action was taken on the measure .

on july 18 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , s. 3288 ( s.rept .

110 - 425 ) .

among its cuba provisions , the bill would have provided $1 million for preliminary work by the department of state , or other entity designated by the secretary of state , to establish cooperation with appropriate cuban agencies on counternarcotics matters .

the report to the bill recommended full funding for the administration's requests of $34.392 million for cuba broadcasting and $20 million in esf for cuba democracy programs , and called for the state department and usaid to conduct regular evaluations to ensure the cost effectiveness of the programs .

no action was taken on the measure .

on july 14 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill , s. 3260 ( s.rept .

110 - 417 ) , which included provisions that would have eased restrictions on payment terms for the sale of agricultural goods to cuba ( section 618 ) , travel relating to the sale of commercial and agricultural goods ( section 619 ) , and family travel ( section 620 ) .

no action was taken on the measure .

on july 11 , 2008 , the gao issued a report that criticized the practices of the international broadcasting bureau and the office of cuba broadcasting for their practices in awarding noncompetitive contracts in december 2006 to two private u.s. commercial stations to transit radio and tv martí .

according to gao , the approach for awarding the two contracts did not reflect sound business practices .

 ( u.s. government accountability office , "broadcasting to cuba , weaknesses in contracting practices reduced visibility into selected award decisions," gao - 08-764 , july 2008. ) .

on june 25 , 2008 , the house appropriations committee approved a draft version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill that included provisions that would have eased restrictions on family travel and u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

the house appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government had approved the measure on june 17 .

no action was taken on the measure .

 ( also see " restrictions on travel and remittances " and " agricultural exports and sanctions " below. ) .

on june 19 , 2008 , the european union approved the permanent lifting of diplomatic sanctions that it had imposed on cuba in 2003 .

the action was largely symbolic , because the sanctions had been temporarily suspended since 2005 .

cuban foreign minister felipe perez roque welcomed the eu's decision , which will be reviewed in 12 months .

u.s. state department officials looked positively at the benchmarks that will be used in the eu's dialogue with cuba , including cuba's release of political prisoners , implementation of the international covenant on civil and political rights , access to the internet , and allowing all eu delegations to meet with members of the opposition as well as the cuban government .

on june 13 , 2008 , cuba's ministry of foreign affairs announced that it deported a u.s. citizen wanted in the united states for sexual exploitation of a minor and for child pornography who had entered cuba from mexico in april .

on june 4 , 2008 , the state department issued its 2008 trafficking in persons report , with cuba again placed on the tier 3 list of countries that do not cooperate in the fight against trafficking .

according to the report , cuba is principally a source country for women and children trafficked within the country for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation .

cuba rejected the report as distorting cuban reality in an attempt to justify the u.s. embargo .

although countries on the list are subject to u.s. foreign aid sanctions , cuba is already ineligible for most u.s. assistance because of other aid sanctions .

on may 21 , 2008 , the senate passed s.res .

573 ( martinez ) by unanimous consent , which recognized cuba solidarity day and the struggle of the cuban people .

on the same day , president bush called for the cuban government to take steps to improve life for the cuban people , including opening up access to the internet .

he also announced that the united states would change u.s. regulations to allow americans to send mobile phones to family members in cuba .

on may 19 , 2008 , cuba accused the chief of the u.s .

interests section in havana , michael parmly , of carrying mail to dissidents that contained private funds from santiago alvarez , a cuban american currently jailed in miami on weapons charges .

in april 2008 , the cuban government announced that it would be revamping the state's wage system by removing the limit that a state worker can earn .

 ( see " economic changes under raúl " below. ) .

in march 2008 , the cuban government announced the lifting of restrictions on the sale of such electronic consumer products as microwaves , dvd and video players , and on the sale and use of cell phones .

it also began rolling out a reform of the agricultural sector focusing on decentralization in order to boost production .

the government also lifted a ban on cubans staying at tourist hotels .

on march 11 , 2008 , the state department issued its 2007 report on human rights practices in cuba , maintaining that the cuban "government continued to deny its citizens their basic human rights and committed numerous , serious abuses. .

see the full report at http: / / www.state.gov / g / drl / rls / hrrpt / 2007 / 100635.htm .

on march 7 , 2008 , president bush asserted that in order to improve u.s. - cuban relations , cuba "must release all political prisoners...have respect for human rights in word and deed , and pave the way for free and fair elections. .

on march 5 , 2008 , the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere held a hearing on cuba in the aftermath of fidel castro permanently stepping down from power .

on february 24 , 2008 , cuba's legislature , the national assembly of people's power , selected raúl castro as president of the council of state , a position that makes him cuba's head of state and government .

in a surprise move , the assembly also selected josé ramón machado venture as the council's first vice - president , making him the official successor to raúl according to the cuban constitution .

a physician by training , machado is 77 years old and part of the older generation of so - called históricos , part of the 1959 cuban revolution .

on february 19 , 2008 , fidel castro announced that he would not accept the position of president of the council of state when cuba's legislature meets on february 24 to select from among its ranks the members of the 31-member council of state .

on february 16 , 2008 , cuba released four political prisoners — union activist pedro pablo alvarez ramos , human rights activist omar pernet hernández , and journalists jose gabriel ramón castillo and alejandro gonzález raga — but sent them into forced exile to spain .

the four had been imprisoned since march 2003 .

on january 20 , 2008 , cuba elected representatives to its 614-member legislature , the national assembly of people's power , and fidel castro was once again among those elected .

as in the past , voters were offered only a single slate of candidates .

on december 11 , 2007 , the senate finance committee held a hearing on the issue of "promoting american agricultural and medical exports to cuba" and a related bill , s. 1673 ( baucus ) .

on december 10 , 2007 , cuba announced that it would sign two international human rights agreements , the international covenant on civil and political rights and the international covenant on economic , social , and cultural rights .

amnesty international welcomed the news , but noted that cuba's action would only be meaningful if the government changed its policies of intimidation and arrests of political dissidents .

on december 4 , 2007 , cuban security officials raided a catholic church hall in the city of santiago , using tear gas and force to detain 18 dissidents who had been protesting the recent arrests of youths in havana .

church officials said that cuban government officials subsequently apologized for invading church property , and had released the dissidents .

on november 30 , 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued a report on u.s. enforcement of the cuba embargo .

the report recommended: 1 ) that the secretary of homeland security direct customs and border protection ( cbp ) to re - evaluate whether the level of resources dedicated to inspecting passengers from cuba at the miami international airport effectively balances its responsibility for enforcing the cuba embargo with its responsibilities for keeping terrorists , criminals , and inadmissible aliens out of the country ; and 2 ) that the treasury department direct the office of foreign assets control to reassess the allocation of resources for investigating and penalizing violations of the cuba embargo with respect to the 20 other sanctions programs it administers .

 ( see the full report available at [http: / / www.gao.gov / docsearch / abstract.php ? rptno=gao - 08-80] ) on november 15 , 2007 , the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight of the committee on foreign affairs held a hearing focusing on the case of luis posada carriles , alleged to be involved in the 1976 bombing of a cuban airliner that killed 73 people .

on november 5 , 2007 , president bush awarded cuban dissident dr. oscar elias biscet with the presidential medal of freedom .

biscet , who has spent most of the last eight years in jail , was sentenced in 2003 to 25 years in prison .

on october 24 , 2007 , president bush made a policy speech that reflected a continuation of the sanctions - based approach toward cuba .

the president also proposed three new initiatives to provide support to the cuban people: allowing licensed groups to provide computers and internet access to the cuban people ; inviting cuban youths whose families are oppressed to participate in the partnership for latin american youth scholarship programs ; and developing an international multi - billion dollar freedom fund for cuba to help the cuban people rebuild their economy and make the transition to democracy .

in a september 25 , 2007 , speech before the u.n. general assembly , president bush stated that "the long rule of a cruel dictator is nearing its end" in cuba , and called on the united nations to insist on free speech , free assembly , and free elections as cuba "enters a period of transition. .

in a september 17 , 2007 , speech on cuba , u.s. commerce secretary carlos gutierrez stated , "the administration's position has been unfailingly clear and consistent .

unless the regime changes , our policy will not .

we are prepared to respond to genuine democratic change in cuba. .

on september 6 , 2007 , during consideration of the fy2008 foreign aid appropriations measure , h.r .

2764 , the senate approved s.amdt .

2694 ( martinez ) by voice vote that increased funding for cuba democracy programs by $30.7 million to fully fund the administration's request of $45.7 million .

the senate appropriations committee report to the bill ( s.rept .

110-128 ) would have provided $15 million in esf for cuba democracy programs .

on july 27 , 2007 , the house rejected , by a vote of 182-245 , h.amdt .

707 ( rangel ) to h.r .

2419 , the 2007 farm bill .

the amendment would have eased restrictions on the commercial sale of agricultural products to cuba by clarifying the meaning of "payment of cash in advance" for the sale of such products ; authorizing direct transfers between u.s. and cuban financial institutions for such sales ; and authorizing the issuance of u.s. visas for cubans to conduct activities , including phytosanitary inspections , related to such sales .

on july 26 , 2007 , in a speech on cuba's revolutionary anniversary , raúl castro acknowledged that cuban salaries were insufficient to satisfy needs , and maintained that structural changes were necessary in order to increase efficiency and production .

he also reiterated an offer to engage in dialogue with the united states , and strongly criticized u.s. trade and economic sanctions on cuba .

on july 19 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee approved its version of the fy2008 agriculture appropriations bill , which included a provision , adopted in committee by voice vote , that would authorize general licenses for travel to cuba for the sale and marketing of u.s. agricultural and medical goods .

s. 1859 ( kohl ) was subsequently introduced and reported by the senate appropriations committee on july 24 , 2007 ( s.rept .

110-134 ) , with the provision in section 741 of the bill .

on july 19 , 2007 , the u.s. international trade commission issued a report , requested by the senate committee on finance , maintaining that the u.s. share of cuba's agricultural , fish , and forest imports would rise from one - third to between one - half and two - thirds if trade restrictions were lifted .

according to the report , lifting travel restrictions would result in travel by u.s. citizens to cuba rising to between 550,000 and 1 million from an estimate of 171,000 in 2005 .

see the full report available at [http: / / www.usitc.gov / ext_relations / news_release / 2007 / er0719ee1.htm] on july 12 , 2007 , the subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight of the house committee on foreign affairs held a hearing on human rights and u.s. foreign policy that examined the cases of azerbaijan , cuba , and egypt .

on july 3 , 2007 , independent journalist armando betancourt reina was sentenced to 15 months in prison .

on june 28 , 2007 , the house passed h.r .

2829 , the fy2008 financial services and general government appropriations act , which contains a provision in section 903 that would prevent treasury department funds from being used to implement a february 2005 tightening of policy requiring the payment of cash in advance prior to the shipment of u.s. agricultural goods to cuba .

the house adopted the provision when it approved h.amdt .

467 ( moran , kansas ) by voice vote .

on june 26 , 2007 , the senate approved by unanimous consent s. 1612 , a measure that would amend the international emergency economic powers act to increase the potential civil and criminal penalties against violators of u.s. sanctions law .

civil penalties would increase to not exceed the greater of $250,000 ( from $50,000 ) or an amount that is twice the amount of the transaction , while criminal penalties would increased to not more than $1 million and / or 20 years imprisonment .

on june 22 , 2007 , the house passed the fy2008 state , foreign operations , and related agencies appropriations act , h.r .

2764 , with several cuba provisions .

it would fully fund the administration's request for $45.7 million in economic support funds ( esf ) for cuba democracy programs .

 ( the house committee - reported bill would have provided $9 million in esf for such programs , but during june 21 , 2007 floor consideration , the house approved h.amdt .

351 ( diaz - balart ) by a vote of 254-170 that increased funding for economic support funds ( esf ) by $36.7 million in order to fully fund the administration's request. ) .

the house - passed bill , in section 607 , would prohibit direct funding for cuba , and , in section 673 , would specifically prohibit international narcotics control and law enforcement assistance to the cuban government .

the report to the bill , h.rept .

110-197 , recommended $33.681 million for cuba broadcasting , $5.019 million below the administration's request of $38.7 million and identical to the amount provided for fy2007 .

on may 9 , 2007 a federal judge in texas dismissed immigration fraud charges against luis posada carriles , alleged to be involved in the 1976 bombing of a cuban airliner and 1997 bombings in cuba .

the judge maintained that the u.s. government mistranslated testimony from posada and manipulated evidence .

posada had been released from jail in new mexico on april 19 , 2007 , and allowed to return to miami under house arrest awaiting trial .

on may 3 , 2007 , cuban authorities prevented a hijacking from havana to the united states by two military recruits who killed an army lieutenant colonel that they had taken hostage .

cuba denounced u.s. immigration policy for encouraging such violent action .

on april 25 , 2007 , cuba expelled u.s. fugitive joseph adjmi to the united states .

adjmi had been convicted of mail fraud in the 1960s , but disappeared before beginning his 10-year sentence .

on april 24 , 2007 , the cuban government released six dissidents , arrested in 2005 , after serving most or all of their sentences .

on april 23 , 2007 , one of cuba's longest serving political prisoners , jorge luis garcía pérez , was released from prison after 17 years .

on april 16 , 2007 , many of cuba's leading dissident groups signed a statement declaring that they were united in their struggle for a peaceful transition toward democracy .

in april 2007 , the cuban government conducted secret trials sentencing human rights activist rolando jiménez posada to 12 years in jail , and independent journalist oscar sánchez madan to four years .

on february 8 , 2007 , cuba extradited alleged colombia drug cartel leader luis hernando gómez bustamante to colombia .

gómez bustamante was ultimately extradited to the united states in july 2007 to face on drug trafficking charges .

in february 2007 , the cuban government released three political prisoners that had been held since july 2005 before a planned protest at the french embassy: prominent dissident rené gómez manzano was released february 8 , while dissidents julio césar lópez and raúl martinez were released on february 3 .

in january 11 , 2007 testimony before the senate select committee on intelligence , defense intelligence agency director lt. gen. michael maples stated that "raúl castro is firmly in control as cuba's acting president and will likely maintain power and stability after fidel castro dies , at least for the short - term. .

on february 24 , 2008 , cuba's legislature selected raúl castro as president of the 31-member council of state , a position that officially made him cuba's head of government and state .

most observers expected this since he already had been heading the cuban government on a provisional basis since july 2006 when his brother fidel castro , cuba's long - ruling communist leader , stepped down as president because of poor health .

for many years , raúl , as first vice president of the council of state and the council of ministers , had been the officially designated successor and was slated to become chief of state with fidel's departure .

raúl also had served as minister of the revolutionary armed forces ( far ) since the beginning of the cuban revolution .

when fidel stepped down from power in late july 2006 because of poor health , he signed a proclamation that ceded political power to raúl on a provisional basis , including the positions of first secretary of the cuban communist party ( pcc ) , commander in chief of the revolutionary armed forces ( far ) , and president of the council of state .

despite the change in government in february 2008 , fidel still holds the official title of first secretary of the pcc .

in late april 2008 , raúl announced that the pcc's sixth congress would be held at the end of 2009 ( the last was held in 1997 ) .

some observers speculate that fidel castro could officially be replaced as the head of the party at that time , and it is likely that some of the pcc's 25-member political bureau ( politburo ) will be replaced .

while it was not a surprise to observers for raúl to succeed his brother fidel as head of government , the selection of josé ramón machado ventura as the council of state's first vice president was a surprise .

a physician by training , machado is 77 years old , and is part of the older generation of so - called históricos of the 1959 cuban revolution .

he has been described as a hard - line communist party ideologue , and reportedly has been a close friend and confident of raul's for many years .

machado's position is significant because it makes him the official successor to raúl , according to the cuban constitution .

many observers had expected that carlos lage , one of five other vice presidents on the council of state , would have been chosen as first vice president .

he was responsible for cuba's economic reforms in the 1990s , and at 56 years of age , represents a younger generation of cuban leaders .

while not rising to first vice president , lage nevertheless retained his position as a vice president on the council of state , and also will continue to serve as the council's secretary .

several key military officers and confidants of raúl also became members of the council , increasing the role of the military in the government .

general julio casas regueiro , 72 years of age , who already was on the council , became one of its five vice presidents .

most significantly , casas , who had been first vice minister in the far , was selected by raúl as the country's new minister of the far , officially replacing raúl in that position .

casas also is chairman of gaesa ( grupo de administracion empresarial , s.a. ) , the cuban military's holding company for its extensive businesses .

two other military appointments to the council were gen. alvaro lópez miera , the army's chief of staff , and gen. leopoldo cintra frías , who commanded the western army , one of cuba's three military regions .

since fidel stepped down from power in 2006 , cuba's political succession from fidel to raúl castro has been characterized by a remarkable degree of stability .

although initially there were not any significant economic changes under raúl , there were signs that changes could be coming .

in july 2007 speech , raúl maintained that structural changes were needed in the cuban economy in order to increase efficiency and production .

in his first speech as president in february 2008 , raúl promised to make the government smaller and more efficient , to review the potential reevaluation of the cuban peso , and to eliminate excessive bans and regulations that curb productivity .

since march 2008 , the government has implemented a number of economic changes that from the outside might not seem significant , but are significant policy changes for a government that has heretofore followed a centralized communist economic model .

 ( see " economic changes under raúl " below. ) .

while additional economic changes under raúl castro are likely , few expect there will be any change to the government's tight control over the political system , which is backed up by a strong security apparatus .

some observers point to the reduced number of political prisoners , from 283 at the end of 2006 to around 219 in mid - 2008 as evidence of a lessening of repression , but dissidents maintain that the overall situation has not improved .

some observers contend that as the new government of raúl castro becomes more confident of ensuring social stability and does not feel threatened , it could move to soften its hard repression , but for now the government is continuing its harsh treatment of the opposition .

the selection of josé ramón machado as first vice president also appears to be a clear indication that the cuban government has no intention of easing tight control over the political system .

for background , also see crs report rs22742 , cuba ' s political succession: from fidel to raul castro , and crs report rl33622 , cuba ' s future political scenarios and u.s. policy approaches , written in the aftermath of fidel castro's stepping down because of poor health in 2006 .

with the cutoff of assistance from the former soviet union , cuba experienced severe economic deterioration from 1989-1993 , with estimates of economic decline ranging from 35-50% , but there has been considerable improvement since 1994 .

from 1994-2000 , as cuba moved forward with some limited market - oriented economic reforms , economic growth averaged 3.7% annually .

economic growth was strong in the 2005-2007 period , registering an impressive 11.2% in 2005 ( despite widespread damage caused by hurricanes dennis and wilma ) , 12.1% in 2006 , and 7.3% in 2007 .

the economy benefitted from the growth of the tourism , nickel , and oil sectors , and support from venezuela and china in terms of investment commitments and credit lines .

cuba benefits from a preferential oil agreement with venezuela , which provides cuba with more than 90,000 barrels of oil a day .

some observers maintain that venezuela's oil subsidies amounted to more than $3 billion a year in 2006 .

venezuela also helped cuba upgrade an oil refinery in cienfuegos , which was inaugurated in 2007 .

in 2008 , economic growth slowed to an estimated 4.5% .

this was prompted by several problems , including the declining price of nickel , which accounts for a major share of cuba's exports , the rising cost of food imports , and the devastation wrought by hurricanes gustav and ike in 2008 , particularly in the agricultural sectors .

over the years , cuba has expressed pride for the nation's accomplishments in health and education .

in 2005 , according to the u.n. development program's 2007 / 2008 human development report , life expectancy in cuba was 77.7 years , adult literacy was estimated at almost 100% , and the infant mortality rate was 6 per 1,000 live births , the lowest rate in latin america .

for 2006 and 2007 , cuba has boasted an infant mortality rate of 5.3 .

when cuba's economic slide began in 1989 , the government showed little willingness to adopt any significant market - oriented economic reforms , but in 1993 , faced with unprecedented economic decline , cuba began to change policy direction .

beginning in 1993 , cubans were allowed to own and use u.s. dollars and to shop at dollar - only shops previously limited to tourists and diplomats .

self - employment was authorized in more than 100 occupations in 1993 , most in the service sector , and by 1996 that figure had grown to more than 150 occupations .

also in 1993 , the government divided large state farms into smaller , more autonomous , agricultural cooperatives ( basic units of cooperative production , ubpcs ) .

it opened agricultural markets in 1994 , where farmers could sell part of their produce on the open market , and it also permitted artisan markets for the sale of handicrafts .

in 1995 , the government allowed private food catering , including home restaurants ( paladares ) , in effect legalizing activities that were already taking place ) , and approved a new foreign investment law that allows fully owned investments by foreigners in all sectors of the economy with the exception of defense , health , and education .

in 1996 , it authorized the establishment of free trade zones with tariff reductions typical of such zones .

in 1997 , the government enacted legislation to reform the banking system and established a new central bank ( bcc ) to operate as an autonomous and independent entity .

after cuba began to recover from its economic decline , the government began to backtrack on some of its reform efforts .

regulations and new taxes made it extremely difficult for many of the nation's self - employed .

some home restaurants were forced to close because of the regulations .

in 2004 , the cuban government limited the use of dollars by state companies for any services or products not considered part of their core business .

some analysts viewed the measure as an effort to turn back the clock on economic reform measures .

also in 2004 , fidel castro announced that u.s. dollars no longer would be used in entities that currently accept dollars ( such as stores , restaurants , and hotels ) .

instead , dollars had to be exchanged for "convertible pesos," with a 10% surcharge for the exchange .

dollar bank accounts are still allowed , but cubans are not able to deposit new dollars into the accounts .

beginning in april 2005 , convertible pesos were no longer on par with the u.s. dollar , but instead were linked to a basket of foreign currencies .

this reduced the value of dollar remittances sent to cuba and provides more hard currency to the cuban government .

in the early 1960s , u.s. - cuban relations deteriorated sharply when fidel castro began to build a repressive communist dictatorship and moved his country toward close relations with the soviet union .

the often tense and hostile nature of the u.s. - cuban relationship is illustrated by such events and actions as u.s. covert operations to overthrow the castro government culminating in the ill - fated april 1961 bay of pigs invasion ; the october 1962 missile crisis in which the united states confronted the soviet union over its attempt to place offensive nuclear missiles in cuba ; cuban support for guerrilla insurgencies and military support for revolutionary governments in africa and the western hemisphere ; the 1980 exodus of around 125,000 cubans to the united states in the so - called mariel boatlift ; the 1994 exodus of more than 30,000 cubans who were interdicted and housed at u.s. facilities in guantanamo and panama ; and the february 1996 shootdown by cuban fighter jets of two u.s. civilian planes operated by the cuban american group , brothers to the rescue , which resulted in the death of four u.s. crew members .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely of isolating the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including an embargo on trade and financial transactions .

the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) , first issued by the treasury department in july 1963 , lay out a comprehensive set of economic sanctions against cuba , including a prohibition on most financial transactions with cuba and a freeze of cuban government assets in the united states .

the cacr have been amended many times over the years to reflect changes in policy , and remain in force today .

these sanctions were made stronger with the cuban democracy act ( cda ) of 1992 ( p.l .

102 - 484 , title xvii ) and with the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l .

104 - 114 ) , the latter often referred to as the helms / burton legislation .

the cda prohibits u.s. subsidiaries from engaging in trade with cuba and prohibits entry into the united states for any vessel to load or unload freight if it has engaged in trade with cuba within the last 180 days .

the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act , enacted in the aftermath of cuba's shooting down of two u.s. civilian planes in february 1996 , combines a variety of measures to increase pressure on cuba and provides for a plan to assist cuba once it begins the transition to democracy .

most significantly , the law codified the cuban embargo , including all restrictions under the cacr .

this provision is especially noteworthy because of its long - lasting effect on u.s. policy options toward cuba .

the executive branch is circumscribed in lifting or substantially loosening the economic embargo without congressional concurrence until certain democratic conditions are met .

another significant sanction in the law is a provision in title iii that holds any person or government that traffics in u.s. property confiscated by the cuban government liable for monetary damages in u.s. federal court .

acting under provisions of the law , however , both president clinton and president bush have suspended the implementation of title iii at six - month intervals .

in addition to sanctions , another component of u.s. policy , a so - called second track , consists of support measures for the cuban people .

this includes u.s. private humanitarian donations , medical exports to cuba under the terms of the cuban democracy act of 1992 , u.s. government support for democracy - building efforts , and u.s. - sponsored radio and television broadcasting to cuba .

in addition , the 106 th congress approved the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 ( p.l .

106 - 387 , title ix ) that allows for agricultural exports to cuba , albeit with restrictions on financing such exports .

the clinton administration made several changes to u.s. policy in the aftermath of the pope's january 1998 visit to cuba , which were intended to bolster u.s. support for the cuban people .

these included the resumption of direct flights to cuba ( which had been curtailed after the february 1996 shootdown of two u.s. civilian planes ) , the resumption of cash remittances by u.s. nationals and residents for the support of close relatives in cuba ( which had been curtailed in august 1994 in response to the migration crisis with cuba ) , and the streamlining of procedures for the commercial sale of medicines and medical supplies and equipment to cuba .

in january 1999 , president clinton announced several additional measures to support the cuban people .

these included a broadening of cash remittances to cuba , so that all u.s. residents ( not just those with close relatives in cuba ) could send remittances to cuba ; an expansion of direct passenger charter flights to cuba from additional u.s. cities other than miami ( direct flights later in the year began from los angeles and new york ) ; and an expansion of people - to - people contact by loosening restrictions on travel to cuba for certain categories of travelers , such as professional researchers and those involved in a wide range of educational , religious , and sports activities .

the following listing consists of enacted appropriations measures with cuba - related provisions , fy2007 appropriations bills with cuba provisions that were not completed by the end of the 109 th congress , and human rights resolutions that were approved .

for a complete listing of legislative initiatives in the 109 th congress , see crs report rl32730 , cuba: issues for the 109th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31139 , cuba: u.s .

restrictions on travel and remittances , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22742 , cuba ' s political succession: from fidel to raul castro , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34523 , financial services and general government ( fsgg ) : fy2009 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22094 , lawsuits against state supporters of terrorism: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31258 , suits against terrorist states by victims of terrorism , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32014 , wto dispute settlement: status of u.s .

compliance in pending cases , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20450 , the case of elian gonzalez: legal basics , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl33622 , cuba ' s future political scenarios and u.s. policy approaches , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32251 , cuba and the state sponsors of terrorism list , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32730 , cuba: issues for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31740 , cuba: issues for the 108 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30806 , cuba: issues for the 107 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30628 , cuba: issues and legislation in the 106 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30386 , cuba - u.s. relations: chronology of key events 1959-1999 , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs20468 , cuban migration policy and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33499 , exempting food and agriculture products from u.s. economic sanctions: status and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22094 , lawsuits against state supporters of terrorism: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32826 , the medical device approval process and related legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 94-636 , radio and television broadcasting to cuba: background and issues through 1994 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs21764 , restricting trademark rights of cubans: wto decision and congressional response , by [author name scrubbed] .

