avian influenza ( ai ) viruses exist throughout the world in many different strains .

avian flu is an influenza a virus that infects both wild and domestic birds , and certain strains have been known to infect both animals and humans .

this report discusses avian flu broadly as it affects agriculture and wild birds , especially with reference to highly pathogenic h5n1 avian flu .

avian flu assumes two forms in birds: a low pathogenicity ( lpai ) form that causes mild illness , and a highly pathogenic ( hpai ) form that is extremely contagious , causes severe illness , and frequently has high rates of mortality .

pathogenicity is determined using two methods: genetic sequencing , and inoculating healthy chicks and monitoring their mortality .

mortality under highly pathogenic avian flu ranges from 30% - 100% , and is usually less than 20% for low pathogenicity .

both forms are possible in many strains , designated by the letters h and n. the strain designations refer to surface proteins on the virus called hemagglutinin ( h ) and neuraminidase ( n ) .

each ai virus has one hemagglutinin and one neuraminidase protein .

sixteen h subtypes and nine n subtypes have been identified , and are designated by numbers .

they can occur in any combination , resulting in 144 possible strains ( for example , h1n1 , h7n2 , etc. ) .

most strains are low pathogenicity , but some strains ( particularly h5 and h7 ) can mutate from lpai into hpai during the course of an outbreak .

globally during the past 20 years , h5 or h7 lpai viruses have mutated into hpai on five occasions .

thus , low pathogenicity outbreaks in domestic poultry are treated aggressively .

low pathogenicity outbreaks in poultry are not uncommon , since lpai is entrenched in wild birds .

the most recent cases in u.s. poultry occurred in 2004 , with low pathogenicity strains of h7n2 in delaware , maryland , and new jersey ; and low pathogenicity h2n2 in pennsylvania .

separately , an h5n2 strain was found in texas in 2004 and was classified genetically as highly pathogenic , although it did not manifest as such in terms of mortality .

other recent cases include low pathogenicity outbreaks of h7n2 in the northeast in 2003 , and in the mid - atlantic in 2002 .

only three highly pathogenic outbreaks have occurred in the united states in the past century ( 1924 , 1983 , and 2004 ) .

a strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza ( h5n1 ) has spread throughout asia since 2003 , and has subsequently moved into europe , the middle east , and africa .

it has infected mostly poultry and wild birds , but a limited number of humans have contracted the disease through close domestic poultry - to - human contact .

over 250 million poultry have died or been destroyed internationally .

in the united states , avian flu in poultry is controlled through prevention and eradication by individual farmers cooperating with industry associations and state and federal governments .

aphis is the lead federal agency .

internationally , fao has a joint response plan with the world health organization ( who ) for the current outbreak .

avian flu can affect the agricultural economy significantly .

because the extent of such an outbreak is highly uncertain , no quantitative economic estimates of an h5n1 outbreak in the united states are provided here .

usually , direct costs include culling birds and quarantining farms .

larger economic effects arise from international trade bans which affect farms outside the quarantine area .

the 1983-1984 outbreak of highly pathogenic avian flu in the united states caused the destruction of 17 million birds and cost $65 million .

in the small 2004 domestic outbreak , about 400,000 chickens were culled in the united states .

while this was less than 0.02% of u.s. broiler production , the effect on local regions and farms was much greater .

the potential economic impact of a highly pathogenic h5n1 outbreak in the u.s. likely could be many times larger .

in the current h5n1 outbreak , global consumer confidence is increasingly at stake despite official statements that normal cooking would kill any virus that might be present .

with strong consumer confidence , demand for healthy poultry may rise .

but weak consumer confidence could depress poultry prices ( globally or locally ) and raise demand for substitute meats such as beef or pork .

in a recent domestic survey , 46% of chicken eaters said they would stop eating chicken and another 25% said they would eat less chicken if avian flu entered the united states .

in 2006 , consumer demand for poultry dropped in europe and africa .

lower shipments to eastern europe and central asia depressed u.s. poultry prices in 2005 .

demand for feed such as corn and soybean meal is tied to poultry production .

poultry accounts for about one - third of world feed use .

so far , the global impact on feed has been limited due to relatively quick recovery of production where outbreaks were contained , since the production cycle is quite short ( about eight weeks ) .

the united states is the world's largest producer and exporter of poultry meat and the second - largest egg producer .

about 8.5 billion broilers are produced annually ( figure 2 ) , worth over $23.3 billion on the farm ( 22% of farm livestock sales , and 12% of total farm sales including crops ) .

broiler production accounts for about $15 billion , eggs $5 billion , and turkeys nearly $3 billion .

five states account for 60% of u.s. production: georgia ( 15% ) , arkansas ( 14% ) , alabama ( 13% ) , mississippi ( 9% ) , and north carolina ( 9% ) .

about 16% of u.s. poultry production is exported .

internationally , the ongoing h5n1 outbreak has affected small poultry farms and backyard farmers in particular , but also large - scale poultry farms , feed suppliers and poultry processors .

the effects have been particularly acute in certain asian countries where culling has been extensive or recurring .

in developing countries , poultry farming represents a significant source of income and wealth .

poultry also may be an important source of protein , causing nutritional problems if culling is extensive or prolonged .

many observers have called for greater assistance to developing countries for compensation programs to encourage early reporting of outbreaks , rapid containment of the disease , and reductions in trade in diseased animals .

since the recent outbreak of highly pathogenic h5n1 in asia , congress has had three hearings on avian flu in poultry .

the senate agriculture committee held the most recent hearing on avian flu in poultry on may 11 , 2006 .

it reviewed avian flu preparedness and the use of appropriated funds .

both the house and senate agriculture committees held more general hearings on avian influenza on november 16 and 17 , 2005 , respectively .

administration , industry , and academic witnesses reviewed prevention and control efforts .

funding for avian flu is scattered in a number of agencies .

for poultry , the primary agency is aphis , with some research funds allocated to the agricultural research service ( ars ) and the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) .

for wild birds , the primary agencies are aphis , plus the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the biological research division in the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , two interior agencies .

for fy2008 , the administration is requesting $82 million for avian flu: about $77 million for aphis and $5 million for agricultural research .

these are the same amounts that the administration requested for fy2007 .

within aphis , the administration requests $57 million for the hpai monitoring and surveillance program , and $17 million for the lpai disease management program ( each increase is about 50% from respective fy2007 estimates ) .

for fy2007 , usda generally is operating at fy2006 levels , with various adjustments , under the year - long continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-5 ) .

aphis received a $30 million increase ( +3.7% ) for all of its programs , largely because of concerns over avian flu , but the continuing resolution does not specify an avian flu allocation within aphis .

usda budget documents suggest about $37 million for a new hpai monitoring and surveillance program , and $11 million for the lpai disease management program .

for fy2006 , the regular appropriation to aphis for its lpai program was $13.8 million ( but with carryover , $28.3 million was available , with about $12 million for indemnities ; p.l .

109-97 , h.rept .

109-255 ) .

in addition , congress appropriated $91.4 million in emergency supplemental funds for usda as part of $3.8 billion for pandemic influenza ( division b , title ii , of p.l .

109-148 ) .

from the supplemental , aphis received $71.5 million for domestic surveillance , diagnosis , and vaccine stockpiles ; and for international technical assistance for surveillance , biosecurity , and control .

in fy2005 , congress appropriated$23.8 million to aphis for avian flu , with about half for the indemnity reserve .

in fy2004 , aphis received a $1 million appropriation .

usda also transferred $13.7 million in emergency funds during the 2004 outbreak .

for fws general operations , the administration proposed $7.4 million for hpai in fy2008 , the level congress provided to fws in fy2006 .

the program covers the study , monitoring , and early detection of hpai .

fws is to cooperate with other federal and non - federal agencies in studying the spread of the virus through wild birds .

attention has been focused on the north american species whose migratory patterns make them likely to come into contact with infected asian birds .

a special geographic focus is on alaska , the pacific flyway ( along the west coast ) , and pacific islands ( see figure 1 ) .

the house appropriations committee report in fy2007 also directed that the funds be used not only for monitoring and testing in alaska , but also for "vector control efforts in other areas," but did not elaborate on the efforts intended nor the geographic areas to be given additional emphasis .

the senate report did not discuss the program .

under the terrestrial and endangered resources sub - activity , usgs is conducting investigations related to hpai .

in cooperation with fws and other federal and state agencies , usgs began targeted surveillance for the early detection of hpai in wild birds in alaska in 2005 , and to date has collected over 45,000 detailed records from around the country for its database .

a steering committee was formed in 2006 to coordinate efforts and establish standard operating procedures for sampling and analysis .

for 2008 , the usgs will work with other partners to continue sampling birds for hpai and coordinate with other agencies to deal with avian influenza in north america .

the administration requested $36.8 million for fy2008 for terrestrial and endangered resources , up $5.3 million over fy2006 .

the agency did not provide a separate figure for hpai - related investigations within the sub - activity .

the house - passed bill and senate appropriations committee bill approved these increases .

