amidst controversy regarding u.s. treatment of enemy combatants and terrorist suspects detained in iraq , afghanistan , and other locations , congress approved additional guidelines concerning the treatment of persons in u.s. custody and control via the detainee treatment act ( dta ) , which was enacted pursuant to both the department of defense , emergency supplemental appropriations to address hurricanes in the gulf of mexico , and pandemic influenza act , 2006 ( p.l .

109 - 148 ) , and the national defense authorization act for fy2006 ( p.l .

109 - 163 ) .

among other things , the dta contains provisions that ( 1 ) require department of defense ( dod ) personnel to employ united states army field manual guidelines while interrogating detainees , and ( 2 ) prohibit the "cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment of persons under the detention , custody , or control of the united states government. .

these provisions , added to the defense appropriations and authorization bills via amendments introduced by senator john mccain , have popularly been referred to as the "mccain amendment. .

as subsequently modified , the dta also provides legal protections and assistance to u.s. personnel engaged in the authorized interrogation of a terrorist suspect .

the dta contains three provisions relevant to the interrogation of detainees , which are described in the following sections .

in the years following the enactment of the dta , the standards governing the interrogation and treatment of detainees have been further modified by executive , legislative , and judicial action .

most recently , president barack obama has issued an executive order which generally requires all u.s. agencies conducting interrogations of persons during armed conflicts to comply with army field manual requirements .

the following paragraphs discuss notable developments concerning standards for detainee treatment since the dta was enacted .

in the 110 th congress , several legislative proposals were introduced that were intended to limit the use of certain interrogation techniques against security detainees by members of the intelligence community .

one measure proposed in several pieces of legislation would have required the cia to use only those interrogation techniques that are authorized by under the army field manual .

as previously discussed , the field manual expressly bars several interrogation techniques , including waterboarding .

more broadly , the manual restricts the use of a number of other techniques ( though not necessarily because they are incompatible with dta requirements ) , including , for example , the use of "good cop , bad cop" interrogation tactics or the separation of detainees during interrogation without special approval .

president bush indicated that he would veto legislation requiring the cia to use only those interrogation techniques authorized under the army field manual .

in a statement released on november 16 , 2007 , the bush administration claimed that such legislation would "jeopardize the safety of the american people by undermining the cia's enhanced interrogation program , which has helped the united states capture senior al qaeda leaders and disrupt multiple attacks against the homeland. .

the white house also alleged that legislation requiring all security detainees to be treated in accordance with field manual provisions would not be "consistent with the president's obligation to take all lawful measures to protect the citizens of the united states from future attacks. .

h.r .

2082 , the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , as reported out of conference on december 6 , 2007 , would generally have barred any person , in the custody or effective control of either an element of the intelligence community or a contractor or subcontractor of the intelligence community , from being subjected to any treatment or interrogation tactic not authorized by the army field manual .

h.r .

2082 would not have prohibited the army field manual from being revised in the future , meaning that the scope of prohibited conduct could potentially be modified .

h.r .

2082 also contained a provision requiring the director of national intelligence to report to appropriate committees concerning detention or interrogation methods approved or discontinued following enactment of the dta and mca , along with the legal basis behind the decision to approve or rescind authorization of such techniques .

the version of h.r .

2082 reported out of conference was passed by the house on december 13 , 2007 , and the senate on february 13 , 2008 , but was subsequently vetoed by president bush on march 8 , 2008 .

the house voted to approve the bill on march 13 , 2008 , by a vote of 225-188 , but failed to muster the two - thirds majority necessary to override the president's veto .

h.r .

4156 , the orderly and responsible iraq redeployment appropriations act , 2008 , which was passed by the house on november 14 , 2007 , would have generally barred all federal agencies , including the cia , from using any treatment or interrogation tactic that is not authorized or listed by the army field manual .

agencies would still be permitted to use non - field manual standards with respect to any individual being held pursuant to u.s. criminal or immigration laws .

on november 16 , 2007 , the senate failed to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed with consideration of h.r .

4156 .

similar proposals have also been introduced in the 111 th congress .

it remains to be seen whether president obama's executive order on detainee treatment or the findings of the special interagency task force on interrogation and transfer policies will affect congressional interest in passing further legislation affecting u.s. interrogation policy .

s. 147 / h.r .

374 , the lawful interrogation and detention act , and h.r .

2544 , the legal interrogation procedures act , would generally bar any individual in the custody or control either of an intelligence agency or a contractor or subcontractor of an intelligence agency , from being subjected to any treatment or interrogation technique not authorized by the united states army field manual .

similarly , h.r .

893 , the american anti - torture act of 2009 , would generally prohibit all u.s. agencies from employing any interrogation technique or treatment not authorized by the army field manual , though this requirement would not apply with respect to any person detained under u.s. criminal or immigration laws .

s. 147 / h.r .

374 would also bar the cia from permitting a contractor or subcontractor from carrying out an interrogation of an individual .

h.r .

591 , the interrogation and detention reform act of 2008 ( sic ) , would require the president to establish uniform standards for the interrogation of persons in the custody or under the effective control of the united states , and that u.s. intelligence personnel receive training regarding the federal and international obligations and laws applicable to the humane treatment of detainees .

the president would be required to submit a report to congress concerning implementation of this requirement .

s. 1494 , the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , would require the director of national intelligence to submit a report to the congressional intelligence committees concerning measures taken by the intelligence community to comply with applicable legal requirements concerning detention and interrogation activities , including those requirements contained in the dta .

