this report examines the issue of whether a type of defined benefit pension plan , the cash balance plan , violates federal laws that prohibit age discrimination .

the discrimination provisions are found in the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) , the internal revenue code ( irc ) , and the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) .

although employer participation in the private pension system is voluntary , any offered plan must satisfy the legal requirements .

the failure to do so may result in civil and criminal liability and the loss of favorable tax treatment for plan contributions and disbursements .

furthermore , erisa and the adea create substantive rights for plan participants that they can seek to have judicially enforced .

this report briefly describes a typical cash balance plan and discusses the claims that such plans violate the federal laws that prohibit age discrimination , as existed prior to the pension protection act of 2006 .

it concludes with a discussion of relevant provisions in the act , which was signed into law on august 17 , 2006 .

the act's provisions apply only to periods beginning on or after june 29 , 2005 , and leave unsettled the law for earlier periods .

there have been claims that cash balance plans and / or the conversion to such plans violate the laws prohibiting age discrimination .

the age discrimination provisions are found in erisa , the irc , and the adea , although plan participants are able to bring legal actions only under erisa and the adea .

all three provisions were added by the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 ( obra ) .

although the language differs slightly , they are intended to be interpreted in the same manner .

they are: erisa § 204 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( h ) [29 u.s.c .

§ 1054 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( h ) ] and irc § 411 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( h ) : [a] defined benefit plan shall be treated as not satisfying the requirements of this paragraph [relating to benefit accrual] if , under the plan , an employee's benefit accrual is ceased , or the rate of an employee's benefit accrual is reduced , because of the attainment of any age .

adea § 4 ( j ) ( 1 ) [29 u.s.c .

§ 623 ( i ) ( 1 ) ]: [i]t shall be unlawful for an employer , an employment agency , a labor organization , or any combination thereof to establish or maintain an employee pension benefit plan which requires or permits - ( a ) in the case of a defined benefit plan , the cessation of an employee's benefit accrual or the reduction of the rate of an employee's benefit accrual , because of age .

two primary claims have been made that cash balance plans or the conversions to such plans violate the law .

the first claim is that the plans violate the age discrimination provisions because the rate of an employee's benefit accrual is reduced on account of age .

the second claim is that the conversions to the plans violate the adea because older workers are treated unfavorably compared with younger workers .

the pension protection act of 2006 ( discussed below ) has significantly affected these claims by adding new requirements that plans must meet to comply with the above statutes .

the act applies only to periods beginning on or after june 29 , 2005 .

because the majority of cash balance plans existed during periods prior to june 29 , 2005 , the pre - act law continues to be relevant to the extent that the legal status of plans during these periods is uncertain .

the vast majority of courts , including all of the appellate courts to examine this issue , have found that cash balance plans do not violate the pre - act age discrimination provisions .

however , courts continue to hear these cases .

the next sections discuss the basic age discrimination claims and how various courts have dealt with these claims .

the final section of this report discusses the pension protection act .

on august 17 , 2006 , president bush signed into law the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) .

the act clarifies , among other things , the legality of cash balance plans if a plan meets certain requirements .

in regard to the age discrimination provisions , the act amends erisa , the irc , and the adea and provides standards under which a cash balance plan will be inherently non - discriminatory .

these standards concern ( 1 ) the rate of benefit accrual , ( 2 ) the amount of interest credits , and ( 3 ) conversions to cash balance plans .

the irs has recently issued proposed regulations that provide guidance as to how these standards are to be implemented .

the act amends the benefit accrual requirements of erisa , the irc , and the adea .

under the act , a plan is not considered age discriminatory if a participant's entire accrued benefit , as determined under the plan's formula , is at least equal to that of any similarly situated , younger individual .

"similarly situated" is defined as an individual who is identical to the participant in every respect ( except age ) , including length of service , compensation , position , and work history .

the act provides that benefits may be expressed in the form of an annuity payable at normal retirement age , a hypothetical account balance , or the current value of the accumulated percentage of the employee's final average compensation .

also , in determining a plan participant's accrued benefit , any subsidized portion of an early retirement benefit or retirement type subsidy is disregarded .

the act also creates new rules for "applicable defined benefit plans," which include cash balance plans .

under the new rules , a cash balance plan will violate the age discrimination provisions of erisa , the irc , and the adea unless it meets an interest credit requirement .

a plan satisfies the interest requirement if the terms of the plan provide that any interest credit ( or equivalent amount ) for a plan year is at a rate that is not more than the market rate of return , and not less than zero .

the secretary of the treasury is expected to provide guidance as to the calculation of the market rate , as well as permissible methods for crediting interest to a participant's account ( e.g .

 , fixed or variable interest rates ) .

the act includes new requirements for plan conversions .

if a defined benefit plan is converted into a cash balance plan after june 29 , 2005 , the plan will not satisfy the age discrimination provisions unless each participant receives the sum of ( 1 ) the pre - conversion accrued benefit determined under the prior plan formula plus ( 2 ) the post - conversion accrued benefit determined under the cash balance plan formula .

a newly converted plan must also credit a participant with the amount of any early retirement benefits or retirement - type subsidies if the participant has met the requirements for the benefit or subsidy under the prior plan .

the act also makes clear that certain circumstances do not violate the age discrimination provisions .

under the act , a plan will be considered non - discriminatory if the plan allows for certain offsets of benefits to the extent the offsets comply with erisa , the irc , and the adea .

a plan will also be treated as non - discriminatory if a disparity in plan contributions or benefits exists , so long as the disparity is in accordance with the irc .

finally , the act states a plan would still comply with the age discrimination standard even if it allowed for pre - retirement indexing of accrued benefits ( pre - retirement indexing provides for adjustments in accrued benefit based on a recognized investment index or methodology ) .

if a plan provides for indexing of accrued benefits , an employee's benefit amount may be protected from being devalued due to inflation .

in general , the new provisions regarding cash balance plans are effective for periods beginning on or after june 29 , 2005 .

for plans in existence on this date , the new interest credit requirements apply to years beginning after december 31 , 2007 .

the provision relating to plan conversions applies to conversions adopted on or after june 29 , 2005 .

the act expressly provides that nothing in it should imply that cash balance plans were age discriminatory prior to the act's effective dates .

thus , for periods not covered by the act , the issue of whether cash balance plans are age discriminatory still remains and continues to be evaluated by the courts .

