before the first gulf war in 1991 , arab - israeli conflict marked every decade since the founding of israel .

with each clash , issues separating the parties multiplied and became more intractable .

the creation of the state of israel in 1948 provided a home for the jewish people , but the ensuing conflict made refugees of hundreds of thousands of arab residents of formerly british palestine , with consequences troubling for arabs and israelis alike .

it also led to a mass movement of jewish citizens of arab states to israel .

the 1967 war ended with israel occupying territory of egypt , jordan , and syria .

egypt and syria fought the 1973 war , in part , to regain their lands .

in 1982 , israel invaded southern lebanon to prevent terrorist incursions ; it withdrew in 1985 , but retained a 9-mile "security zone" that lebanon sought to reclaim .

middle east peace has been a u.s. and international diplomatic goal throughout the years of conflict .

the 1978 camp david talks , the only previous direct arab - israeli negotiations , brought about the 1979 israel - egypt peace treaty .

foreign aid issues related to the peace process are covered extensively in other crs reports .

for details , please see crs report rs22967 , u.s. foreign aid to the palestinians , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33222 , u.s. foreign aid to israel , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report rl32260 , u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east: historical background , recent trends , and the fy2010 request , by [author name scrubbed] .

in general , in order to ensure that israel has a partner for peace , congress has provide assistance for the development of palestinian institutions , security forces , and democracy , including language that prohibits any assistance for hamas unless it meets international conditions with respect to israel , and requires good governance practices .

it also has appropriated considerable military assistance for israel and included language ensuring israel's "qualitative military edge" over its regional neighbors .

congress also has increased aid to jordan , in part to short up its position as a voice of moderation and for peace in the region .

israel annexed the city in 1967 and proclaimed it to be israel's eternal , undivided capital .

palestinians seek east jerusalem as their capital .

successive u.s .

administrations have maintained that the parties must determine the fate of jerusalem in negotiations .

h.con.res .

60 , june 10 , 1997 , and s.con.res .

21 , may 20 , 1997 , called on the administration to affirm that jerusalem must remain the undivided capital of israel .

congress has repeatedly prohibited official u.s. government business with the palestinian authority ( pa ) in jerusalem and the use of appropriated funds to create u.s. government offices in israel to conduct business with the pa and allows israel to be recorded as the place of birth of u.s. citizens born in jerusalem .

these provisions are again in p.l .

111-117 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , signed into law on december 16 , 2009 .

the state department does not recognize jerusalem , israel as a place of birth for passports because the u.s. government does not recognize all of jerusalem as part of israel .

a related issue is the relocation of the u.s. embassy from tel aviv to jerusalem .

proponents argue that israel is the only country where a u.s. embassy is not in the capital , that israel's claim to west jerusalem , proposed site of an embassy , is unquestioned , and that palestinians must be disabused of their hope for a capital in jerusalem .

opponents say a move would undermine the peace process and u.s. credibility in the islamic world and with palestinians , and would prejudge the final status of the city .

p.l .

104 - 45 , november 8 , 1995 , provided for the embassy's relocation by may 31 , 1999 , but granted the president authority , in national security interest , to suspend limitations on state department expenditures that would be imposed if the embassy did not open .

presidents clinton and bush each used the authority several times , and president obama did so on june 5 , 2009 .

the state department authorization act for fy2002-fy2003 , p.l .

107 - 228 , september 30 , 2002 , urged the president to begin relocating the u.s. embassy "immediately. .

president bush replied that the provision would "if construed as mandatory ... impermissibly interfere with the president's constitutional authority to conduct the nation's foreign affairs. .

the state department declared , "our view of jerusalem is unchanged .

jerusalem is a permanent status issue to be negotiated between the parties. .

the obama administration , in line with its demand for an end to all settlement activity beyond the 1967 green line ( armistice line ) , objected to israeli construction of new settler housing at the former shepherd hotel in a predominantly palestinian neighborhood of east jerusalem .

israel maintains that jerusalem is not included in the areas under discussion for a construction freeze .

president bush signed the syria accountability and lebanese sovereignty restoration act , p.l .

108 - 175 , on december 12 , 2003 , to hold syria accountable for its conduct , including actions that undermine peace .

on may 11 , 2004 , he cited the act as well as the international emergency powers act , p.l .

95-223 , october 28 , 1977 , as the basis for his authority to issue executive order 13399 block property of certain persons and prohibit the exportation or reexportation of certain goods to syria .

in 2006 and 2008 , president bush issued additional executive orders on the subject .

on may 7 , 2009 , president obama declared a one - year continuance of the national emergency with respect to syria to allow the sanctions to remain in place .

in a letter to members of congress , he said , "syria poses a threat to u.s. interests" and accused its leadership of "supporting terrorist organizations" among other actions .

sec .

328 of the conference report ( h.rept .

110 - 478 ) for h.r .

2082 , the intelligence authorization act for fy2008 , agreed to in the house on december 13 , 2007 , would have limited spending of the intelligence budget to 30% until each member of the intelligence committees has been informed with respect to intelligence regarding the facility targeted on september 6 .

the administration objected that this provision would circumvent the executive's authority to control access to extraordinarily sensitive information .

the senate agreed to the conference report on february 13 , 2008 , by a vote of 51-45 and the bill was cleared for the white house , but it was not signed .

on april 24 , national security advisor stephen hadley , cia director michael hayden , and director of national intelligence mike mcconnell presented evidence to congressional committees that the israeli target was a nuclear reactor , designed by and being built with the assistance of north korea .

hayden said that the reactor was within weeks or months of completion and , within a year of entering operation , it could have produced enough material for at least one weapon .

these officials reportedly acknowledged lack of evidence indicating that syria was working on nuclear weapons designs and that they had not identified a source of nuclear material for the facility .

they expressed "low confidence" that the site was part of a nuclear weapons program .

they also denied u.s. involvement in planning or executing the september 6 strike .

experts suggested that the inability to identify a source of fuel raised questions about when the reactor would have been operational and agreed that the inability to identify facilities to separate plutonium from fuel raised further questions about whether the reactor was part of a weapons program .

damascus has allowed the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) only one visit to the site and has turned down requests for follow - up visits and for access to other sites .

the iaea has said that the building had characteristics of a nuclear facility and that its inspectors had detected "significant" traces of man - made uranium at the site .

on september 15 , 2009 , the u.n. human rights council's gaza fact - finding mission , headed by south african judge richard goldstone , presented its report on the december 2008-january 2009 conflict between israel and hamas , which israel refers to as operation cast lead .

the report concluded that "there is evidence indicating serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law were committed by israel ... and that israel committed actions amounting to war crimes , and possibly crimes against humanity .

the report also found "evidence that palestinian armed groups committed war crimes , as well as possibly crimes against humanity in their repeated launching of rockets and mortars into southern israel. .

the mission asked the u.n. security council to order israel and hamas to conduct credible investigations into the alleged crimes .

if either side fails to do so within six months , it said , then the evidence should be referred to the international criminal court prosecutor in the hague .

israel is not a member of the international criminal court , which can only prosecute israeli citizens if the security council orders an inquiry .

israel rejected the idea of a special investigation and denounced the report for ignoring its right to self - defense , making unsubstantiated claims about its intent , and challenging israel's democratic values and rule of law .

israel further criticized the report for ignoring hamas's deliberate strategy of operating within and behind the civilian population in gaza , and charged that the mission's goal is to instigate "a political campaign against israel. .

an israeli foreign ministry spokesman stated , "we are speaking to members of the security council and countries that are conducting operations in afghanistan .

our message is this: if this u.n. report is allowed to set a precedent , no country can feel safe in defending itself against terrorism or any other kind of threat. .

prime minister netanyahu vowed not to allow israeli officials to go to the hague .

on september 18 , the u.s. state department criticized the report's "overwhelming focus" on and "sweeping conclusions of fact and law" with respect to israel , while making more general and tentative conclusions regarding "hamas's deplorable conduct. .

pa president abbas is said to have been weakened by initially trying to postpone action in the u.n. human rights council on the report until march 2010 , as did the united states .

abbas's effort left him vulnerable to charges in the palestinian media and from hamas and other arab governments of betraying the palestinian people .

he then reversed his position and supported rapid efforts to condemn israel .

the u.n. human rights council and the general assembly adopted the report ; the united states voted against the recommendation in both bodies .

the council's resolution condemned israel , not hamas , which the report also criticized .

it is believed that the security council is unlikely to take up the matters because all five of the permanent members oppose its involvement .

the united states voted against the adoption of the report in both u.n. bodies .

on september 18 , the u.s. state department criticized the report's "overwhelming focus" on and "sweeping conclusions of fact and law" with respect to israel , while making more general and tentative conclusions regarding "hamas's deplorable conduct. .

u.s .

ambassador to the u.n. susan rice expressed concern about the mission's "unbalanced , one - sided , and unacceptable" mandate , which was to investigate israel's "war crimes. .

on september 29 , at the human rights council , assistant secretary of state for democracy , human rights , and labor michael posner encouraged "israel to utilize appropriate domestic review and meaningful accountability mechanisms to investigate and follow up on credible allegations" and called on hamas to launch an inquiry into the firing of rockets into israel during the fighting in january .

israeli prime minister netanyahu suggest that "if the report reaches the international court in hague , it will bring the peace process to a halt because israel won't take the risks necessary to achieve peace if it is not assured the right to defense itself. .

on november 3 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

867 , describing the goldstone report as "irredeemably biased and unworthy of further consideration or legitimacy. .

s.res .

10 , agreed to by unanimous consent in the senate on january 8 , 2009 , and h.res .

34 , agreed to in the house on january 9 , by a vote of 390-5 , 22 present , recognize israel's right to defend itself against attacks from gaza , and reaffirm the united states' strong support for israel , and support the israeli - palestinian peace process .

h.res .

130 , introduced on february 4 , 2009 , expressing support for the appointment of former senator george mitchell as special envoy for middle east peace .

