i n 1973 , the u.s. supreme court concluded in roe v. wade that the u.s. constitution protects a woman's decision to terminate her pregnancy .

in a companion decision , doe v. bolton , the court found that a state may not unduly burden t he exercise of that fundamental right with regulations that prohibit or substantially limit access to the procedure .

rather than settle the issue , the court's rulings since roe and doe have continued to generate debate and have precipitated a variety of governmental actions at the national , state , and local levels designed either to nullify the rulings or limit their effect .

these governmental regulations have , in turn , spawned further litigation in which resulting judicial refinements in the law have been no more successful in dampening the controversy .

although the primary focus of this report is legislative action with respect to abortion , discussion of the various legislative proposals necessarily involves an examination of the leading supreme court decisions concerning a woman's right to choose .

after the supreme court's decisions in roe and doe , some of the first federal legislative responses involved restrictions on the use of federal money to pay for abortions .

in 1976 , representative henry j. hyde offered an amendment to the departments of labor and health , education , and welfare , appropriation act , 1977 , that restricted the use of appropriated funds to pay for abortions provided through the medicaid program .

almost immediately , the so - called hyde amendment and similar restrictions were challenged in the courts .

two categories of public funding cases have been heard and decided by the supreme court: those involving ( 1 ) funding restrictions for nontherapeutic ( elective ) abortions ; and ( 2 ) funding limitations for therapeutic ( medically necessary ) abortions .

rather than settle the issue , the court's decisions in roe and doe prompted debate and a variety of governmental actions at the national , state , and local levels to limit their effect .

congress continues to be a forum for proposed legislation and constitutional amendments aimed at limiting or prohibiting the practice of abortion .

this section examines the history of the federal legislative response to the abortion issue .

prior to the court's decision in roe , relatively few bills involving abortion were introduced in either the house or the senate .

since 1973 , however , more than 1,000 separate legislative proposals have been introduced .

the wide disparity in these statistics illustrates the impetus that the court's 1973 decisions gave to congressional action .

most of these proposals have sought to restrict the availability of abortions .

some measures , however , have been introduced to better secure the right to terminate a pregnancy .

the freedom of choice act , for example , attempted to codify roe and was introduced in several congresses .

the freedom of access to clinic entrances act of 1994 made it a federal crime to use force , or the threat of force , to intimidate abortion clinic workers or women seeking abortions .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) was enacted on march 23 , 2010 , to reduce the number of uninsured individuals and restructure the private health insurance market .

the aca includes provisions that address the coverage of abortion services by qualified health plans that are available through health benefit exchanges ( exchanges ) .

the aca's abortion provisions have been controversial , particularly with regard to the use of premium tax credits or cost - sharing subsidies to obtain health coverage that includes coverage for elective or nontherapeutic abortion services .

in addressing the coverage of abortion services by qualified health plans offered through an exchange , the aca refers to the hyde amendment to distinguish between two types of abortions: abortions for which federal funds appropriated for hhs may be used , and abortions for which such funds may not be used ( elective abortions ) .

under the aca , individuals who receive a premium tax credit or cost - sharing subsidy are permitted to select a qualified health plan that includes coverage for elective abortions .

however , to ensure that funds attributable to such a credit or subsidy are not used to pay for elective abortion services , the aca prescribes payment and accounting requirements for plan issuers and enrollees .

under the aca , the issuer of a qualified health plan must determine whether to provide coverage for either elective abortions or abortions for which federal funds appropriated for hhs are permitted .

it appears that a plan issuer could also decide not to cover either type of abortion .

the aca also permits a state to prohibit abortion coverage in exchange plans by enacting a law with such a prohibition .

the aca indicates that an issuer of a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions cannot use any funds attributable to a premium tax credit or cost - sharing subsidy to pay for such services .

the issuer of a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions is required to collect two separate payments from each enrollee in the plan: one payment that reflects an amount equal to the portion of the premium for coverage of health services other than elective abortions ; and another payment that reflects an amount equal to the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions .

the plan issuer is required to deposit the separate payments into separate allocation accounts that consist solely of each type of payment and that are used exclusively to pay for the specified services .

state health insurance commissioners ensure compliance with the segregation requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of generally accepted accounting requirements , office of management and budget circulars on funds management , and government accountability office guidance on accounting .

to determine the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions , the plan issuer estimates the basic per enrollee , per month cost , determined on an average actuarial basis , for including such coverage .

the estimate may take into account the impact on overall costs of including coverage for elective abortions , but cannot take into account any cost reduction estimated to result from such services , such as prenatal care , delivery , or postnatal care .

the per month cost has to be estimated as if coverage were included for the entire population covered , but cannot be less than $1 per enrollee , per month .

under the aca , a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions is also required to provide notice of such coverage to enrollees as part of a summary of benefits and coverage explanation at the time of enrollment .

the notice , any plan advertising used by the issuer , any information provided by the exchange , and any other information specified by the secretary provides information only with respect to the total amount of the combined payments for elective abortion services and other services covered by the plan .

the aca also provides for conscience protection and the preservation of certain state and federal abortion - related laws .

the aca prohibits exchange plans from discriminating against any individual health care provider or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions .

state laws concerning the prohibition or requirement of coverage or funding for abortions , and state laws involving abortion - related procedural requirements are not preempted .

federal conscience protection and abortion - related antidiscrimination laws , as well as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , are also not affected .

on may 5 , 2017 , president donald j. trump signed h.r .

244 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 .

the measure provided fy2017 funds for foreign operations , the district of columbia , hhs , and other federal agencies .

long - standing funding restrictions on abortion and abortion - related services , including restrictions on the use of federal and local dc funds to pay for abortions , were retained .

with regard to foreign operations , none of the appropriated funds could be made available to an organization or program that supported or participated in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization .

in addition , appropriated funds were not available for the performance of abortions as a method of family planning , or to motivate or coerce any person to practice abortions .

appropriated funds were also not available to lobby for or against abortion .

to reduce reliance on abortions in developing nations , funds were available only for voluntary family planning projects that offered a broad range of family planning methods and services .

such voluntary family planning projects were required to meet specified requirements .

contributions to the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) were conditioned on the entity not funding abortions .

in addition , amounts appropriated to the unfpa were required to be kept in an account that was separate from the unfpa's other accounts .

the unfpa could not commingle funds provided under h.r .

244 with the entity's other funds .

the omnibus measure prohibited the use of appropriated funds to pay for an abortion or for any administrative expenses related to a health plan in the federal employees health benefits program that provided benefits or coverage for abortions .

this prohibition , however , did not apply when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term , or in the case of rape or incest .

funds provided to the department of justice could also not be used to pay for an abortion , except when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term , or in the case of rape or incest .

finally , funds appropriated for hhs , as well as funds derived from any trust fund that received appropriations , could not be used to pay for abortions except in cases of rape or incest , or when a woman who suffered from a physical disorder , injury , or illness would have her life jeopardized if an abortion was not performed .

on january 24 , 2017 , the house passed h.r .

7 , the no taxpayer funding for abortion and abortion insurance full disclosure act of 2017 , by a vote of 238-183 .

introduced by representative christopher h. smith , the bill would amend title 1 of the u.s. code to add new sections that would permanently prohibit the use of federal funds for abortion .

unlike the hyde amendment and the other hyde - type restrictions that have been included annually in various appropriations measures , the proposed sections would not have to be renewed each year .

moreover , these funding limitations would apply to all federal funds and not just those specifically appropriated for hhs and other federal agencies .

h.r .

7 would impose additional restrictions on the availability of abortion .

the measure would amend the internal revenue code to indicate that a health plan that includes coverage for elective abortions is not a "qualified health plan" for purposes of the availability of a premium tax credit .

under the aca , recipients of a premium tax credit are permitted to select a qualified health plan that includes elective abortion coverage , so long as the plan enrollee and plan issuer comply with specified payment and accounting requirements .

thus , if enacted , h.r .

7 would likely affect a recipient's decision to select a health plan that covers elective abortions .

finally , h.r .

7 would make permanent the dornan amendment , which restricts the use of local dc funds to pay for abortions , and would amend the aca to require plans to disclose abortion services coverage in marketing or advertising materials , comparison tools , and benefit summaries .

h.r .

7 was received in the senate on january 30 , 2017 , but no further action on the measure has been taken .

a companion bill , s. 184 , has also not been considered in the senate .

on october 3 , 2017 , the house passed h.r .

36 , the pain - capable unborn child protection act , by a vote of 237-189 .

introduced by representative trent franks , the bill would prohibit the performance or attempted performance of an abortion if the probable postfertilization age of the "unborn child" is 20 weeks or greater .

the prohibition would not apply to abortions that are necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman whose life is endangered by a physical disorder , physical illness , or physical injury .

the bill's prohibition would also not apply when a pregnancy is the result of rape and certain specified conditions are satisfied .

individuals who violate h.r .

36 would be subject to a fine under title 18 , u.s. code , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

h.r .

36 was received in the senate on october 4 , 2017 , but no further action on the measure has been taken .

a cloture vote on s. 2311 , a companion measure , was taken in the senate on january 29 , 2017 .

cloture on the motion to proceed to consideration of s. 2311 was rejected by a vote of 51-46 .

on january 19 , 2018 , the house passed h.r .

4712 , the born - alive abortion survivors protection act , by a vote of 241-183 .

introduced by representative marsha blackburn , the bill would require care to be provided to a fetus "born alive" following an abortion or attempted abortion .

under the measure , any health care practitioner who is present at the time the fetus is "born alive" would be required to exercise the same degree of skill , care , and diligence necessary to preserve the life and health of the fetus as a "reasonably diligent and conscientious health care practitioner would render to any other child born alive at the same gestational age. .

a health care practitioner who fails to exercise the specified level of care would be subject to a fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

h.r .

4712 was received in the senate on january 20 , 2018 , but no further action on the measure has been taken .

a companion measure , s. 220 , has also not been considered in the senate .

on may 4 , 2017 , the house passed h.r .

1628 , the american health care act of 2017 , by a vote of 217-213 .

introduced by representative diane black , the reconciliation bill would make two notable changes related to the aca .

first , it would amend section 36b ( c ) ( 3 ) ( a ) of the internal revenue code to provide that a health plan that includes coverage for elective abortions would not be considered a "qualified health plan. .

because the tax credit provided under section 36b is available only to enrollees in a qualified health plan , the change could affect an individual's choice of health coverage .

second , the bill would define the term "qualified health plan" to exclude any plan that includes coverage of elective abortions for purposes of section 45r of the internal revenue code , which provides a small employer health insurance credit based on employee enrollment in a qualified health plan .

the bill would also restrict the availability of federal funds for certain nonprofit organizations that provide elective abortions .

h.r .

1628 was considered by the senate in july 2017 and remains on the senate calendar .

notably , two discussion drafts prepared by the senate committee on the budget — the better care reconciliation act ( bcra ) and the obamacare repeal reconciliation act ( orra ) — included similar provisions with regard to abortion .

the drafts were written as amendments in the nature of a substitute , intended to replace the house - passed provisions of h.r .

1628 , if adopted .

however , neither the bcra nor the orra was adopted .

several abortion - related bills that were passed by the house during the 114 th congress were reintroduced , but have not been considered , in the 115 th congress .

representative diane black introduced h.r .

354 , the defund planned parenthood act of 2017 , on january 6 , 2017 .

the bill would restrict the availability of federal funds for planned parenthood federation of america and any of its affiliates or clinics for one year , unless these entities certify that they will not perform abortions or provide any funds to another entity that performs abortions during that period .

the restriction would not apply to an abortion involving a pregnancy that is the result of an act of rape or incest , or if a woman's life would be endangered if an abortion is not performed .

representative black also introduced h.r .

644 , the conscience protection act of 2017 , on january 24 , 2017 .

the bill would establish a private right of action for health care providers who suffer retaliation or discrimination for not performing or otherwise participating in an abortion .

under the measure , a prevailing plaintiff could receive all necessary equitable and legal relief , including compensatory damages , as well as reasonable attorneys' fees .

a companion measure , s. 301 , was introduced in the senate on february 3 , 2017 .

neither h.r .

644 nor s. 301 has received further consideration .

representative sean p. duffy introduced h.r .

656 , the women's public health and safety act , on january 24 , 2017 .

the bill would allow a state to establish criteria for entities and individuals who perform abortions or participate in the performance of abortions for purposes of providing services in the medicaid program .

on march 23 , 2018 , president trump signed h.r .

1625 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 .

the measure retains the same long - standing funding restrictions on abortion and abortion - related services that appear in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 .

