in early september 2005 , another navy report on the status of 1991 gulf war navy pilot lt. cdr .

michael scott speicher was completed .

it reiterated conclusions reached in earlier studies that he could well have been captured ; that there was no specific evidence of his death ; and that some former members — they were not identified , if known — of the saddam hussein government of iraq were knowledgeable about his fate .

accordingly , it recommended that speicher's status be maintained as missing , rather than killed .

this report summarizes numbers of u.s. prisoners of war ( pows ) and servicemembers missing in action ( mias ) lost during the vietnam war ( 1961-1973 ) and the korean war ( 1950-1953 ) , compares these losses to other 20 th century american wars , and describes the pow / mia investigation and policy process .

it discusses reports asserting that some pows from these wars were not returned to u.s. control when the wars ended , and that some of these individuals may still be alive .

further , it discusses americans possibly captured by communist countries during cold war incidents , or after being liberated from german pow camps at the end of world war ii , and whether any such americans could still be alive .

it also summarizes pow / mia matters and controversies related to post - cold war u.s. military operations , particularly the 1991 persian gulf war ; the ongoing operation enduring freedom that began on october 7 , 2001 , when the united states began combat operations against the taliban regime in afghanistan ; and operation iraqi freedom that began on march 19 , 2003 .

finally , the report describes legislation and congressional oversight concerning the pow / mia issue .

for information on other aspects of u.s. - vietnam relations and on the current controversy over the attempt by some american former pows held by the japanese during world war ii to obtain compensation from japanese corporations , see the " for additional reading " section at the end of this report .

the following terms are frequently encountered in analyses of the pow / mia issue: pow ( prisoner of war ) : persons known to be , or to have been , held by the enemy as a live prisoner or last seen under enemy control .

mia ( missing in action ) : persons removed from control of u.s. forces due to enemy action , but not known to either be a prisoner of war or dead .

kia - bnr ( killed in action - body not recovered ) : persons known to have been killed in action , but body or remains not recovered by u.s. forces , such as an aircraft exploding in midair or crashing or a body lost at sea .

pfod ( presumptive finding of death ) : an administrative finding by the appropriate military service secretary , after statutory review procedures , that there is no current evidence to indicate that a person previously listed as mia or pow could still be alive .

unaccounted for : an all - inclusive term — not a legal status — used to indicate americans initially listed as pow , mia , kia - bnr , or pfod , but about whom no further information is yet known .

names are shifted , usually from the most uncertain status , mia , to more certain categories , during and after hostilities based on new information , or , in the case of a pfod , lack of any new information over time that indicates an individual is still living .

statistics on u.s. pows and mias in vietnam and past wars are often mutually irreconcilable .

tables 1 , 2 , and 3 , below , as with all such material , are not always compatible in detail , but they do provide some basis for comparison .

north vietnamese and viet cong ( south vietnamese communist ; termed the "national liberation front" ) authorities returned 591 pows to u.s. control within the specified two - month period after the signing of the vietnam war peace treaty on january 27 , 1973 .

67 u.s. civilians , not part of the official list of americans unaccounted for , were trapped or stayed voluntarily after south vietnam fell in april 1975 .

all were released by late 1976 .

since 1976 , some americans have been imprisoned in vietnam ( almost all for civilian offenses ) and eventually released .

most americans now in vietnamese prisons for criminal offenses ( some of which would be characterized as "political" crimes by the vietnamese authorities ) are naturalized americans of vietnamese birth or ancestry .

since 1973 , only one u.s. military member has returned alive from vietnam .

marine corps pfc robert garwood was listed as a pow by u.s. authorities — but never by the vietnamese — in 1965 and returned voluntarily to the u.s. in 1979 .

he was convicted of collaboration with the enemy , but his light sentence included no prison term .

after the return of the 591 pows , 2,583 americans were unaccounted for ( not counting civilians trapped in vietnam after the south fell , or who later visited vietnam ) .

identified remains of 768 americans have been returned from vietnam ( 540 ) , laos ( 197 ) , cambodia ( 28 ) , and china ( 3 ) since the war ended on january 27 , 1973 .

of the 1,815 still listed as unaccounted for as of august 5 , 2005 , the department of defense ( dod ) is still actively seeking to account as fully as possible for the 1,148 .

dod believes that , based on currently available information and its analysis , it will be unable to ever recover the remains of the other 667 .

examples of the latter would include the 468 men lost over water , as stated in the note to table 3 , which summarizes data on americans currently unaccounted for in southeast asia .

another example would be those crewmen of aircraft that , at the time , were observed by both vietnamese and americans to have exploded without any sign of the crew ejecting ; and similar situations .

since the korean war ended in 1953 , there have been rumors americans captured by the north koreans or chinese were , or still are , held against their will in north korea , china , or russia / the former ussr .

it is generally accepted that the communist powers involved in the war withheld significant amounts of information on pow / mia from the united states , probably with more withholding by north korea and china than russia .

dpmo states that although there is no first - hand , direct evidence of korean war pows being transferred to the soviet union , the cumulative weight of circumstantial evidence is so compelling that they believe that at least small numbers of americans were in fact so transferred .

there are indications that some sightings of caucasians by foreign nationals in north korea may be of several american soldiers who defected to north korea in the post - korean war era .

in addition , some u.s. pows were not released by china until 1955 , two years after the war ended .

two civilian cia aircrew members shot down over north korea during the war , in 1952 , were imprisoned for 20 years and not released until 1972 .

declassified u.s. documents indicate that the u.s. government maintained an intensive interest in live pows from the korean war throughout the 1950s .

the end of the korean war in 1953 was followed by intensely bitter relations between the u.s. , the north koreans , and the chinese .

this suggests that the two communist enemies of the united states during the korean war , as well as a stalinist soviet union , might be inclined to hold live americans — perhaps more so than vietnam in the 1970s .

during the mid - 1950s , the u.s. demanded the north koreans and chinese account for missing americans .

after 1955 , due to the lack of response ( except for the return of 1,868 remains in 1954 ) , the issue abated , although the united states periodically raised the issue .

in 1957 , house foreign affairs committee hearings on the korean mia issue aired frustrations similar to those raised since 1973 on indochina mias .

although the issue of korean mias began to get more attention in the early 1980s , concrete results of contact with the north koreans were minimal until 1996 .

between mid - 1996 and mid - 1997 , negotiations took place in which united states and north korea agreed on parameters for conducting field investigations and archival research for u.s. mias .

between 1996 and 2004 , u.s. personnel completed 36 "joint field activities" ( jfas ) — searches for american remains — in north korea .

these teams recovered 224 remains , of which 20 have been identified as those of americans .

agreement was reached in late 2004 for five more jfas to be conducted in 2005 ; the first took place between mid - april and mid - may 2005 .

however , on may 25 , 2005 , dod suspended the operations of u.s. pow / mia personnel operating in north korea , citing heightened concerns about their safety in the context of rising tensions between the united states and north korea .

"the teams operate in north korea under terms that effectively cut off their ability to communicate with anyone outside the country....the only message permitted is a daily situation report sent from a liaison officer in pyongyang [the north korean capital] .

.. .

although acceptable to u.s. commanders in the past , this restrictive condition would clearly hamper any effort by other u.s. forces to protect the recovery teams should an emergency arise .

such a consideration , [a u.s. military spokesman said] played a part in the decision to suspend the missions. .

the most recent identification of remains returned from north korea took place on july 22 , 2005 , when dod announced that the remains of a u.s. army soldier mia from the korean war had been identified .

the remains had first been returned to the united states from north korea in 1993 .

there has been some controversy about the payments the u.s. has made to north korea for pow / mia - related search activity .

since 1993 , dpmo has paid north korea about $15 million for recovery operations ; "as with joint recovery operations in vietnam , laos , and other countries , the payments are calculated by negotiating the compensation provided for the workers , materials , facilities , and equipment provided by" the north koreans .

some have alleged that the sums are a form of disguised subsidy and provide little benefit , in terms of remains found , although it may be that the extremely austere conditions in north korea make any sort of operations there difficult and expensive by american standards .

for further information , see crs report rl31785 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] .

during the cold war ( 1946-1991 ) , some u.s. military aircraft were shot down by the ussr , eastern european countries , china , and north korea .

some of these aircraft were performing intelligence missions near or actually inside soviet airspace ; others were definitely in international airspace and / or were not involved in intelligence operations .

while virtually all such aircraft losses were acknowledged at the time , often with considerable publicity , their intelligence functions were not .

between 1946 and 1977 , according to a dod list released in 1992 , there were at least 38 such aircraft shootdowns and one involving a ship ( the seizure of the u.s.s .

pueblo , by the north koreans in early 1968 ) .

of the 364 crewmembers , 187 were eventually returned to u.s. custody , the remains of 34 were recovered , 11 were known to be dead from eyewitness reports but remains were not recovered , and 132 were "not recovered , fate unknown. .

throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s , intelligence ( mostly apparently obtained from german and japanese pows from world war ii , several hundred thousands of whom were not released by the soviets until 1954-1955 ) provided considerable evidence that some crewmembers of these aircraft had been seen and spoken to in soviet concentration camps .

after the cold war ended in 1989-1991 , the united states began to receive substantial russian cooperation about soviet involvements in cold war shootdowns .

however , there is little doubt that the russians have not released all available information , due to varying levels of obstructionism and the often - disorganized nature of government in post - soviet russia .

a second type of "cold war incident" involves kidnapping of u.s. personnel in or near soviet - occupied territory in europe after the end of world war ii , by soviet intelligence agents .

most , however , were defectors , or had wandered into soviet - occupied areas for nonpolitical reasons ( romantic entanglements , drunkenness , and the like ) .

the full story of such kidnappings may well not have been told and may never be .

there is no question that numerous west germans were kidnapped by soviet and east german intelligence agencies in the late 1940s and early and mid - 1950s .

the iraq war that began on march 19 , 2003 , provides the most recent illustration that the pow / mia issue is not merely one of historical interest .

congressional concerns over americans unaccounted for during the cold war have been an integral component of the discussion about how to account for americans missing or captured since then .

the largest conflicts since the cold war began to end in 1989 were the two wars with , or in , iraq .

there are allegations that the ussr failed to repatriate up to 25,000 american pows liberated from the germans after world war ii ended in europe on may 8 , 1945 .

this appears to have no foundation in fact and to result in large part from an apparent lack of rigor and care in analyzing the issue .

archival research in the united states and russia , combined with interviews in russia , appears to establish conclusively that virtually all such prisoners were returned .

in addition , the large flow of information on soviet concentration camps of the stalin era , beginning in the early 1960s , both in writing and from emigre accounts , has provided no indication of mass imprisonment of americans .

some u.s. citizens of german birth who served in the german armed forces or lived in germany were taken prisoner by the red army as it advanced into central europe ; in addition , the soviet secret police singled out americans with german , russian , or jewish names for special attention .

both figures are consonant with other knowledge of the arbitrary and brutal nature of the stalinist ussr .

accounts of u.s. dealings with the ussr during and immediately after world war ii on the pow issue are replete with accounts of soviet obfuscation , truculence , and reluctant cooperation .

the joint u.s. - russian commission on pows / mias investigating these issues has obtained a good deal of information .

however , as was noted above in the section on cold war shootdowns and similar incidents , there has been considerable hesitancy and obstruction of the commission's work by russian officials still sympathetic to the former soviet regime .

defense pow / missing personnel office .

extensive statistical breakdowns , lists of individuals , and studies and analyses on pow / mia matters from world war ii to the present .

http: / / www.dtic.mil / dpmo nenninger , timothy k. "united states prisoners of war and the red army , 1944-45: myths and realities. .

the journal of military history , july 2002: 761-82 .

sledge , michael .

soldier dead: how we recover , identify , bury , and honor our military fallen .

new york , columbia university press , 2005 .

376 p. swift , earl .

where they lay: searching for america ' s lost soldiers .

boston , houghton mifflin co. , 2003 .

307 p. u.s. congress .

senate .

select committee on pow / mia affairs .

pow / mia ' s. report .

january 13 , 1993 .

washington , u.s. government printing office , 1993 ( 103 rd congress , 1 st session .

s.rept .

103-1 ) .

1223 p .

