the trademark dilution revision act of 2006 ( h.r .

683 ) was passed by the house on a vote of 411 to 8 , on april 19 , 2005 .

the senate passed h.r .

683 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , by unanimous consent , on march 8 , 2006 .

among other things , the amendment added a non - commercial use liability exclusion to protect free speech interests , and addressed concerns raised by internet service providers over secondary liability for trademark dilution by their end users .

on september 25 , 2006 , the house , by unanimous consent , agreed to the senate amendment .

the president signed the bill into law on october 6 , 2006 .

this report provides an overview of trademark law in general , describes the federal trademark dilution act ( hereinafter "ftda" ) , and summarizes several judicial opinions interpreting the ftda .

it also analyzes the provisions of the trademark dilution revision act , which clarify certain undefined elements of the ftda and overrule judicial interpretations of the ftda that congress considered to be inconsistent with the original legislative intent in enacting the ftda in 1996 .

intellectual property ( ip ) law has three major branches , applicable to different types of subject matter: copyright ( original artistic and literary works of authorship ) , patent ( inventions of processes , machines , manufactures , and compositions of matter that are useful , new , and nonobvious ) , and trademark ( commercial symbols ) .

unlike the other two disciplines , the constitutional basis for federal trademark law is not the ip clause of the u.s. constitution , but rather the commerce clause .

another unique feature of trademark law is that trademark rights may arise from federal as well as state law ; the coexistence of this dual system of law is not characteristic of the other ip fields .

although this report focuses on federal trademark law , it is important to keep in mind that state common law is another source of legal protection for trademark owners .

a "trademark" is any word , name , symbol , or device or any combination thereof , adopted and used by a manufacturer or merchant , ( 1 ) to indicate the source of his or her goods or services and ( 2 ) to identify and distinguish the goods or services from those offered by others .

for example , when a consumer walks into a shoe store and sees an athletic shoe with a "swoosh" logo on the side of it , the mark informs the consumer that the product has been manufactured by nike and carries with it a certain quality or reputation that the public associates with a particular shoe company .

as the sponsor of h.r .

683 has explained: trademarks give customers assurance that the goods or services they are buying are what customers think they are .

if a customer has purchased items in the past from a particular company that bears a specific mark or logo , the customer has an impression , favorable or not , of that company and the goods or services it produces .

so trademark law empowers consumers by giving them information that is often critical to their purchasing decisions .

motivated by the v secret case and by the other judicial decisions discussed above , the 109 th congress considered legislation , h.r .

683 , amending the ftda to clarify federal dilution law and address what some members of congress considered to be problematic judicial interpretations of the ftda .

according to the bill's sponsor , the trademark dilution revision act of 2006 ( hereinafter "tdra" ) "represents a clarification of what congress meant when it passed the dilution statute almost a decade ago. .

the tdra makes the following changes to the ftda: requires that a mark be both famous and distinctive .

allows federal dilution protection for famous descriptive marks that have acquired distinctiveness .

provides a definition of "famous" to limit application of dilution law to only widely recognized marks .

expressly provides that dilution may be actionable if done by tarnishment or by blurring .

establishes that the standard of harm in a federal dilution case is "likelihood of dilution. .

explicitly requires that the defendant had used a mark as a designation of source for a dilution claim to be actionable , thus adding a free speech safeguard for competitors , disgruntled consumers , and the media to criticize , parody , and comment on the goods or services of the famous mark owner .

some observers and legislators wonder whether the act too heavily favors major corporations over small businesses and future businesses .

others raise concerns that it may negatively affect consumer rights and free speech .

several critics speculate that the tdra will limit existing small businesses and potential future businesses in the choice of names for themselves and their products .

despite these sentiments , the house passed h.r .

683 by a vote of 411 to 8 , on april 19 , 2005 .

the senate passed h.r .

683 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , by unanimous consent , on march 8 , 2006 .

the most prominent difference between the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

683 is that the house bill would remove "noncommercial use" of a mark as one of the affirmative defenses to a dilution claim brought under the ftda ; the senate bill retains this exemption .

if this defense is removed from existing law , it may affect the outcome of cases that resemble the factual circumstances of the barbie girl decision and possibly raise questions regarding the ftda's preservation of free speech rights .

however , it could be argued that these first amendment concerns are adequately addressed by the "fair use" defense for parodying , criticizing , or commenting on the famous mark owner or the goods or services of the mark owner , which is provided in both versions of the bill .

the senate's amendment to the bill keeps the "noncommercial use" exemption as a separate defense from the "fair use" defense , perhaps suggesting that there may be a substantive difference between them .

critics of the house - passed bill have argued: in trademark litigation , consumers who have criticized businesses , or artists who make reference to trademarks in their works , can escape the litigation quickly , and cheaply , by raising the non - commercial use defense .

fair use , by contrast , ... tends to require application of a multi - factor test that is heavily dependent on context .

making the defense rest on a complicated fair use analysis may make dismissal harder to obtain short of full ( and expensive ) discovery and trial .

in addition , the senate's amendment also creates an explicit fair use exemption from dilution liability for "a nominative or descriptive fair use , or facilitation of such fair use. .

this "facilitation" exemption was apparently added to address concerns raised by internet search engines and internet service providers over secondary liability for trademark dilution by their end users .

finally , the senate - passed version of h.r .

683 includes a new section that shifts the burden of proof in a civil action for dilution involving an unregistered trade dress .

under this new provision , the person asserting trade dress protection has the burden of demonstrating that ( 1 ) the claimed trade dress , taken as a whole , is non - functional and is famous ; and ( 2 ) if the claimed trade dress includes any registered mark , the unregistered matter , taken as a whole , is famous separate and apart from any fame of the registered mark .

on september 25 , 2006 , the house , by unanimous consent , agreed to the senate amendment , and the president signed the bill into law on october 6 , 2006 .

the trademark dilution revision act is intended to reduce confusion and uncertainty among the courts concerning key provisions of the ftda .

the legislation more precisely defines statutory elements of the ftda ( such as "famous," "distinctive," "blurring," and "tarnishment" ) and expressly clarifies the standard of harm and other eligibility requirements for bringing a dilution claim .

these changes should permit owners of famous , distinctive trademarks to more easily obtain injunctive relief against acts of dilution before they cause significant harm to the reputation of a famous trademark .

however , as the dilution remedy is an "extraordinary" one , the appropriate standard for qualifying for ftda protection has been viewed as "a high hurdle. .

the trademark dilution revision act limits ftda eligibility to a small number of marks that are truly prominent and renowned , as opposed to those that are famous only within a geographic region or "niche" market .

