the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization ( ctbto ) prepcom's international monitoring system detected data indicating that north korea had conducted a nuclear test on january 6 , 2016 .

the ct bto prepcom held a symposium for experts called science and diplomacy for peace and security in january 2016 .

the spring ctbto prepcom meeting was a "20 year ministerial" from june 13-14 , 2016 , to mark the 20 th anniversary of the opening for signature of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty ( ctbt ) and to explore options for advancing its entry into force .

at that meeting , pakistan reiterated its stance that "it will not be the first in its region to resume nuclear testing. .

on august 29 , 2016 , the ctbto prepcom held an international conference — on the international day against nuclear testing — in almaty , kazakhstan , to mark 25 years after the nuclear test site in kazakhstan was closed down .

the united states is working with other countries to draft a un security council resolution marking the 20 th year after the signing of the ctbt on september 24 .

the ctbto prepcom will meet in november 2016 .

while the ctbt was opened for signature in 1996 , it has not entered into force , leaving a ban on nuclear testing as the oldest item on the arms control agenda .

efforts to curtail tests have been made since the 1940s .

in the 1950s , the united states and soviet union conducted hundreds of hydrogen bomb tests .

the radioactive fallout from these tests spurred worldwide protest .

these pressures , plus a desire to improve u.s. - soviet relations in the wake of the cuban missile crisis of 1962 , led to the limited test ban treaty of 1963 , which banned nuclear explosions in the atmosphere , in space , and under water .

the threshold test ban treaty , signed in 1974 , banned underground nuclear weapons tests having an explosive force of more than 150 kilotons , the equivalent of 150,000 tons of tnt , 10 times the force of the hiroshima bomb .

the peaceful nuclear explosions treaty , signed in 1976 , extended the 150-kiloton limit to nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes .

president carter did not pursue ratification of these treaties , preferring to negotiate a comprehensive test ban treaty , or ctbt , a ban on all nuclear explosions .

when agreement on a ctbt seemed near , however , he pulled back , bowing to arguments that continued testing was needed to maintain reliability of existing weapons , to develop new weapons , and for other purposes .

president reagan raised concerns about u.s. ability to monitor the two unratified treaties and late in his term started negotiations on new verification protocols .

these two treaties were ratified in 1990 .

with the end of the cold war , the need for improved warheads dropped and pressures for a ctbt grew .

the u.s.s.r. and france began nuclear test moratoria in october 1990 and april 1992 , respectively .

in early 1992 , many in congress favored a one - year test moratorium .

the effort led to the hatfield - exon - mitchell amendment to the fy1993 energy and water development appropriations bill , which banned testing before july 1 , 1993 , set conditions on a resumption of testing , banned testing after september 1996 unless another nation tested , and required the president to report to congress annually on a plan to achieve a ctbt by september 30 , 1996 .

president george h. w. bush signed the bill into law ( p.l .

102-377 ) october 2 , 1992 .

the ctbt was negotiated in the conference on disarmament .

it was adopted by the u.n. general assembly on september 10 , 1996 , and was opened for signature on september 24 , 1996 .

as of august 2016 , 183 states had signed it and 164 had ratified .

united states: as of august 2016 , the united states had signed but not ratified the ctbt .

the following history casts light on the u.s. position .

under the hatfield - exon - mitchell amendment , president clinton had to decide whether to ask congress to resume testing .

on july 3 , 1993 , he said , "a test ban can strengthen our efforts worldwide to halt the spread of nuclear technology in weapons," and "the nuclear weapons in the united states arsenal are safe and reliable. .

while testing offered advantages for safety , reliability , and test ban readiness , "the price we would pay in conducting those tests now by undercutting our own nonproliferation goals and ensuring that other nations would resume testing outweighs these benefits. .

therefore , he ( 1 ) extended the moratorium at least through september 1994 ; ( 2 ) called on other nations to extend their moratoria ; ( 3 ) said he would direct doe to "prepare to conduct additional tests while seeking approval to do so from congress" if another nation tested ; ( 4 ) promised to "explore other means of maintaining our confidence in the safety , the reliability and the performance of our own weapons" ; and ( 5 ) pledged to refocus the nuclear weapons laboratories toward technology for nuclear nonproliferation and arms control verification .

he extended the moratorium twice more ; on january 30 , 1995 , the administration announced his decision to extend the moratorium until a ctbt entered into force , assuming it was signed by september 30 , 1996 .

on september 22 , 1997 , president clinton submitted the ctbt to the senate .

he asked the senate to approve it in his state of the union addresses of 1998 and 1999 .

senate foreign relations committee chairman helms rejected that request , saying that the treaty "from a non - proliferation standpoint , is scarcely more than a sham" and had low priority for the committee .

in summer 1999 , senate democrats pressed senators helms and lott to permit consideration of the treaty .

on september 30 , 1999 , senator lott offered a unanimous - consent request to discharge the senate foreign relations committee from considering the treaty and to have debate and a vote .

the request , as modified , was agreed to .

the senate armed services committee held hearings october 5-7 ; the foreign relations committee held a hearing october 7 .

it quickly became clear that the treaty was far short of the votes for approval , leading many on both sides to seek to delay a vote .

as the vote was scheduled by unanimous consent , and several senators opposed a delay , the vote was held october 13 , rejecting the treaty , 48 for , 51 against , and 1 present .

at the end of the 106 th congress , pursuant to senate rule xxx , paragraph 2 , the treaty moved to the senate foreign relations committee calendar , where it currently resides .

the bush administration's nuclear posture review and nuclear testing: in the fy2001 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

106-398 , §1041 ) , congress directed the secretary of defense , in consultation with the secretary of energy , to review nuclear policy , strategy , arms control objectives , and the forces , stockpile , and nuclear weapons complex needed to implement u.s. strategy .

although the resulting nuclear posture review is classified , j.d .

crouch , assistant secretary of defense for international security policy , presented an unclassified briefing on it on january 9 , 2002 , dealing in part with the ctbt and nuclear testing .

he stated there would be "no change in the administration's policy at this point on nuclear testing .

we continue to oppose ctbt ratification .

we also continue to adhere to a testing moratorium. .

further , "doe is planning on accelerating its test - readiness program" to reduce the time needed between a decision to test and the conduct of a test , which was then 24 to 36 months .

he discussed new weapons .

"at this point , there are no recommendations in the report about developing new nuclear weapons ... we are trying to look at a number of initiatives .

one would be to modify an existing weapon , to give it greater capability against ... hard targets and deeply - buried targets .

and we're also looking at non - nuclear ways that we might be able to deal with those problems. .

a washington post article of january 10 , 2002 , quoted white house press secretary ari fleischer as saying that the president has not ruled out testing "to make sure the stockpile , particularly as it is reduced , is reliable and safe .

so he has not ruled out testing in the future , but there are no plans to do so. .

critics expressed concern about the implications of these policies for testing and new weapons .

physicians for social responsibility argued , "the administration's plan ... would streamline our nuclear arsenal into a war - fighting force , seek the opportunity to design and build new nuclear weapons , and abandon a ten - year - old moratorium on nuclear weapons testing. .

another critic felt that increased funding for test readiness would in effect give prior approval for testing .

in july 2002 a national academy of sciences panel report on technical aspects of the ctbt concluded , in the words of a press release , "that verification capabilities for the treaty are better than generally supposed , u.s. adversaries could not significantly advance their nuclear weapons capabilities through tests below the threshold of detection , and the united states has the technical capabilities to maintain confidence in the safety and reliability of its existing weapons stockpile without periodic nuclear tests. .

a u.n. draft document of august 5 , 2005 , for signature by heads of government and heads of state at the u.n. general assembly meeting of september 2005 , contained a provision that the signers "resolve to ... [m]aintain a moratorium on nuclear test explosions pending the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty and call upon all states to sign and ratify the treaty. .

john bolton , the u.s .

ambassador to the united nations , reportedly called for major changes to the draft ; the ctbt passage was one of many drawing his objection .

on june 25 , 2007 , secretary of state condoleezza rice stated: the administration does not support the comprehensive test ban treaty and does not intend to seek senate advice and consent to its ratification .

there has been no change in the administration's policy on this matter .

by reducing the likelihood of the need to return to underground nuclear testing , rrw [the reliable replacement warhead] makes it more likely that the united states would be able to continue its voluntary nuclear testing moratorium .

we cannot , however , provide guarantees regarding the voluntary moratorium .

we may find at some future time that we cannot diagnose or remedy a problem in a warhead critical the u.s. nuclear deterrent without conducting a nuclear test .

similarly , a statement of administration policy on s. 1547 , fy2008 national defense authorization act , included the following: while supporting the continued voluntary moratorium on testing , the administration strongly opposes a provision of section 3122 that calls for the ratification of the ctbt .

it would be imprudent to tie the hands of a future administration that may have to conduct a test of an element of an aging , unmodernized stockpile in order to assure the reliability of the nuclear deterrent force .

absent such a test , the united states may not be able to diagnose or remedy a problem in a warhead critical to the nation's deterrent strategy .

the obama administration and the ctbt : in a speech in prague on april 5 , 2009 , president obama said , "my administration will immediately and aggressively pursue u.s. ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

secretary of state hillary clinton stated , "the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty is an integral part of our non - proliferation and arms control agenda , and we will work in the months ahead both to seek the advice and consent of the united states senate to ratify the treaty , and to secure ratification by others so that the treaty can enter into force. .

secretary of defense robert gates , asked if the united states should ratify the ctbt , replied , "i think that if there are adequate verification measures , probably should. .

the obama administration released its nuclear posture review ( npr ) report in april 2010 , which "focuses on five key objectives of our nuclear weapons policies and posture: 1 .

preventing nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism ; 2 .

reducing the role of u.s. nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy ; 3 .

maintaining strategic deterrence and stability at reduced nuclear force levels ; 4 .

strengthening regional deterrence and reassuring u.s. allies and partners ; and 5 .

sustaining a safe , secure , and effective nuclear arsenal. .

consistent with administration statements , the report presented the ctbt as a way to implement the first objective .

it called several arms control measures , including the ctbt , "a means of strengthening our ability to mobilize broad international support for the measures needed to reinforce the non - proliferation regime and secure nuclear materials worldwide. .

it viewed ratification and early entry into force of the ctbt as contributing to the prevention of nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism: ratification of the ctbt is central to leading other nuclear weapons states toward a world of diminished reliance on nuclear weapons , reduced nuclear competition , and eventual nuclear disarmament .

u.s. ratification could also encourage ratification by other states , including china , and provide incentives for the remaining states to work toward entry into force of the treaty .

further , u.s. ratification of the ctbt would enable us to encourage non - npt parties to follow the lead of the npt - recognized nuclear weapon states in formalizing a heretofore voluntary testing moratorium , and thus strengthen strategic stability by reducing the salience of nuclear weapons in those states' national defense strategies .

the report also called for a substantial effort to maintain nuclear weapons and to upgrade the workforce and physical infrastructure of the nuclear weapons complex .

vice president joseph biden wrote , "the president has made ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty an administration priority .

he has asked me to guide the administration's effort to gain senate support for the treaty. .

under secretary of state ellen tauscher described elements of the administration's strategy to win senate approval of the treaty .

"this administration will not attempt to [seek ratification] unless we believe it can actually pass.... [we are] laying the groundwork for the support of a supermajority in the senate , 67 votes.... we [will] have a very , very short window to talk about ctbt .

but when we believe that we have the right conditions , we will begin to engage the senate. .

obtaining senate advice and consent to ratification has proven to be a challenge .

senator john kerry , then chairman of the senate foreign relations committee , stated , "i will begin working to build the necessary bipartisan support for u.s. ratification of the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty ... success would be the single greatest arms control accomplishment for the new senate and it would reestablish america's traditional leadership role on nonproliferation. .

on the other hand , senate minority leader mitch mcconnell said , "i also disagree with the administration's recent pledge to ratify the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

the timeline for senate consideration of the ctbt is uncertain .

the administration decided to press for senate approval of the u.s. - russian new strategic arms reduction treaty ( new start ) before trying to bring up the ctbt .

however , new start fell behind schedule .

the treaty it replaced , the strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) , expired in december 2009 .

president obama signed the new treaty in april 2010 and submitted it to the senate in may .

the senate committees on armed services , foreign relations , and intelligence held hearings on new start , and the foreign relations committee reported it favorably .

president obama reportedly made securing senate advice and consent to ratification of new start one of his top priorities for the lame duck session of congress .

the senate passed the resolution of ratification for that treaty on december 22 , 2010 , 71-26 .

subsequently , administration officials turned more attention to the ctbt .

for example , on september 23 , 2011 , ellen tauscher , then under secretary of state for arms control and international security , said , "we have begun the process of engaging the senate .

we like to think of our efforts as an 'information exchange' and are working to get these facts [on verification and stockpile stewardship capabilities] out to members and staff , many of whom have never dealt with this treaty. .

on september 26 , 2012 , rose gottemoeller , acting under secretary of state for arms control and international security , said , "as we look towards ratification of the ctbt , we acknowledge that the process will not be easy .

that said , the new start ratification process reinvigorated interest in the topic of nuclear weapons and arms control on capitol hill .

i am optimistic that interest will continue as we engage with members and staff on this treaty. .

on september 15 , 2014 , gottemoeller , who had been confirmed as under secretary of state for arms control and international security , said , now , i will pivot to the question that is asked each and every time this treaty is discussed: "what is the plan for senate ratification ? .

the answer is simple .

first comes education , and then comes discussion and last and most importantly , comes debate .

it is only through that process that you get to a place where a vote could happen .

we are reintroducing this treaty to the american public , since it has been quite some time it has been discussed outside the capital beltway .

we are and will continue to outline the clear and convincing facts about our ability to maintain the nuclear stockpile without explosive testing and our ability to effectively monitor and verify treaty compliance .

both secretary moniz and general klotz have spoken about these two issues this afternoon and they are strong allies in this effort .

we are and will continue to make it clear that a global ban on nuclear explosive testing will hinder regional arms races and impede advancements in nuclear stockpiles around the world .

with an emphasis on a healthy , open dialogue , rather than a timeline , we are working with the senate to re - familiarize members with the treaty .

a lot of ctbt - related issues have changed since 1999 , but the senate has changed a lot since then , too .

it is up to us , as policymakers and experts before the american people , to practice due diligence in consideration of this treaty – that means briefings , hearings at the appropriate time , more briefings , trips to labs , trips to vienna and the ctbto , more briefings , etc. , etc. .

the senators should have every opportunity to ask questions , many questions , until they are satisfied .

i want to make one thing very clear: this administration has no intention of rushing this or demanding premature action before we have had a thorough and rigorous discussion and debate .

in addressing the seventh ministerial meeting on the ctbt in september 2014 , secretary of state john kerry said , " so i come here to reiterate the obama administration's unshakable commitment to seeing this treaty ratified and entered into force .

and though we have not yet succeeded in ratifying it for pure political , ideological reasons — not substance , i assure you — we nevertheless are pledged to live by it , and we do live by it , and we will live by it. .

in the run - up to the 2015 nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference , however , the united states stressed its support for the treaty rather than efforts to secure senate advice and consent to ratification .

in a report to the conference , the united states noted its financial support for the ctbto prepcom and stated , "the united states fully supports the activities of the ctbt preparatory commission as it makes the necessary preparations for the effective implementation of the treaty. .

at the conference , secretary of state john kerry said , "we have clearly demonstrated our commitment to abide by the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. .

united kingdom: the united kingdom cannot test because it held its nuclear tests for several decades at the nevada test site and does not have its own test site .

its last test was held in 1991 .

britain and france became the first of the original five nuclear weapon states to ratify the ctbt , depositing instruments of ratification with the united nations on april 6 , 1998 .

on february 14 , 2002 , and february 23 , 2006 , the united kingdom conducted subcritical experiments jointly with the united states at the nevada test site .

the united kingdom and france maintain their own separate stockpile stewardship programs to maintain existing warheads and , if necessary , develop new ones .

for example , the u.k. atomic weapons establishment uses two sites: aldermaston , which conducts r&d and some manufacturing , and burghfield , which conducts final assembly , maintenance , and decommissioning of warheads .

the united kingdom and france are also pooling stockpile stewardship resources .

a declaration from the november 2010 u.k. - french summit announced the decision by the two states to collaborate in the technology associated with nuclear stockpile stewardship in support of our respective independent nuclear deterrent capabilities , in full compliance with our international obligations , through unprecedented co - operation at a new joint facility at valduc in france that will model performance of our nuclear warheads and materials to ensure long - term viability , security and safety – this will be supported by a joint technology development centre at aldermaston in the uk .

stockpile stewardship supports the stockpile , but at issue for the united kingdom is what weapons it will have in the future , and even whether it will have a nuclear force .

the u.k. nuclear force consists of trident ii ( d - 5 ) missiles aboard four ballistic missile submarines .

with the submarines approaching the end of their service lives , at issue is whether to replace them with something other than ballistic missile submarines ( eg , bombers , land - based missiles , or missiles on attack submarines ) , and if ballistic missile submarines are chosen , whether to build four or fewer .

scotland held a referendum on september 18 , 2014 , on whether to become an independent country , and chose to remain part of the united kingdom .

prior to the vote , there was considerable concern over what would become of the u.k. nuclear deterrent if scotland were to become independent , as all u.k. ballistic missile submarines are based at faslane , scotland .

in october 2012 , alex salmond , the leader of the scottish national party ( snp ) , said , "the snp government will be bringing forward a white paper on independence which proposes a written constitution for an independent scotland , and that constitution will have to be ratified by the scottish parliament elected in 2016 .

the snp position on this is that the constitution should include an explicit ban on nuclear weapons being based on scottish territory. .

if scotland had decided to become independent and to ban nuclear weapons in its territory , it is unclear what steps britain would have taken regarding its missile submarine force .

indeed , according to one report of october 2012 , "the uk defence secretary [philip hammond] said he was making no contingency plans for moving trident out of scotland in the event of its people voting yes to independence. .

another view put forward in august 2014 was that the trident base could be relocated to a site within england .

however , scotland's vote to remain part of the united kingdom has rendered these concerns moot .

france: on june 13 , 1995 , president jacques chirac announced that france would conduct eight nuclear tests at its test site at mururoa atoll in the south pacific , finishing by the end of may 1996 .

the armed services had reportedly wanted the tests to check existing warheads , validate a new warhead , and develop a computer system to simulate warheads to render further testing unneeded .

many nations criticized the decision .

on august 10 , 1995 , france indicated it would halt all nuclear tests once the test series was finished and favored a ctbt that would ban "any nuclear weapon test or any other nuclear explosion. .

france conducted six tests from september 5 , 1995 , to january 27 , 1996 .

on january 29 , 1996 , chirac announced the end to french testing .

on april 6 , 1998 , france and britain deposited instruments of ratification of the ctbt with the united nations .

see the section on the united kingdom , above , for information on a u.k. - french collaboration on stockpile stewardship .

russia: several press reports between 1996 and 1999 claimed that russia may have conducted low - yield nuclear tests at its arctic test site at novaya zemlya ; other reports stated that u.s. reviews of the data determined that these events were earthquakes .

several reports between 1998 and 2000 stated that russia had conducted "subcritical" nuclear experiments , discussed below , which the ctbt does not bar .

the report of the congressional commission on the strategic posture of the united states presents arguments for and against the ctbt ; one argument by opponents is , "apparently russia and possibly china are conducting low yield tests. .

this charge was reiterated in a september 2011 article: "russia apparently has continued to test nuclear weapons at very low yields , despite its commitment not to do so. .

russia ratified the treaty on june 30 , 2000 .

in september 2005 , russia reportedly stated that it intends to continue to observe the moratorium on testing until the ctbt enters into force as long as other nuclear powers do likewise , and expressed its hope that the nations that must ratify the treaty for it to enter into force will do so as soon as possible .

in november 2007 , according to itar - tass , russian foreign minister sergei lavrov "confirmed russia's unchanging support for the treaty as one of the key elements of the nuclear non - proliferation regime and an effective nuclear arms limitation tool. .

in september 2009 , dmitry medvedev , president of the russian federation , said , "we need to encourage leading countries to sign and ratify the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty as soon as possible in order to ensure its ultimate entry into force .

that is very important. .

a russian scholar at the russian academy of sciences raised the prospect of the ctbt's collapse in an article of november 2010 .

claiming that britain and france have ratified the treaty but do not have a moratorium on testing , that the reverse is the case for china and the united states , that india , israel , north korea , and pakistan have done neither , and that only russia has ratified the treaty and has a moratorium on testing , he argued that if the treaty has not been in force for fifteen years [i.e. , since it was opened for signature in 1996] , it is difficult for russia to be the only nuclear power which complies with its terms and conditions in full .

russia's official position is to support the ctbt's entry into force .

however , russian experts tend to focus on the pessimistic scenarios of ctbt collapse .

in the near future , russia could face a difficult choice between the political dividends the ctbt affords and the military necessity to upgrade its nuclear capabilities .

at the 2011 conference on facilitating the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , sergey ryabkov , deputy minister of foreign affairs of the russian federation , expressed his country's support for the treaty and said , "we hope that our call upon the respective states to sign and / or ratify the ctbt will finally be heard by them. .

at the 2015 nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference , mikhail uliyanov , acting head of the russian federation's delegation , said , "we are deeply concerned by the lack of any tangible progress in the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty ( сtbt ) coming into force .

we recall that our country ratified the ctbt in 2000 , and we are working hard to make it universal both in bilateral and multilateral formats. .

china: china did not participate in the moratorium .

it conducted a nuclear test on october 5 , 1993 , that many nations condemned .

it countered that it had conducted 39 tests , as opposed to the 1,054 that the united states had conducted , and needed a few more for safety and reliability .

according to one report , "china will immediately stop nuclear testing once the treaty on the complete ban of nuclear tests takes effect , [chinese premier] li peng said. .

it conducted other tests on june 10 and october 7 , 1994 , may 15 and august 17 , 1995 , and june 8 and july 29 , 1996 .

it announced that the july 1996 test would be its last , as it would begin a moratorium on july 30 , 1996 .

on february 29 , 2000 , the chinese government submitted the ctbt to the national people's congress for ratification .

in a white paper of december 2004 , china stated its support of early entry into force and , until that happens , its commitment to the test moratorium .

as of august 2016 , china had signed but not ratified the treaty .

india: on may 11 , 1998 , prime minister atal behari vajpayee announced that india had conducted three nuclear tests .

the government stated , "the tests conducted today were with a fission device , a low yield device and a thermonuclear device... .

these tests have established that india has a proven capability for a weaponised nuclear programme. .

it announced two more tests may 13 .

an academic study concluded , based on seismic data , that india and pakistan overstated the number and yields of their tests .

india has conducted no tests since may 1998 , but questioned whether the united states should expect india to sign a treaty that the united states views as flawed .

in an indian - pakistani statement of june 20 , 2004 , "each side reaffirmed its unilateral moratorium on conducting further nuclear test explosions" barring "extraordinary events. .

on december 22 , 2005 , shri rao inderjit singh , minister of state in the ministry of external affairs , said , "india has already stated that it will not stand in the way of the entry into force of the treaty. .

on august 16 , 2007 , india's external affairs minister , pranab mukherjee , reportedly told parliament , "india has the sovereign right to test and would do so if it is necessary in national interest. .

a statement on u.s. - indian nuclear cooperation of july 18 , 2005 , by president bush and indian prime minister manmohan singh , said , "the prime minister conveyed that for his part , india would reciprocally agree that it would be ready to ... continu[e] india's unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing. .

in a senate hearing of november 2 , robert joseph , under secretary of state for arms control and international security , stated , "india's pledge to maintain its nuclear testing moratorium contributes to nonproliferation efforts by making its ending of nuclear explosive tests one of the conditions of full civil nuclear cooperation. .

at that hearing , michael krepon , co - founder of the stimson center , argued that statements by indian government officials that there are no current plans to test "do not carry equal weight , nor do they impose equal responsibility , to the obligations accepted by the 176 states that have signed the ctbt. .

press reports of april 2006 said the sides were negotiating a detailed nuclear cooperation agreement .

the reports indicated that the united states would insist that india maintain its nuclear test moratorium or else the united states would have the right to terminate the agreement .

india responded that it had pledged to maintain the moratorium , rendering this provision out of place in the final agreement .

a press report of january 2007 quoted national security advisor m.k .

narayanan as saying , "there is no question of signing the comprehensive test ban treaty .

we have our voluntary moratorium .

that position remains. .

according to a report of november 2007 , when some members of parliament criticized the u.s. - indian nuclear agreement on grounds it would bar indian nuclear testing , prime minister manmohan singh responded , "if a necessity for carrying out a nuclear test arises in future , there is nothing in the agreement which prevents us from carrying out tests. .

 ( see crs report r42948 , u.s. - india security relations: strategic issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in august 2009 , a former indian official said that india should not be "railroaded" into signing the ctbt because its hydrogen bomb tests of 1998 did not produce the desired yield .

accordingly , he said , india "should conduct more nuclear tests which are necessary from the point of view of security. .

in response , other indian officials claimed that the thermonuclear tests were successful , so no further tests were needed .

in december 2009 , in response to "the renewed pressure from president obama on [india] in recent months to sign the ctbt," 11 scientists and others formerly in the indian nuclear weapons program urged the indian government not to sign the treaty .

in october 2010 , a trade agreement in which japan would sell civilian nuclear technology to india had stalled as japan urged india to take steps toward signing the ctbt .

meanwhile , india continues to develop its nuclear weapons program .

for example , press reports in 2014 described construction in india of a nuclear - powered submarine for carrying nuclear - armed ballistic missiles , a test of this type of missile , construction of an indian uranium enrichment plant , and a test of a missile defense interceptor .

press reports of april 2015 indicated that india had tested a nuclear - armed ballistic missile with a range of 3,000 km and was working to develop missile defenses .

as of august 2016 , india had not signed the ctbt .

pakistan: pakistan announced on may 28 , 1998 , that it had conducted five nuclear tests , and announced a sixth on may 30 .

reports placed the yields of the smallest devices between zero and a few kilotons , and between 2 and 45 kilotons for the largest .

some question the number of tests based on uncertain seismic evidence .

pakistan made no claims of testing fusion devices .

pakistan's weapons program apparently relies heavily on foreign technology .

pakistan claimed that it tested "ready - to - fire warheads," not experimental devices , and included a warhead for the ghauri , a missile with a range of 900 miles , and low - yield tactical weapons .

in response to the indian and pakistani tests , the united states imposed economic sanctions on the two nations .

in november 1999 , foreign minister abdul sattar said that his nation would not sign the ctbt unless sanctions were lifted , but that "[w]e will not be the first to conduct further nuclear tests. .

in august 2000 , president pervez musharraf said the time was not ripe to sign the ctbt because so doing could destabilize pakistan .

in september 2005 , pakistan reportedly said it would not be the first nation in the region to resume nuclear testing .

in april 2007 , pakistan's prime minister , shaukat aziz , reportedly said that pakistan would not unilaterally sign the ctbt since it shares a border with india .

replying to the statement on nuclear testing by pranab mukherjee , india's external affairs minister , tasnim aslam , a spokeswoman for pakistan's foreign office , reportedly said , "we take seriously the assertions by the indian leadership about the possibility of renewing nuclear tests.... resumption of nuclear tests by india would create a serious situation obliging pakistan to review its position and to take action , appropriate , consistent to our supreme national interest. .

according to a press report of june 2009 , the situation had changed: "'let me tell you , pakistan has no plan to sign the ctbt,' pakistani foreign ministry spokesman abdul basit said , adding that circumstances have changed since islamabad pledged in 1998 to sign off on the agreement if nuclear rival india did the same. .

meanwhile , like india , pakistan continues development of its nuclear weapons program .

reports of 2014 describe the start of operations of a third plutonium reactor , with a fourth apparently still under construction and the test firing of a ballistic missile .

a report of february 2015 indicated that pakistan may have finished a plutonium separation plant , which , if true , would increase that country's ability to make nuclear weapons .

in june 2015 , pakistan's ministry of foreign affairs issued a press release that said , among other things , "pakistan noted its continued support for ctbt - related resolutions in the united nations general assembly , and its consistent stance that it will not be the first in its region to resume nuclear testing. .

pakistan reiterated this policy at the ctbto prepcom's 20 th year ministerial meeting in june 2016 .

as of august 2016 , pakistan had not signed the ctbt .

egypt , iran , israel: to enter into force , the ctbt requires ratification by 44 states specified in annex 2 of the treaty , as discussed under " key provisions of the ctbt . .

as of august 2016 , 36 of these states had ratified the treaty .

the remaining states are china , india , north korea ( discussed next ) , pakistan , the united states , and three middle eastern nations — egypt , iran , and israel .

the latter three have signed the ctbt but have not ratified it .

egypt and iran have ratified the npt as non - nuclear weapon states , while israel has not signed or ratified that treaty .

ambassador merav zafary - odiz , representative of israel to the iaea and the ctbto , stated israel's position on the ctbt in march 2015 .

israel is committed to ratifying the ctbt but several considerations affect when it can do so .

first is a concern over "regional political realities," such as iran violating its npt obligations and concealing its nuclear program , and syria violating its commitments to the chemical weapons convention by using chemical weapons against its civilians .

second is the completion of the ctbt verification regime .

for example , according to william potter , iran decided in 2007 "to suspend data transmission from the five ims [international monitoring system] stations on iranian territory , three of which have been built and connected to the international data center. .

 ( the ims is the monitoring system established by the ctbt , while the international data center receives and processes data from the ims ; see " key provisions of the ctbt ." ) .

third is "israel's equal status in the policy making organs of the organisation [ctbto] .

israel by treaty definition is a member of a regional group called mesa – middle east and south asia .

however , the group has been paralysed for nearly 19 years because some members of this group who do not recognise the existence of the state of israel block it from functioning. .

it appears that egypt and iran have not specified conditions under which they would ratify the ctbt .

in contrast , they have for decades pressed for a middle east nuclear weapons - free zone ( menwfz ) .

this zone , if brought into being , would require israel to relinquish its nuclear weapons ( which it neither confirms nor denies having but which it is widely assumed to have ) .

following a proposal by egypt and iran , the u.n. general assembly adopted a resolution in 1974 calling for establishment of this zone .

the resolution " considers that , in order to advance the idea of a nuclear - weapon - free zone in the region of the middle east , it is indispensable that all parties concerned in the area proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain , on a reciprocal basis , from production , testing , obtaining , acquiring or in any other way possessing nuclear weapons. .

a statement presented by iran's minister of foreign affairs on behalf of the non - aligned movement ( nam ) , a group that also includes egypt and over 100 other states , at the 2015 npt review conference , included the following: the heads of state or government of the non - aligned movement , in their tehran summit declaration of 2012 , … called upon all parties concerned to take urgent and practical steps for the establishment of such a zone [menwfz] and , pending its establishment , demanded that israel , the only one in the region that has neither joined the npt nor declared its intention to do so , to renounce possession of nuclear weapons , to acceded to the npt without precondition and further delay , to place promptly all its nuclear facilities under iaea full - scope safeguards and to conduct its nuclear related activities in conformity with the non - proliferation regime .

another nam statement at the 2015 npt review conference , also presented by an iranian official , said , "we stress the significance of achieving the universal adherence to the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty and realizing its entry into force. .

at the same time , the nam states parties to the npt recommended , inter alia , "to strongly call on all states that are not party to the non - proliferation treaty , particularly those states that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities , to accede , without any further delay and precondition , to the treaty as non - nuclear - weapon states. .

israel is such a state .

such statements do not address whether israeli accession to the npt and participation in a menwfz would be necessary conditions for egypt and iran to ratify the ctbt , or if such accession and participation plus israeli ratification of the ctbt would be sufficient conditions .

the prepcom uses the calendar year as its fiscal year .

its assessed budget is presented in dollars plus euros .

its 2016 budget is $37.2 million plus €80.7 million or , using an exchange rate of €1 = $1.11 as of august 31 , 2016 , a total of $117.9 million .

as of august 26 , about 70% of this assessment had been collected .

the u.s. assessment is 22.39% of the total or , in dollars , $26.4 million .

since the united states pays the prepcom once the u.s. budget is signed into law , almost all ( $20.1 million ) of the 2016 assessment remained outstanding as of august 26 , 2016 .

the united states had no outstanding prior year balance due as of that date .

u.s. funding for the prepcom is fy2002 actual , $16.6 million ; fy2003 actual , $18.2 million ; fy2004 actual , $18.9 million ; fy2005 actual , $18.8 million ; fy2006 actual , $14.2 million ; fy2007 actual , $13.5 million ; and fy2008 appropriated , $23.8 million ( net of an across - the - board cut in the consolidated appropriations act ) .

the fy2009 request was $9.9 million ; p.l .

111-8 , fy2009 omnibus appropriations act , provided $25.0 million .

the fy2010 appropriation was $30.0 million .

fy2011 actual funding was $33.0 million plus a special contribution of $7.5 million .

fy2012 actual funding was $33.0 million plus a special contribution of $8.9 million .

fy2013 actual funding , reflecting the full - year continuing resolution , was $31.3 million plus a special contribution of $7.1 million .

the fy2014 actual funding was $31.0 million plus a special contribution of $1.0 million .

the fy2015 actual funding was $30.3 million plus a special contribution of $1.7 million .

the fy2016 actual funding was a total of $31.0 million plus a special contribution of $2 million .

the fy2017 request was $29 million plus a special contribution of $3 million .

these funds are in the foreign operations budget under nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs .

they are listed in the budget documents as under the subprograms ctbt international monitoring system and ctbto preparatory commission special contributions .

special contributions are designated by the united states to improve specific detection technologies .

the bush administration's fy2007 budget justification stated that these funds "pay the u.s. share for the ongoing development and implementation of the international monitoring system ( ims ) , which supplements u.s. capabilities to detect nuclear explosions .

since the united states does not seek ratification and entry - into - force of the ctbt , none of the funds will support preparatory commission activities that are not related to the ims. .

the obama administration has taken a different approach .

in september 2009 , secretary of state clinton said , "we are prepared to pay our share of the preparatory commission budget so that the global verification regime will be fully operational when the ctbt enters into force. .

in 2010 , the united states paid off an outstanding prior years balance of $22.323 million .

the administration's fy2011 request for the prepcom was in two parts .

a "voluntary contribution" of $33 million "helps to fund the establishment , operation , and maintenance of the worldwide international monitoring system. .

in addition , "new for fy 2011 , a voluntary contribution to the preparatory commission of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization ( $10 million ) will fund specific projects to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the treaty's verification regime. .

the administration's fy2012 request for the prepcom was in the same two parts , $33.0 million for the ims and $7.5 million for specific projects .

in september 2011 , under secretary tauscher said that in august , the united states announced a contribution of $8.9 million to the ctbto prepcom "to support projects that will accelerate development of the ctbt verification regime," and in september , she said , the united states "concluded a memorandum of understanding with the provisional technical secretariat to contribute up to $25.5 million to underwrite the rebuilding of the hydroacoustic monitoring station on crozet island in the southern indian ocean. .

the fy2013 request stated , "the voluntary contribution to the preparatory commission of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization ( $33 million ) helps to fund the establishment , operation , and maintenance of the worldwide international monitoring system .

in addition , $3.5 million will fund specific projects to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the treaty's verification regime. .

for fy2014 , the request was $31.0 million for the ims and $1.0 million as special contributions .

among other things , the latter was intended to assist the ctbto's provisional technical secretariat in "efforts to engage medical isotope producers to use techniques to reduce their xenon emissions , provide information on such emissions to the idc , and begin defining how medical isotope data should be used when it is received by the idc. .

these isotopes are of concern to the ims , as discussed under " key provisions of the ctbt . .

as noted , the administration's fy2015 request was $30.3 million plus a special contribution of $1.7 million , the fy2016 request was a total of $33.0 million , and the fy2016 request was a total of $32.0 million .

p5 states want to maintain their nuclear warheads under a ctbt .

for example , in his prague speech of april 2009 , president obama expressed "america's commitment to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons" and pledged to pursue u.s. ratification of the ctbt , but he also stated , "as long as these weapons exist , the united states will maintain a safe , secure and effective arsenal to deter any adversary , and guarantee that defense to our allies. .

to this end , the p5 states have "stockpile stewardship" programs to maintain their nuclear weapons , and have maintained and upgraded their scientific and technical capabilities to do so .

nonnuclear nations fear that the p5 will continue to design new warheads under a ctbt , using computation and nonnuclear experiments instead of testing .

congress established the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) in title xxxii of p.l .

106-65 , fy2000 national defense authorization act , as a semiautonomous doe agency to manage stewardship and related programs .

in nnsa's budget , stewardship is funded by the weapons activities account , which has four main elements: directed stockpile work , activities directly supporting weapons in the stockpile ; research , development , test and evaluation programs ( formerly campaigns ) , which nnsa calls "efforts to develop and maintain critical capabilities , tools , and processes needed to support science based stockpile stewardship , refurbishment , and continued certification of the stockpile over the long - term in the absence of underground nuclear testing" ; readiness in technical base and facilities , which funds material recycle and recovery , recapitalization of facilities , and construction of facilities ; and infrastructure and safety , which is charged with maintaining , operating , and modernizing nnsa's infrastructure .

weapons activities contains other components as well .

for a discussion of stockpile stewardship programs and budgets , see crs report r43948 , energy and water development: fy2016 appropriations for nuclear weapons stockpile stewardship , by [author name scrubbed] .

weapons activities appropriations were: fy2001 , $5.006 billion ; fy2002 , $5.429 billion ; fy2003 , $5.954 billion ; fy2004 , $6.447 billion ; fy2005 , $6.626 billion ; fy2006 , $6.370 billion ; fy2007 , $6.259 billion ; fy2008 , $6.302 billion ; fy2009 , $6.380 billion ; fy2010 , $6.384 billion ; fy2011 , $6.896 billion ; fy2012 , $7.214 billion ; and fy2013 , $6.971 billion .

the latter amount reflected the sequester and the across - the - board rescission .

the fy2014 enacted amount was $7.781 billion .

the fy2015-enacted amount was $8.180 billion , and the fy2016-enacted amount was $8.846 billion .

the fy2017 request for weapons activities was $9.24 billion .

the ctbt is contentious .

for a detailed analysis of the case for and against the treaty , see crs report rl34394 , comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty: issues and arguments , by [author name scrubbed] .

key arguments include the following: can the united states maintain deterrence without testing ? .

the treaty's supporters hold that the u.s. stockpile stewardship program can maintain existing , tested weapons without further testing .

indeed , as noted above , as of august 2015 the weapons laboratories had completed 19 annual assessments of the stockpile , with the 20 th in progress .

treaty supporters claim that these weapons meet any deterrent needs , so that new types are not needed .

opponents maintain that there can be no confidence in existing warheads because many minor modifications over time will change them from tested versions .

as a result , some opponents argue that testing is needed to restore and maintain confidence , while others believe that testing may become needed and the option to return to testing must not be ruled out .

opponents see deterrence as dynamic , requiring new types of nuclear weapons to counter new threats , and assert that these weapons must be tested .

are monitoring and verification capability sufficient ? .

"monitoring" refers to technical capability ; "verification" to its adequacy to maintain security .

supporters hold that advances in monitoring , such as the rollout of the international monitoring system , make it hard for an evader to conduct undetected tests .

they claim that any such tests would be too small to affect the strategic balance .

opponents see many opportunities for evasion , such as detonating an explosion in a large underground cavity to muffle its seismic waves .

they believe that clandestine tests of even small weapons could put the united states at a serious disadvantage .

how might the treaty affect nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament ? .

supporters claim that the treaty makes technical contributions to nonproliferation , such as limiting weapons programs ; some supporters believe that nonproliferation requires progress toward nuclear disarmament , with the treaty a key step .

they note that all nato members excepting the united states have ratified the ctbt .

opponents believe that a strong nuclear deterrent is essential for nonproliferation because it reduces the incentive for friends and foes alike to build their own nuclear weapons , that nonproliferation and disarmament are unrelated , and that the international community gives this nation little credit for its many nonproliferation and disarmament actions .

09 / 29 / 1 5 — the ninth article xiv conference on promoting ctbt entry into force is scheduled to take place in new york .

06 / 22 / 1 5 — the fifth ctbt science and technology conference began in vienna , austria , ending on june 26 .

06 / 02 / 1 5 — pakistan reiterated its "its consistent stance that it will not be the first in its region to resume nuclear testing. .

05 / 22 / 1 5 — the nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference , which began on april 27 , ended without producing a final document .

05 / 14 / 1 5 — the ctbto prepcom and others concluded a workshop on signatures of medical and industrial isotope production .

the workshop began may 12 .

03 / 20 / 1 5 — angola became the 164 th state to ratify the ctbt .

02 / 24 / 1 5 — the ctbto prepcom and ecuador concluded an agreement to build two stations of the international monitoring system on the galapagos islands .

12 / 09 / 1 4 — the vienna conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons was held december 8 and 9 in vienna , austria .

11 / 03 / 1 4 — the ctbto prepcom sponsored an integrated field exercise in jordan to test procedures and technologies for an on - site inspection to detect a clandestine underground nuclear test .

the exercise concluded on december 9 , 2014 .

09 / 26 / 1 4 — the seventh ctbt ministerial meeting was held at u.n. headquarters in new york .

09 / 04 / 1 4 — the republic of the congo ratified the ctbt .

08 / 18 / 1 4 — the ctbto preparatory commission inaugurated a new facility to train personnel and to test equipment for infrasound ( low - frequency sound ) and seismic detection of nuclear explosions .

08 / 11 / 1 4 — a report indicated that activity at north korea's nuclear test site "has come to a standstill," judging from satellite imagery .

06 / 16-17 / 1 4 — the ctbto preparatory commission held its 42 nd meeting ; the next is scheduled for october 28-30 .

06 / 4-5 / 1 4 — the g7 summit in brussels adopted a declaration on nonproliferation and disarmament calling , among other things , for early entry into force and universalization of the ctbt .

03 / 04 / 1 4 — niue became the 162 nd state to ratify the ctbt .

06 / 17 / 1 3 — the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization preparatory commission ( ctbto prepcom ) science and technology conference is scheduled for june 17-21 .

06 / 13 / 1 3 — the ctbto prepcom's 40 th session is scheduled for june 13-14 .

this will be the last prepcom of executive secretary tibor tóth , whose term ends on july 31 .

his successor , lassina zerbo , takes office the next day .

06 / 10 / 1 3 — fifty years ago , president kennedy delivered his american university commencement address , in which he proposed a comprehensive test ban treaty and declared a moratorium on u.s. atmospheric nuclear testing .

06 / 06 / 1 3 — the house armed services committee passed h.r .

1960 , the fy2014 defense authorization bill , 59-2 .

it included an amendment that passed by voice vote fencing certain funds until the president certifies that no state party to the ctbt has conducted certain nuclear weapon tests , and barring use of u.s. contributions to the ctbto prepcom for lobbying or advocacy in the united states relating to the ctbt .

04 / 22 / 1 3 — the second session of the preparatory committee for the 2015 nuclear non - proliferation treaty review conference was held april 22-may 3 .

delegates called for entry into force of the ctbt and referenced the final document of the 2010 review conference , which stressed the urgency of entry into force .

04 / 08 / 1 3 — between april 8 and 14 , international monitoring system stations detected radioactive isotopes of xenon consistent with the north korean nuclear test of february 12 .

2 / 12 / 1 3 — north korea conducted a nuclear test .

2 / 08 / 1 3 — chad ratified the ctbt .

12 / 07 / 12 — by a vote of 184 for , 1 against ( north korea ) , and 3 abstentions , the u.n. general assembly adopted a resolution urging countries that have not done so to sign and ratify the ctbt .

12 / 05 / 12 — staff from los alamos and sandia national laboratories and the nevada national security site ( nnss ) conducted the 27 th subcritical experiment , "pollux," at nnss .

10 / 23 / 12 — lassina zerbo was elected to be the next executive secretary of the ctbt organization preparatory commission .

10 / 22 / 12 — the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization preparatory commission began its 39 th meeting , which ended october 24 .

09 / 27 / 12 — a group of foreign ministers issued a statement reaffirming their strongest support for the ctbt .

0 4 / 0 9 / 12 — niue became the 183 rd state to sign the ctbt .

03 / 30 / 1 2 — the national research council of the national academy of sciences released the unclassified version of its report , the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty — technical issues for the united states .

0 2 / 06 / 1 2 — indonesia became the 157 th state to ratify the ctbt , and the 36 th of the 44 annex 2 states whose ratification is required for entry into force .

12 / 02 / 11 — the u.n. general assembly adopted resolution a / res / 66 / 64 , "comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty," on a vote of 175 for , 1 against ( north korea ) , and 3 abstentions ( india , mauritius , syria ) .

the resolution , among other things , "stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification , without delay and without conditions , in order to achieve the earliest entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty. .

10 / 2 4 / 11 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization endorsed a budget of $10.3 million for an integrated field exercise in 2014 .

this exercise is intended to improve the organization's on - site inspection capabilities .

0 9 / 23 / 11 — a conference on accelerating ctbt entry into force was held at u.n. headquarters in new york .

09 / 2 0 / 11 — guinea became the 155 th state to ratify the ctbt .

0 8 / 2 9 / 11 — the second international day against nuclear tests was observed .

06 / 14 / 11 — ghana ratified the ctbt .

06 / 00 / 1 1 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty sponsored a conference , "comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty: science and technology 2011," in vienna , austria , from june 8 to 10 .

0 5 / 1 0 / 11 — ellen tauscher , under secretary of state for arms control and international security , said , "the obama administration is preparing to engage the senate and the public on an education campaign that we expect will lead to ratification of the ctbt. .

0 4 / 3 0 / 11 — foreign ministers from 10 nations issued a statement in support of the ctbt .

0 3 / 00 / 11 — the national institute for public policy released a report suggesting that "u.s. ratification of the ctbt would bring few if any tangible benefits while introducing significant new risks for u.s. and allied security. .

11 / 00 / 10 — the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization preparatory commission held a simulated on - site inspection in jordan from november 1 to 12 .

1 0 / 0 5 / 10 — assistant secretary of state rose gottemoeller said , "the administration prepares for u.s. senate reconsideration of the treaty. .

09 / 23 / 10 — twenty - four foreign ministers issued a joint statement on the ctbt calling on "all states that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the treaty without delay" and committing themselves "to make the treaty a focus of attention at the highest political level. .

0 9 / 15 / 10 — nnsa conducted the 24 th subcritical experiment , "bacchus," at the nevada nuclear security site .

this was the first such experiment in four years .

0 8 / 29 / 10 — u.n. general assembly resolution 64 / 35 , adopted by consensus on december 3 , 2009 , declared this day the international day against nuclear tests .

05 / 26 / 10 — central african republic and trinidad and tobago ratified the ctbt .

05 / 0 3 / 10 — at the 2010 npt review conference , indonesia announced that it "is initiating the process of the ratification of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty. .

indonesia is one of the 44 nations that must ratify the treaty for it to enter into force .

05 / 00 / 10 — the eighth nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference was held may 3-28 at u.n. headquarters in new york .

the final document stated , "the conference reaffirms the vital importance of the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty as a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non - proliferation regime. .

for earlier chronology , see the appendix .

2010 review conference of the parties to the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , "final document," new york , 2010 , http: / / www.un.org / ga / search / view_doc.asp ? symbol=npt / conf.2010 / 50%20 ( vol.i ) .

american association for the advancement of science , american physical society , and center for strategic and international studies , joint working group , "nuclear weapons in 21 st century u.s. national security," december 2008 .

"arms control today 2008 presidential q&a: president - elect barack obama," arms control today , december 2008 , pp .

31-36 .

arms control association , ctbt at 15: status and prospects , report on a conference held february 17 , 2012 , at vienna center for disarmament and non - proliferation , vienna , austria , october 2012 , http: / / www.armscontrol.org / files / aca_ctbt_report_vienna_2012.pdf .

australia .

department of foreign affairs and trade .

"berlin statement by foreign ministers on nuclear disarmament and non - proliferation," april 30 , 2011 , http: / / www.dfat.gov.au / security / berlin_statement_110430.html .

bailey , kathleen , and robert barker .

"why the united states should unsign the comprehensive test ban treaty and resume nuclear testing. .

comparative strategy .

april - june 2003: 131-138 .

bailey , kathleen , and thomas scheber , the comprehensive test ban treaty: an assessment of the benefits , costs , and risks , national institute for public policy , march 2011 , xix + 65 p. , http: / / www.nipp.org / ctbt%203.11.11%20electronic%20version.pdf .

brown , harold , and john deutch .

"the nuclear disarmament fantasy. .

wall street journal , november 19 , 2007 , p. 19 .

brumfiel , geoff , "isotopes hint at north korean nuclear test," nature , february 3 , 2012 , http: / / www.nature.com / news / isotopes - hint - at - north - korean - nuclear - test - 1.9972 .

[addresses de geer's article on north korea] center for security policy , "towards a new deterrent: analysis and recommendations for the commission on the strategic posture of the united states," 5 p. , c. may 2008 , http: / / www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org / modules / newsmanager / center%20publication%20pdfs / towards%20a%20new%20deterrent%20516.pdf .

coblentz , david , and frank pabian , "revised geologic site characterization of the north korean test site at punggye - ri," science & global security , published online june 29 , 2015 , http: / / www.tandfonline.com / doi / pdf / 10.1080 / 08929882.2015.1039343 .

conference on facilitating the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , "final declaration and measures to promote the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty," september 27 , 2013 , 5 p. + app. , http: / / www.ctbto.org / fileadmin / user_upload / art_14_2013 / statements / final_declaration.pdf .

congressional commission on the strategic posture of the united states .

america's strategic posture , final report .

washington , dc , united states institute of peace press , may 2009 .

corden , pierce , and david hafemeister , "nuclear proliferation and testing: a tale of two treaties," physics today , april 2014 , pp .

41-46 .

council on foreign relations .

independent task force report no .

62 .

u.s. nuclear weapons policy , 2009 .

dahlman , ola , jenifer mackby , svein mykkeltveit , and hein haak , detect and deter: can countries verify the nuclear test ban ? , dordrecht , netherlands , springer , 2011 , 271 pp .

de geer , lars - erik , "radionuclide evidence for low - yield nuclear testing in north korea in april / may 2010," science and global security , 20 ( 2012 ) , pp .

1-29 , http: / / www.tandfonline.com / doi / pdf / 10.1080 / 08929882.2012.652558 .

de geer , lars - erik , "the great 2010 dprk nuclear test debate: summarizing the evidence of a low - yield nuclear test carried out in north korea in may 2010," 38 north , may 19 , 2015 , http: / / 38north.org / 2015 / 05 / ledegeer051915 / .

dodge , michaela , and baker spring , "keeping nuclear testing on the table: a national security imperative," heritage foundation backgrounder no .

2770 , february 28 , 2013 , http: / / report.heritage.org / bg2770 .

feith , douglas , frank gaffney , james lyons , and r. james woolsey , "obama's harmful nuclear illusions," washington post , march 31 , 2013 , p. 15 .

finlay , brian , et al. , "ctbt: what's new and what's next ? .

" , panel discussion , carnegie international nuclear policy conference 2015 , march 23 , 2015 , http: / / carnegieendowment.org / files / 10-230315carnegiectbt_ - _formatted2.pdf .

gallucci , robert , "nuclear shockwaves: ramifications of the north korean nuclear test," arms control today , november 2006 .

gorbachev , mikhail , "the nuclear threat," wall street journal , january 31 , 2007 , p. 13 .

gottemoeller , rose , remarks at the american bar association spring meeting , international law section , washington , dc , april 25 , 2013 , http: / / translations.state.gov / st / english / texttrans / 2013 / 04 / 20130429146553.html#axzz2vlxx3dnp .

graham , owen , "consider tech risk when debating nuclear test ban treaty," defense news ( online ) , june 17 , 2012 , http: / / www.defensenews.com / article / 20120617 / deffeat05 / 306170007 / consider - tech - risk - when - debating - nuclear - test - ban - treaty ? odyssey=nav|head .

hafemeister , david , "the comprehensive test ban treaty: effectively verifiable," arms control today , october 2008 .

hafemeister , david , "progress in ctbt monitoring since its 1999 senate defeat," science and global security , no .

15 , 2007 , pp .

151-183 .

harden , blaine , "north korean nuclear blast draws global condemnation," washington post , may 26 , 2009 , p. 1 .

heller , arnie , "enhancing confidence in the nation's nuclear stockpile," science & technology review , july / august 2010 , pp .

4-11 .

heller , arnie , "seismic research making waves," science & technology review , june 2015 , pp .

4-11 .

hoffman , david , "supercomputers offer tools for nuclear testing — and solving nuclear mysteries," washington post , november 1 , 2011 , p. 1 .

horovitz , liviu , "a detour strategy for the test ban treaty," washington quarterly , fall 2011 , pp .

87-99 .

"joint ministerial statement on the ctbt," new york , september 23 , 2010 , 3 p. , http: / / www.ctbto.org / fileadmin / user_upload / public_information / 2010 / statementrev.16.09.pdf .

jonas , david , and thomas saunders , "the object and purpose of a treaty: three interpretive methods," vanderbilt journal of transnational law , vol .

43 , no .

3 , may 2010 , pp .

565-609 .

joseph , jofi , "renew the drive for ctbt ratification" washington quarterly , april 2009 , pp .

79-90 , http: / / www.twq.com / 09april / docs / 09apr_joseph.pdf .

kazakhstan , embassy of , et al. , "nuclear weapons testing: history , progress , challenges," conference held september 15 , 2014 , washington , dc ; transcript at http: / / www.armscontrol.org / events / nuclear - weapons - testing_history - progress - challenges .

kimball , daryl , "learning from the 1999 vote on the nuclear test ban treaty," arms control today , october 2009 , pp .

46-52 .

kimball , daryl , "time to move forward on the test ban treaty," arms control today , april 2013 , http: / / www.armscontrol.org / act / 2013_04 / focus .

klug , foster , and matthew pennington , "photos show nkorea nuclear readiness," associated press / abc news , december 28 , 2012 , http: / / abcnews.go.com / international / wirestory / ap - exclusive - photos - show - nkorea - nuclear - readiness - 18079671 .

koplow , david , "nuclear arms control by a pen and a phone: effectuating the comprehensive test ban treaty without ratification," georgetown journal of international law , vol .

46 , no .

2 , winter 2015 , pp .

475-518 , http: / / www.law.georgetown.edu / academics / law - journals / gjil / recent / upload / zsx00215000475.pdf .

kyl , senator jon , "why we need to test nuclear weapons," wall street journal , october 21 , 2009 , p. 23 .

kyl , senator jon , and richard perle , "our decaying nuclear deterrent," wall street journal , june 29 , 2009 , p. 13 .

lakshmi , rama , "key indian figures call for new nuclear tests despite deal with u.s.," washington post , october 5 , 2009 , p. 7 .

linzer , dafna , and thomas ricks , "u.s. waits for firm information on nature and success of [north korean nuclear] device," washington post , october 11 , 2006: 14 .

mathews , jessica tuchman , "this time , ban the test," international herald tribune , october 21 , 2009 .

monroe , robert , "assessing risks of comprehensive test ban treaty," june 15 , 2012 , video , http: / / www.youtube.com / watch ? v=h9plbibj74y&list=uuppw4a4zmhk_e95s2ka0xaw&index=2&feature=plcp .

monroe , robert , "the antiquation of america's nuclear weapons," washington times , march 4 , 2013 .

murphy , jack , "comments on the seismic monitoring analyses presented in the 2012 national academy of sciences report: 'the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty – technical issues for the united states,'" spring 2012 ( technical criticisms of the report by an saic seismologist ) .

national academy of sciences .

"advances in nuclear - test monitoring and verification," briefing slides by five presenters , september 24 , 2012 , available via http: / / cstsp.aaas.org / content.html ? contentid=2507 .

national academy of sciences .

committee on technical issues related to ratification of the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty .

technical issues related to the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty .

washington , national academies press , 2002. http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog.php ? record_id=10471 .

national academy of sciences , national research council , committee on reviewing and updating technical issues related to the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty , the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty — technical issues for the united states , washington , national academies press , 2012 , http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog.php ? record_id=12849 .

[updates 2002 report] o'leary , hazel , "new evidence for the nuclear test - ban treaty," san diego union - tribune , april 19 , 2012 , http: / / www.utsandiego.com / news / 2012 / apr / 19 / new - evidence - for - the - nuclear - test - ban - treaty / .

pabian , frank , and siegfried hecker , "contemplating a third nuclear test in north korea," bulletin of the atomic scientists ( online edition ) , august 6 , 2012 .

perfilyev , nikita , "keeping the nuclear - test - ban treaty alive," the diplomat , may 5 , 2015 , http: / / thediplomat.com / 2015 / 05 / keeping - the - nuclear - test - ban - treaty - alive / .

preparatory committee for the 2015 review conference of the parties to the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , second session ( april 22-may 3 , 2013 ) , "comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty," working paper submitted by the members of the non - proliferation and disarmament initiative ( australia , canada , chile , germany , japan , mexico , the netherlands , poland , turkey and the united arab emirates ) , march 6 , 2013 , npt / conf.2015.pc.ii / wp - 1 , http: / / papersmart.unmeetings.org / media / 1104226 / nptconf.2015pc.iiwp.1.pdf .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization , website , http: / / www.ctbto.org .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization , annual report 20 13 , june 2014 , c. 90 pp. , http: / / www.ctbto.org / fileadmin / user_upload / pdf / annual_report_2013 / english / ar2013-english - opening.pdf .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , "ctbto detects radioactivity consistent with 12 february announced north korean nuclear test," press release , april 23 , 2013 , http: / / www.ctbto.org / press - centre / press - releases / 2013 / ctbto - detects - radioactivity - consistent - with - 12-february - announced - north - korean - nuclear - test / .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , ife14 [integrated field exercise 2014] home page , http: / / www.ctbto.org / specials / integrated - field - exercise - 2014 / .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , science and technology 2015 , conference home page , http: / / www.ctbto.org / specials / snt2015 / .

preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , ctbto spectrum ( journal ) , august 2014 , http: / / www.ctbto.org / publications / spectrum - publication / spectrum - issues - 2012-and - onward / issue - 22-august - 2014 / .

"project for the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty," website sponsored by the arms control association , http: / / projectforthectbt.org / .

ramaker , jaap , jenifer mackby , peter marshall , and robert geil , the final test: a history of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty negotiations , vienna , austria , provisional technical secretariat of the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization , 2003 , 291 pp .

richards , paul , "forensic seismology and ctbt verification," ctbto spectrum , january 2007 , pp .

1 , 6 , 19 .

ringbom , a. , et al. , "radioxenon detections in the ctbt international monitoring system likely related to the announced nuclear test in north korea on february 12 , 2013 , journal of environmental radioactivity 128 ( 2014 ) , pp .

47-63 .

russian federation .

ministry for atomic energy and ministry of defense .

ussr nuclear weapons tests and peaceful nuclear explosions , 1949 through 1990 .

1996 .

63 pp .

russian federation .

ministry for atomic energy .

catalog of worldwide nuclear testing .

1999. http: / / www.iss.niiit.ru / ksenia / catal_nt / .

sanger , david , "north koreans say they tested nuclear device," new york times , october 9 , 2006 , p. 1 .

sanger , david , and choe sang - hun , "north korea confirms it conducted 3d nuclear test," new york times ( online edition ) , february 12 , 2013 .

schneidmiller , chris , "as obama prepares to push nuclear test ban , technological basis still debated," global security newswire , july 15 , 2011 , and "senate decision key to future of test ban treaty," global security newswire , july 18 , 2011 ( two - part series ) .

schoeppener , ulrich kuhn , "improve the nuclear test monitoring system," bulletin of the atomic scientists , february 9 , 2015 , http: / / thebulletin.org / improve - nuclear - test - monitoring - system7980 .

shultz , george , william perry , henry kissinger , and sam nunn , "a world free of nuclear weapons," wall street journal , january 4 , 2007 , p. 15 .

shultz , george , william perry , henry kissinger , and sam nunn , "toward a nuclear - free world," wall street journal , january 16 , 2008 , p. 13 .

shultz , george , william perry , henry kissinger , and sam nunn , "how to protect our nuclear deterrent," wall street journal , january 20 , 2010 , p. 17 .

spring , baker , restoring the role of the nation - state system in arms control and disarmament , heritage foundation special report sr - 84 , september 21 , 2010 , http: / / thf_media.s3.amazonaws.com / 2010 / pdf / sr84.pdf .

sokolski , henry , and gary schmitt , "advice for the nuclear abolitionists," weekly standard , may 12 , 2008 .

uk prime minister's office .

"uk - france summit 2010 declaration on defence and security co - operation," november 2 , 2010 .

umarov , ambassador kairat , daryl kimball , and paul walker , "close the door on nuclear dangers," the hill , september 14 , 2014 , http: / / thehill.com / blogs / congress - blog / foreign - policy / 217596-close - the - door - on - nuclear - dangers .

u.n. "resolution adopted by the general assembly on 5 december 2013 [on the report of the first committee ( a / 68 / 417 ) ] , 68 / 68 .

comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty," a / res / 68 / 68 , december 11 , 2013 , http: / / www.un.org / en / ga / search / view_doc.asp ? symbol=a / res / 68 / 68 .

"unicorn experiments yield crucial data," nuclear weapons journal ( a publication of los alamos national laboratory ) , issue 2 , 2006 , pp .

20-21 .

u.s. air force research laboratory and national nuclear security administration .

proceedings of the 30 th monitoring research review: ground - based nuclear explosion monitoring technologies , september 23-25 , 2008 , portsmouth , va. u.s. congress .

congressional research service .

crs report r41160 , north korea's 2009 nuclear test: containment , monitoring , implications , by [author name scrubbed] .

u.s. congress .

senate .

comprehensive nuclear test - ban treaty: message from the president of the united states transmitting comprehensive nuclear test - ban treaty ... , treaty doc .

105-28 , september 23 , 1997 .

washington: gpo , 1997 , xvi + 230 p. u.s. department of defense .

nuclear posture review report .

april 2010 , http: / / www.defense.gov / npr / docs / 2010%20nuclear%20posture%20review%20report.pdf .

u.s. department of energy .

fy 20 16 congressional budget request .

volume 1 , national nuclear security administration , doe / cf - 0107 , february 2015 , http: / / www.energy.gov / sites / prod / files / 2015 / 02 / f19 / fy2016budgetvolume1%20_1.pdf .

u.s. department of energy .

united states nuclear tests: july 1945 through september 1992 .

doe / nv - 209 ( rev .

15 ) , december 2000: xviii + 162 pp .

http: / / www.nv.doe.gov / library / publications / historical / doenv_209_rev15.pdf .

u.s. department of energy .

f iscal year 201 6 stockpile stewardship and management plan , report to congress , march 2015 , http: / / nnsa.energy.gov / sites / default / files / fy16ssmp_final%203_16_2015_reducedsize.pdf .

april 2014 , http: / / nnsa.energy.gov / sites / default / files / nnsa / 04-14-inlinefiles / 2014-04-11%20fy15ssmp_final_4-10-2014.pdf .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

"nnsa conducts pollux subcritical experiment at nevada national security site," press release , december 6 , 2012 , http: / / www.nnsa.energy.gov / print / mediaroom / pressreleases / pollux120612 .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

"nnsa conducts experiment to improve u.s. ability to detect foreign nuclear explosions," press release , may 26 , 2015 , http: / / nnsa.energy.gov / mediaroom / pressreleases / foreignnuclearexplosiondetectionexperiments .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

nuclear test readiness , report to congress , may 2011 , 6 pp .

+ app .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration , "summary of experiments conducted in support of stockpile stewardship," quarter 1 , fy15 , 3 p. , http: / / nnsa.energy.gov / sites / default / files / quarterly%20ssp%20experiment%20summary - q1fy15.pdf .

u.s. secretary of energy , secretary of defense , and secretary of state .

"national security and nuclear weapons: maintaining deterrence in the 21 st century. .

july 2007 , 3 p. http: / / www.nnsa.doe.gov / docs / factsheets / 2007 / na - 07-fs - 04.pdf .

u.s. department of state .

"remarks at the friends of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty ministerial," john kerry , secretary of state , united nations headquarters , new york city , september 26 , 2014 , http: / / www.state.gov / secretary / remarks / 2014 / 09 / 232219.htm .

u.s. white house .

office of the press secretary .

"joint statement between president george w. bush and [indian] prime minister manmohan singh," july 16 , 2005 .

vienna conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons , "report and summary of findings of the conference," december 8-9 , 2014 , http: / / www.bmeia.gv.at / fileadmin / user_upload / zentrale / aussenpolitik / abruestung / hinw14 / hinw14_chair_s_summary.pdf .

walter , katie , "sleuthing seismic signals," science & technology review , march 2009 , pp .

4-12 .

weapons of mass destruction commission , weapons of terror: freeing the world of nuclear , biological and chemical arms .

june 2006 , 227 p. http: / / www.wmdcommission.org / files / weapons_of_terror.pdf .

"the united states - indonesia comprehensive partnership," speech by h.e .

dr. n. hassan wirajuda , minister for foreign affairs , republic of indonesia , at a breakfast forum with the carnegie endowment for international peace and usindo , washington , dc , june 8 , 2009 .

woolsey , r. james , and keith payne , "reconsidering the comprehensive test ban treaty: it's an ineffectual gesture that could do more harm than good," national review online , september 8 , 2011 , http: / / www.nationalreview.com / articles / 276530 / reconsidering - comprehensive - test - ban - treaty - r - james - woolsey .

zhang , miao , and lianxing wen , "seismological evidence for a low - yield nuclear test on 12 may 2010 in north korea," seismological research letters , vol , 86 , no .

1 , january / february 2015 , pp .

1-8 .

09 / 23 / 92 — the united states conducted its most recent nuclear test , "divider. .

10 / 02 / 92 — president bush signed the fy1993 energy and water development appropriations act , p.l .

102-377 ; section 507 restricted u.s. nuclear testing .

10 / 13 / 92 — russia announced an extension of its test moratorium at least to mid - 1993 .

01 / 13 / 93 — president françois mitterrand said france would extend its test moratorium as long as the united states and russia did .

04 / 24 / 93 — at the vancouver summit , presidents clinton and yeltsin agreed that negotiations on a multilateral test ban should begin soon .

07 / 03 / 93 — president clinton announced his plan to continue the test moratorium through september 1994 as long as no other nation tests .

08 / 10 / 93 — the conference on disarmament ( cd ) gave its ad hoc committee on a nuclear test ban a mandate to negotiate a ctbt .

10 / 05 / 93 — china held the world's first nuclear test since september 1992 .

01 / 25 / 94 — the conference on disarmament opened its 1994 session in geneva , with negotiation of a ctbt its top priority .

03 / 15 / 94 — the united states extended its test moratorium through september 1995 .

06 / 10 / 94 — china conducted an underground nuclear test .

09 / 26 / 94 — president yeltsin , in an address to the u.n. general assembly , said , "russia favors signing this treaty [the ctbt] next year. .

10 / 07 / 94 — china conducted an underground nuclear test .

01 / 24 / 95 — president clinton said in his state of the union address , "the united states will lead the charge to extend indefinitely the nuclear non - proliferation treaty [and] to enact a comprehensive nuclear test ban. .

01 / 30 / 95 — president clinton continued the u.s. moratorium until a ctbt enters into force , assuming it is signed before september 30 , 1996 .

05 / 11 / 95 — the nuclear non - proliferation treaty review and extension conference agreed to extend that treaty indefinitely , and by reference called for completing ctbt negotiations not later than 1996 .

05 / 15 / 95 — china conducted a nuclear test , its fourth since september 1992 .

06 / 13 / 95 — president jacques chirac announced that france would conduct eight nuclear tests in the south pacific between september 1995 and may 1996 .

08 / 04 / 95 — the senate tabled , 56 to 44 , an amendment by senator exon and others to delete $50 million for conducting hydronuclear tests ( those producing extremely low nuclear yield ) .

the amendment was to s. 1026 , the fy1996 national defense authorization bill .

08 / 10 / 95 — france announced that once it completed its nuclear test program , it would support a ctbt that bans all nuclear tests of any yield .

08 / 11 / 95 — president clinton announced his decision to pursue a "true zero yield" ctbt , banning all nuclear tests regardless of yield , accompanied by six "safeguards" to assure confidence in u.s. nuclear weapons under a ctbt .

08 / 17 / 95 — china conducted a nuclear test , its fifth since september 1992 .

09 / 05 / 95 — france conducted a nuclear test , its first since 1991 .

12 / 13 / 95 — a u.n. general assembly resolution , passed 85-18 , "strongly deplores" current nuclear testing and "strongly urges" an immediate end to testing .

01 / 23 / 96 — in his state of the union address , president clinton stated , "we must end the race to create new nuclear weapons by signing a truly comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty — this year. .

01 / 27 / 96 — france held the sixth nuclear test in its test series .

01 / 29 / 96 — president chirac announced "the final end to french nuclear tests. .

03 / 07 / 96 — the washington times reported u.s. intelligence agencies have ambiguous evidence that russia may have conducted a nuclear test in january 1996 .

04 / 19 / 96 — president yeltsin formally endorsed a zero - yield ctbt and reserved the right to resume testing if russia's supreme interests are threatened .

the next day , the group of seven plus russia expressed their commitment to complete and sign a zero - yield ctbt by september 1996 .

05 / 28 / 96 — ambassador jaap ramaker of the netherlands , chairman of the cd's ad hoc committee on a nuclear test ban , tabled a draft text of a ctbt incorporating compromises on key outstanding issues .

06 / 04 / 96 — france and the united states signed an agreement to share information relevant to maintaining nuclear weapons .

06 / 08 / 96 — china held a nuclear test and declared that after one more test it would join an international moratorium on nuclear explosions .

06 / 20 / 96 — india stated it would not sign a ctbt unless the five declared nuclear weapon states agreed to a timetable to give up their nuclear weapons .

06 / 26 / 96 — the senate tabled , 53-45 , an amendment by senators kyl and reid to the fy1997 national defense authorization bill to permit u.s. nuclear testing after september 30 , 1996 , under certain conditions if the senate had not given its advice and consent to ratification of a ctbt .

07 / 23 / 96 — the united states and russia announced their joint support for the existing draft ctbt .

while this draft did not fully satisfy either nation , they saw it as acceptable and the only route to achieving a ctbt in 1996 .

07 / 29 / 96 — china conducted what it said would be its last nuclear test , and pledged to begin a moratorium on testing on july 30 .

08 / 07 / 96 — china and the united states reportedly reached an agreement on modifying the draft treaty so as to resolve china's concerns over ctbt verification , clearing the way for china to support the treaty .

08 / 20 / 96 — india vetoed the draft ctbt in the cd , barring the treaty from going to the u.n. general assembly as a cd document .

08 / 23 / 96 — australia asked the u.n. general assembly to begin consideration of the draft ctbt on september 9 .

09 / 10 / 96 — the u.n. general assembly adopted , 158 to 3 ( with 5 abstentions and 19 nations not voting ) , the draft ctbt negotiated at the cd .

09 / 24 / 96 — the ctbt was opened for signing ; president clinton and others signed .

11 / 20 / 96 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive test ban treaty organization ( ctbto ) began its first meeting .

07 / 02 / 97 — the department of energy conducted its first subcritical experiment , "rebound," at the nevada test site .

it conducted one more in 1997 .

08 / 28 / 97 — the washington times reported administration officials as saying russia may have conducted a nuclear explosion on august 16 .

09 / 22 / 97 — president clinton submitted the ctbt to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification .

11 / 04 / 97 — the washington post reported the administration formally dropped its claim that a seismic event of august 16 , 1997 , was a russian nuclear test .

01 / 21 / 98 — senator jesse helms , in a letter to president clinton , said "the ctbt is very low on the [senate foreign relations] committee's list of priorities. .

01 / 27 / 98 — in his state of the union address , president clinton asked the senate to approve the ctbt this year and announced that four former chairmen of the joint chiefs of staff had endorsed the treaty .

03 / 25 / 98 — the department of energy conducted its third subcritical experiment , "stagecoach," at the nevada test site .

it conducted two more in 1998 .

04 / 06 / 98 — britain and france became the first declared nuclear weapon states to ratify the ctbt , depositing instruments of ratification with the united nations .

05 / 11 / 98 — prime minister vajpayee announced india conducted three nuclear tests .

05 / 13 / 98 — india announced that it conducted two nuclear tests .

05 / 28 / 98 — pakistan announced that it conducted five nuclear tests .

05 / 30 / 98 — pakistan announced that it conducted one nuclear test .

06 / 05 / 98 — the foreign ministers of china , france , russia , the united kingdom , and the united states , in a joint communique , condemned the indian and pakistani nuclear tests , urged india and pakistan to refrain from weaponizing or deploying nuclear weapons , and called on them to adhere to the ctbt "immediately and unconditionally. .

09 / 23 / 98 — pakistan's prime minister , nawaz sharif , in an address to the united nations , said his nation would adhere to the ctbt if other nations lifted economic sanctions , as long as india refrained from testing .

12 / 00 / 98 — secretary of energy bill richardson and secretary of defense william cohen submitted the third annual nuclear stockpile certification memorandum to the president stating , "the nuclear stockpile has no safety or reliability concerns that require underground testing at this time. .

02 / 09 / 99 — the department of energy conducted its sixth subcritical experiment , "clarinet," at the nevada test site .

it conducted two more in 1999 .

05 / 25 / 99 — the cox committee , in its report , stated its belief that china may be continuing to conduct underground nuclear tests .

07 / 20 / 99 — in separate press conferences , president clinton and nine senators urged the senate to consider the ctbt .

a survey found 82% of americans want the treaty approved .

all 45 democratic senators wrote to senator helms urging him to hold hearings on the treaty and to report it to the senate .

07 / 26 / 99 — responding to the july 20 letter , senator helms stated that "i do not share your enthusiasm for this treaty" and that the senate foreign relations committee would consider it after amendments to the abm treaty and the kyoto protocol .

09 / 30 / 99 — senator lott proposed a unanimous - consent request that would bring the ctbt to the senate floor for 10 hours of debate beginning october 6 , and then to a vote .

10 / 08 / 99 — ( 1 ) states that had ratified the ctbt ended a three - day conference on expediting entry into force .

 ( 2 ) the senate began debate on the treaty .

10 / 11 / 99 — president clinton wrote to senators lott and daschle to request that a vote on the ctbt be delayed .

10 / 13 / 99 — the senate rejected the ctbt , 48 for , 51 against , 1 present .

01 / 28 / 00 — secretary of state albright announced that gen. john shalikashvili ( ret. ) .

would head the administration's effort to achieve bipartisan support for ctbt ratification , but the state department indicated the administration did not expect to seek senate approval of the treaty in 2000 .

02 / 04 / 00 — doe conducted the ninth u.s. subcritical experiment , "oboe 3. .

it held four more in 2000 .

02 / 04 / 00 — russia announced that it conducted seven subcritical experiments between september 23 , 1999 , and january 8 , 2000 .

06 / 30 / 00 — russia ratified the ctbt .

11 / 03 / 00 — russia announced that it completed its fifth and final series of subcritical experiments for 2000 at novaya zemlya during the week of october 30 .

01 / 17 / 01 — colin powell , as nominee for secretary of state , said the administration would not ask for ctbt ratification in this session of congress .

03 / 04 / 01 — the new york times reported u.s. intelligence experts were divided on whether russia had conducted clandestine tests over the past several years .

06 / 26 / 01 — the house appropriations committee declined to add funds to the fy2002 energy and water development appropriations bill to increase nuclear test readiness , arguing the secretary of defense , president , armed services committees , and congress must first request or approve these funds .

09 / 26 / 01 — the national nuclear security agency ( nnsa ) held the 14 th u.s. subcritical experiment , "oboe 8. .

it conducted one more in 2001 .

11 / 11 / 01 — the conference on facilitating the entry into force of the ctbt began on this date at u.n. headquarters in new york and ended november 13 .

02 / 15 / 02 — nnsa held the 16 th u.s. subcritical experiment , and the first with uk participation , "vito. .

it conducted three more subcritical experiments , without uk participation , in 2002 .

05 / 10 / 02 — the house passed h.r .

4546 , the bob stump national defense authorization act for fy2003 ; it called for doe to achieve the ability to conduct a nuclear test within a year of a presidential direction to test .

07 / 31 / 02 — the national academy of sciences issued a report asserting that the main technical concerns raised in regard to the ctbt are manageable .

09 / 26 / 02 — nnsa held the 19 th u.s. subcritical experiment , "rocco. .

02 / 00 / 03 — a house policy committee report recommended "a test readiness program that could achieve an underground diagnostic [nuclear] test within 18 months" ; the bipartisan congressional task force on nonproliferation urged president bush "not to resume nuclear weapons testing. .

05 / 22 / 03 — the senate passed , 98-1 , s. 1050 , the fy2004 national defense authorization bill .

section 3132 directed the secretary of energy to achieve by october 1 , 2006 , and to maintain thereafter , the ability to conduct a nuclear test within 18 months of a decision to test , unless the secretary determines that a different number of months is preferable .

09 / 00 / 03 — a conference on facilitating the ctbt's entry into force was held in vienna , austria , september 3-5 .

09 / 19 / 03 — nnsa held the 20 th u.s. subcritical experiment , "piano. .

10 / 30 / 03 — the u.n. general assembly's first committee ( disarmament and international security ) approved a draft resolution , "a path to total elimination of nuclear weapons," 146-2 , with 16 abstentions .

a provision stressed the importance of achieving early entry into force of the ctbt .

the united states and india voted no ; the u.s. representative stated that he did so because of u.s. opposition to the ctbt .

11 / 00 / 03 — the 21 st meeting of the ctbto preparatory commission was held november 10-13 in vienna , austria .

12 / 08 / 03 — the u.n. general assembly adopted , 164-2 , with 2 abstentions , a resolution , "a path to total elimination of nuclear weapons. .

01 / 06 / 04 — libya became the 109 th nation to ratify the ctbt .

05 / 25 / 04 — nnsa held the 21 st u.s. subcritical experiment , "armando. .

06 / 20 / 04 — in a joint statement , india and pakistan agreed to reaffirm their unilateral moratoria on nuclear testing , barring extraordinary events , and to establish a dedicated and secure hotline between the two foreign secretaries .

06 / 00 / 04 — the 22 nd meeting of the ctbto preparatory commission was held june 22-24 in vienna , austria .

09 / 24 / 04 — foreign ministers from 42 nations issue a statement calling entry into force of the ctbt "more urgent today than ever before. .

12 / 03 / 04 — the u.n. general assembly adopted , 177-2 , with 4 abstentions , a resolution , "comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty. .

0 2 / 10 / 05 — north korea declared , "we ... have manufactured nukes for self - defense to cope with the bush administration's evermore undisguised policy to isolate and stifle the dprk. .

03 / 10 / 05 — the european parliament passed a resolution that , among other things , "reiterates its call for the usa ... to sign and ratify the ctbt. .

05 / 00 / 05 — at the nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference , held may 2-27 , some nations criticized the united states for not ratifying the ctbt .

05 / 16 / 05 — the new york times reported that on may 15 , national security advisor stephen hadley stated , "action would have to be taken" if north korea conducted a nuclear test .

08 / 29 / 05 — egyptian foreign minister ahmed aboul gheit reportedly stated that egypt would not ratify the ctbt until israel joins the npt .

09 / 00 / 05 — a conference , facilitating the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty , was held september 21 to 23 at u.n. headquarters in new york .

11 / 00 / 05 — the 25 th session of the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization was held november 14 to 18 .

12 / 08 / 05 — the u.n. general assembly adopted , 168-2 , a resolution on nuclear disarmament that , among other things , urged nations to ratify the ctbt .

2 / 23 / 06 — the united states and united kingdom conducted a subcritical experiment , "krakatau," at the nevada test site .

0 6 / 00 / 06 — the 26 th meeting of the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty organization was held june 20-23 .

0 8 / 30 / 06 — the united states conducted its 23 rd subcritical experiment , "unicorn," at the nevada test site .

0 9 / 20 / 06 — fifty - nine foreign ministers called on states that have not done so to ratify the treaty .

0 9 / 28 / 06 — representative tauscher introduced h.res .

1059 , calling on the senate to give its advice and consent to ctbt ratification .

10 / 03 / 06 — north korea declared that it will conduct a nuclear test .

10 / 09 / 06 — north korea claimed to have conducted its first nuclear test ; most reports placed the explosive yield of the test at one kiloton or less .

10 / 16 / 06 — the united states confirmed that the north korean event of october 9 was a nuclear test .

11 / 17 / 06 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization concluded its 27 th meeting .

01 / 04 / 07 — four former government officials urged "[i]nitiating a bipartisan process with the senate ... to achieve ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

01 / 31 / 07 — mikhail gorbachev called on nuclear weapon states to ratify the ctbt .

03 / 29 / 07 — the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization preparatory commission certified the 200 th and 201 st international monitoring system stations .

06 / 04 / 07 — the senate armed services committee reported s. 1547 , fy2008 national defense authorization act .

section 3122 , sense of congress on the nuclear nonproliferation policy of the united states and the reliable replacement warhead program , included a provision , "the senate should ratify the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty. .

06 / 04 / 07 — the united states paid $10.0 million toward the international monitoring system to the comprehensive test ban treaty organization preparatory commission .

06 / 22 / 07 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization concluded its 28 th meeting .

09 / 00 / 07 — the united nations held the fifth conference on facilitating ctbt entry into force on september 17 and 18 in vienna , austria .

10 / 24 / 07 — senator jon kyl delivered a speech critical of the ctbt and of section 3122 of h.r .

1585 , the fy2008 national defense authorization act , expressing the sense of congress that the senate should ratify the ctbt .

senator kyl included a letter signed by 41 senators opposing the treaty and section 3122 .

11 / 14 / 07 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization concluded its 29 th meeting .

11 / 19 / 07 — former secretary of defense harold brown and former director of central intelligence john deutch suggested a five - year renewable ctbt in lieu of the current treaty .

12 / 05 / 07 — by a vote of 176 for , 1 against ( united states ) , and 4 abstentions , the u.n. general assembly adopted resolution a / res / 62 / 59 stressing the importance of achieving the earliest entry into force of the ctbt .

11 / 26 / 07 — the conference report on h.r .

1585 , the fy2008 defense authorization bill , was ordered to be printed .

the bill provided for biennial reports on u.s. nuclear test readiness and dropped a provision in the senate bill expressing the sense of congress that "the senate should ratify" the ctbt .

12 / 17 / 07 — representative tauscher introduced h.res .

882 , expressing the sense of the house that the senate should initiate a bipartisan process to give its advice and consent to ratification of the ctbt .

01 / 29 / 08 — colombia , one of the annex 2 states that must ratify the ctbt for it to enter into force , became the 144 th nation to ratify the treaty .

02 / 25 / 08 — the united states paid $23.8 million to the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty preparatory commission , restoring its voting rights in the commission .

05 / 27 / 08 — senator john mccain said he would "tak[e] another look at the comprehensive test ban treaty to see what can be done to overcome the shortcomings that prevented it from entering into force. .

06 / 26 / 08 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization concluded its 30 th meeting .

08 / 19 / 08 — iraq became the 179 th nation to sign the ctbt .

09 / 00 / 08 — the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty organization conducted a large - scale integrated field exercise in kazakhstan to simulate a complete on - site inspection .

09 / 24 / 08 — a joint ministerial statement urging states that have not done so to sign and ratify the ctbt was launched ; as of december 12 , 2008 , 96 nations had associated themselves with the statement .

11 / 21 / 08 — lebanon became the 148 th nation to ratify the ctbt .

01 / 13 / 09 — in her answers to questions for the record prepared for her confirmation hearing of this date , secretary of state - designate hillary clinton said , "the president - elect and i are both strongly committed to senate approval of the ctbt and to launching a diplomatic effort to bring on board other states whose ratifications are required for the treaty to enter into force. .

04 / 05 / 09 — in a speech in prague , president obama said , "my administration will immediately and aggressively pursue u.s. ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

05 / 25 / 09 — north korea announced that it had conducted a nuclear test , its second .

06 / 08 / 09 — foreign minister hassan wirajuda of indonesia said that his nation would "immediately" ratify the ctbt once the united states did so .

06 / 10 / 09 — an international scientific conference was held in vienna , austria , june 10-12 to present the results of the international scientific studies project .

09 / 00 / 09 — a conference on ctbt entry into force , pursuant to article xiv of the treaty , was held at u.n. headquarters in new york on september 24 and 25 .

