the nomination and confirmation of a chief justice or an associate justice to the u.s. supreme court is an infrequent event of major significance in american public life .

to receive what may be lifetime appointment to the court , a candidate must first be nominated by the president and then confirmed by the senate .

midway in the appointment process , intensive hearings on a supreme court nomination , often taking at least three or four days , are routinely held by the senate judiciary committee , which then can vote on whether to report the nomination to the senate with a favorable recommendation .

nominating and confirming supreme court justices is an interdependent process .

neither the president nor the senate acts alone .

the decisions that each branch makes determine how quickly nominations are made and considered , and whether the nomination is successful .

this report provides information on the pace of all supreme court nominations and confirmations since 1900 , focusing on the actual amounts of time that presidents and the senate have taken to act ( as opposed to the elapsed time between official points in the process ) .

as discussed below , the speed with which the president makes supreme court nominations and the senate acts on those nominations has been of continuing concern to congress in recent years .

especially since 2005 , a high priority has been assigned to making appointments according to timetables designed to assure that vacancies taking effect while the court is in summer recess are filled in time for the nine - member court to be at full strength when it convenes its next annual term .

for many supreme court appointments , the timing of individual events is determined by the decisions of various key players — by sitting justices planning to leave the court ; by the president , who selects nominees to fill court vacancies ; and by senate committee and party leaders , who respectively schedule committee and floor action on supreme court nominations .

first , justices who retire or resign from the court must decide whether to provide the president with advance notice of that decision .

for example , justice harry a. blackmun told president william j. clinton of his decision to retire in 1994 , more than four months before the decision became public on april 6 of that year .

justice o'connor , on the other hand , did not appear to have given president george w. bush any advance notice when she resigned on july 1 , 2005 .

also , the mode of presidential notification varies .

while president clinton learned of justice blackmun's plans to retire through an informal conversation , justice o'connor apparently notified president bush of her decision through a formal letter .

once the president chooses a nominee , he alerts the senate — by public announcement as well as by formal transmission of a written nomination to the senate .

frequently , the president will announce and formally nominate his supreme court choice on the same day , or take both actions within a few days of each other .

less commonly , presidents announce their intention to nominate a candidate , then make the official nomination a week or more later .

the most extreme case of the latter involved president ronald reagan in 1981 .

on july 7 of that year , president reagan announced he would send the nomination of sandra day o'connor , then an arizona state appeals court judge , to the senate "upon completion of all the necessary checks by the federal bureau of investigation. .

however , it was not until almost six weeks later , on august 19 , that judge o'connor was officially nominated .

as noted above , after the senate receives a supreme court nomination , the judiciary committee normally holds hearings , followed by final committee action , and consideration before the full chamber .

the need for a new appointment to the court arises when a justice position becomes vacant , due to death , retirement , or resignation , or when a justice announces his intention to retire or resign .

if the vacated seat is that of the chief justice , the president , if he chooses , may nominate a sitting associate justice to be chief , thus setting the stage for the creation of an associate justice vacancy as well .

vacancies on the court also will occur if justices resign to receive new government appointments or to seek new government positions .

when a nomination fails in the senate , the president must select a new nominee ( unless the president chooses to re - nominate his first choice ) .

 table 1 ( at the end of this report ) lists dates for the following events regarding each nomination to the supreme court since 1900: ( 1 ) when the actual or prospective vacancy apparently became known to the president , ( 2 ) when the president announced the nominee , ( 3 ) when the senate judiciary committee held its first hearing on the nominee , ( 4 ) when final committee action took place , and ( 5 ) when final senate action took place .

table 2 presents the number of days elapsed for six related time intervals: ( 1 ) from when the president apparently learned of the actual or prospective vacancy to the his announcement of a new nominee , ( 2 ) from the nomination announcement to the first judiciary committee hearing , ( 3 ) from the first hearing to the committee's final action , ( 4 ) from the committee's final action to the senate's final action , ( 5 ) from nomination announcement to final senate action ( duration of total senate action ) , and ( 6 ) from the vacancy starting date ( when the president apparently first became aware of the opportunity to make a nomination ) to final senate action .

table 3 provides summary statistics for the number of days elapsed during each of these intervals , for all nominations from 1900 until 2010 , and for two periods within those dates — 1900-1980 and 1981-2010 .

as discussed later in this report , those periods were chosen because the data indicate a sharp difference in the pace of most nominations before and after 1980 .

as noted previously , it is often difficult or impossible to determine the specific date that a president first knew he would have the opportunity to name a new justice to the supreme court .

the president always has the constitutional obligation to make nominations to the court when vacancies arise , and is certainly aware of the possibility that vacancies could arise at any time .

however , the "actual or prospective vacancy became known to president" columns in table 1 and table 2 focus on documented , specific instances when the president knew he had , or soon would have , the opportunity to name a new justice to the court .

these dates are based on extensive research about when the justice's impending departure ( or death ) was made public , and whether the president had advance knowledge of the vacancy before it became public .

in cases in which research revealed no public evidence that the president had advance notice ( or in which the data are inconclusive ) , the date of the first public account of the vacancy marks the beginning of the process ( the "when" column in table 1 and table 2 ) .

for example , justice sandra day o'connor announced her retirement , pending confirmation of a successor , on july 1 , 2005 .

there is no evidence that president george w. bush definitely knew that o'connor would retire until her announcement .

therefore , july 1 , 2005 , is used as the starting point for what became the associate justice nomination of john g. roberts , jr. on the other hand , although chief justice warren burger's retirement letter to ronald reagan was not released until june 17 , 1986 , president reagan's public papers reveal that burger informed the president of his decision to retire on may 27 , 1986 .

therefore , may 27 , 1986 , is used as the starting point for what became the william h. rehnquist elevation to chief justice .

notes throughout table 1 and table 2 provide information on historical context .

unless otherwise noted , the "president's announcement - of - nominee" date in table 1 is the day when the president announced his nomination to the public or released the text of his nomination letter ( whichever came first ) .

this date is significant because it marks the senate's first opportunity to begin considering the nomination , even if informally .

there are a few cases , explained by table notes , in which presidents announced their decisions less formally , but still publicly .

for example , president harry s. truman casually told reporters during a july 28 , 1949 , press conference that he had offered an associate justice nomination to then - attorney general thomas c. clark , even though clark had not yet accepted the nomination .

as discussed previously , in some cases , the announcement date differs by days or even weeks from the date the nomination was formally submitted to the senate .

 table 2 provides the duration of each major interval in the process of nominating and considering supreme court justices .

table 3 provides the median number of days for each major interval in the process .

the median is the middle number in a set of observations ( in this case , the number of days involved in each stage of considering supreme court nominations ) .

the median is generally the preferred measure of central tendency in social science research .

as statistician william h. greene notes , "loosely speaking , the median corresponds more closely than the mean to the middle of a distribution [group of numbers] .

it is unaffected by extreme values. .

in other words , the median represents the best example of the "average" case , regardless of extremely short or long individual confirmations .

however , in describing the speed of the supreme court nomination - and - confirmation process , even median values should be considered carefully .

each nomination is different , and political context and historical factors can have a major impact on when various events occur .

several factors affecting individual nominations to the court are discussed later in this report .

during the entire period covered by this report ( 1900-2010 ) , the president and the senate have each taken varying amounts of time to act on supreme court nominations and confirmations .

as table 3 shows , from 1900-2010 , presidents took a median of 28 days after a vacancy occurred to announce their nominees , compared with a median of 23.5 days for final senate action once the nomination was announced .

the entire process , from actual or prospective vacancy to final senate action , lasted a median of 79 days from 1900-2010 .

however , the amount of time involved in each stage of the nomination - and - confirmation process varies widely when individual cases are examined .

some supreme court nominations are unusually fast , coming immediately on the heels a sitting justice's departure from the bench .

in these cases , the president almost certainly knew in advance of the outgoing justice's intention to retire yet delayed announcement of the retirement to coincide with announcing a new nominee .

for example , on may 27 , 1986 , president reagan simultaneously announced the retirement of chief justice warren burger , the elevation of william h. rehnquist to chief justice , and the nomination of antonin scalia to assume the associate justice seat being vacated by justice rehnquist .

on the other hand , some nomination decisions can take months — at least to become public .

for example , although justice harold h. burton submitted his retirement letter to president dwight d. eisenhower on october 6 , 1958 , eisenhower did not publicly announce potter stewart's nomination until january 17 , 1959 — 103 days after announcing justice burton's retirement .

the entire interval between burton's announced retirement and stewart's confirmation lasted 211 days , the bulk of the interval due to a long congressional recess .

the data indicate that the median decision - making intervals surrounding supreme court nominations have changed substantially since 1981 .

when comparing supreme court nominations from 1900-1980 with those from 1981-2010 , five patterns stand out .

first , after apparently learning of vacancies , presidents have typically been quicker to announce nominees since 1981 than in the previous 80 years .

as shown in figure 1 ( and table 3 ) , from 1900-1980 , presidents took a median of 34 days to announce their nominees after apparently learning of vacancies , compared with only 19.5 days from 1981-2010 .

second , and perhaps most notably , the median interval between the president's announcement of his nominee and the first judiciary committee hearing was substantially longer from 1981-2009 than from 1900-1980 .

as shown in figure 1 ( and table 3 ) , this period almost quadrupled — from 12.5 days during the 1900-1980 period to 49 days from 1981-2010 .

again , however , context is important .

even before hearings begin , the senate can be actively working on the nomination .

for example , prior to the start of john g. roberts's hearings ( and even before his nomination was submitted to the senate ) , senators met privately with judge roberts , and some pressed the white house to release records from roberts's department of justice service .

the harriet miers and samuel alito nominations followed similar patterns .

third , committee and floor action from 1981-2010 also took slightly longer than prior to 1981 .

from 1981-2010 , the judiciary committee took a median of 15 days to reach a decision after starting hearings , while the interval between final committee action and final senate action took nine days ( compared with six and three days respectively from 1900-1980 ) .

fourth , as shown in figure 1 ( and table 3 ) , total senate activity ( the interval between the president's announcement of the nominee and final senate action ) increased from a median of 17 days ( 1900-1980 ) to 84 days ( 1981-2010 ) .

finally , the entire nomination - and - confirmation process took substantially longer after 1980 than during the previous 80 years .

the median duration for the entire process ( from when the president apparently became aware of a vacancy until the senate's final action on the nomination ) was almost twice as long from 1981-2010 than during 1900-1980 ( 113 days versus 59 days , respectively ) .

some elements of the decision - making process surrounding the naming and the confirmation or rejection of supreme court nominees are known only to presidents , nominees , and a few select advisors .

other elements are more obvious .

each nomination has its own political context , making each nomination somewhat different .

however , several factors appear to be relatively constant in affecting the speed of supreme court nominations and senate decisions .

how quickly the president announces his nominee and how quickly the senate considers that nomination can depend on how the vacancy occurred .

when justices die unexpectedly , presidents can be eager to bring the court back to full strength as soon as possible .

on july 19 , 1949 , for example , justice frank murphy unexpectedly died of a heart attack after a brief illness .

president harry s. truman announced his nomination of thomas c. clark at a press conference nine days later , on july 28 .

the senate also considered the nomination quickly , beginning hearings on august 9 .

clark's entire nomination - and - confirmation process lasted just 30 days .

a few months later , sherman minton was confirmed even faster — in 24 days — after the death of justice wiley b. rutledge .

nonetheless , sudden death does not guarantee that either the president or the senate will make nomination - and - confirmation decisions quickly .

for example , when justice rufus w. peckham died unexpectedly on october 24 , 1909 , president william howard taft waited 50 days to announce a nominee .

once taft announced his choice , the senate confirmed horace h. lurton seven days later .

retirements and resignations are often expected , allowing the president time to prepare for his choice even before an official announcement that a sitting justice will step down .

for example , at the time of his retirement , justice william o. douglas's health had been so poor and abilities allegedly in such decline that seven of his fellow justices voted on october 17 , 1975 , to "effectively strip douglas of his power" and excluded the aging justice from deliberations .

by the time justice douglas officially wrote to president gerald r. ford on november 12 , 1975 , announcing his retirement , the president was prepared to act quickly .

he announced the nomination of john paul stevens just 16 days later .

congress , too , acted quickly , confirming stevens 19 days later , on december 17 , 1975 .

sometimes , though , even when retirements or resignations come with advance notice , the process moves slowly .

for example , justice harry a. blackmun privately told president william j. clinton around january 1 , 1994 , that he was planning to leave the court .

soon afterward , the white house staff began quietly considering replacements .

however , president clinton did not publicly announce justice blackmun's retirement until april 6 , did not publicly announce judge stephen g. breyer's nomination until may 13 , and did not formally nominate breyer until may 17 .

the judiciary committee began hearings 60 days after the nomination was announced , and the entire process surrounding breyer's nomination lasted 209 days .

however , decisions affecting the nomination were apparently being made even before blackmun's retirement became public knowledge .

congress's schedule , especially whether the senate is in session at all , plays an important role in how long supreme court nominations take to reach a conclusion .

in the early 1900s , several vacancies arose during summer recess or election years when congress was away from the capitol .

in 1910 , for example , congress adjourned on june 25 and did not return until december 5 — a break of more than five months .

in the interim , chief justice melville w. fuller died of a heart attack on july 4 .

as press coverage noted at the time , although potential nominees were immediately considered , president william howard taft waited to formally submit a nomination to the senate until congress reconvened .

on december 12 , five days after the senate reconvened , president taft announced and formally submitted to the senate his nomination of former senator edward d. white of louisiana to be chief justice .

that same day , without referring the nomination to the judiciary committee , the senate quickly confirmed senator white .

three times during the 1950s , president eisenhower resorted to recess appointments when justices died or announced their retirement after congress had already adjourned for the year .

in each case , president eisenhower formally submitted the nomination after the senate convened the following january .

of the five persons whom he nominated to the court , three first received recess appointments and served as justices before being confirmed — earl warren ( as chief justice ) in 1953 , william brennan in 1956 , and potter stewart in 1958 .

president eisenhower's recess appointments , however , generated controversy , prompting the senate in 1960 , voting closely along party lines , to pass a resolution expressing opposition to supreme court recess appointments in the future .

president eisenhower's actions were the most recent recess appointments to the supreme court , and recess appointments to the lower federal courts also have become relatively rare since the late 1960s .

while a president's constitutional power to make judicial recess appointments was upheld by a federal court in 1985 , such appointments , when they do occur , may cause controversy , in large part because they bypass the senate and its "advice and consent" role .

because of the criticisms of judicial recess appointments in recent decades , the long passage of time since the last supreme court recess appointment , and the relatively short duration of contemporary senate recesses ( which arguably undercuts the need for recess appointments to the court ) , a president in the 21 st century might be expected to make a recess appointment to the supreme court only under the most unusual of circumstances .

today , congress's availability is less of an obstacle to speedy consideration of nominations than in the past .

given congress's increasingly year - round schedule , extended decision - making is more often the result of waiting for presidential decisions , background investigations of nominees , or preparations for judiciary committee hearings .

today , it would be highly unusual for the judiciary committee not to hold supreme court confirmation hearings lasting at least a few days .

in the past , however , the judiciary committee often handled supreme court nominations without holding hearings at all .

as table 1 shows , of the 22 nominees to the court from 1900 to 1937 , only three had judiciary committee hearings ( louis d. brandeis in 1916 , harlan f. stone in 1925 , and john j. parker in 1930 ( whose nomination was eventually rejected ) ) .

in contrast , of the 41 nominees after 1937 , only three did not have hearings .

nominees did not begin regularly testifying at their own hearings until john m. harlan did so in 1955 .

when the judiciary committee holds hearings , senate floor consideration can be pushed back sometimes by weeks or even months .

controversial nominees often spur protracted hearings .

for example , the judiciary committee spent 19 days considering justice louis d. brandeis's nomination in 1916 , and the interval between the start of hearings and final committee action lasted 105 days .

the final senate vote came eight days later .

more recently , the judiciary committee , after learning of president ronald reagan's selection of robert h. bork , took 76 days to hold its first day of hearings on the nomination , and then 21 more days to conclude action on the nomination .

senate custom plays an especially large role when sitting or former senators are nominated to the court .

the senate has almost always considered their colleagues' nominations to the court within days of receiving the nomination , often without committee hearings or floor debate .

for example , although president taft waited five months to nominate edward d. white ( a former senator from louisiana ) for chief justice , the senate confirmed the nomination with no debate in less than one hour .

since 1900 , three sitting senators — hugo l. black of alabama ( 1937 ) , james f. byrnes of south carolina ( 1941 ) , and harold h. burton of ohio ( 1945 ) — have been nominated to the court , and all were quickly confirmed .

senators george sutherland of utah ( 1922 ) and sherman minton of indiana ( 1949 ) were nominated to the court after having concluded their senate service .

sutherland was confirmed on the same day on which president warren harding announced the nomination , and minton was confirmed in 19 days .

the decades since 1945 have yet to test again the senate tradition of bypassing the judiciary committee when the supreme court nominee is a sitting u.s .

senator ; no president since then has nominated a sitting senator .

the last former senator to be nominated to the court , in 1949 , was judge sherman minton of indiana .

 ( after defeat for re - election to the senate in 1940 , he had been appointed by president franklin d. roosevelt to a federal appellate court judgeship. ) .

in a break with tradition , the supreme court nomination of former senator minton was referred to the judiciary committee , and senate confirmation followed the day after the committee approved the nomination .

as noted previously , withdrawn , rejected , or controversial nominations can substantially lengthen the process .

in these cases , although presidents often name nominees fairly quickly , consideration of the nominations can be drawn out in the senate .

during judge robert h. bork's controversial nomination , for example , senate consideration of bork lasted more than a month , from the first judiciary committee hearing on september 15 , 1987 , until the senate's floor vote to reject the nomination on october 23 , 1987 .

the entire process — from president reagan's announcement of his intention to nominate bork to senate rejection — took 119 days .

controversy can also delay confirmation of nominees who are ultimately successful .

despite a relatively quick nomination - and - confirmation process of 42 days in late 1924 and early 1925 for then - attorney general harlan f. stone , his nomination was temporarily set back when it was recommitted to the senate judiciary committee , apparently because of stone's investigation as attorney general of senator burton k. wheeler .

more recently , although judge clarence thomas narrowly won confirmation in 1991 , nominating and confirming him took 110 days , including a second round of judiciary committee hearings surrounding law professor anita hill's allegations against thomas of sexual harassment .

understanding how long the previous supreme court nomination - and - confirmation process has taken , and what factors affected that schedule , can provide useful perspective on presidential decision - making and the senate's preparations for future nominations .

while presidents and supporters of nominees want justices confirmed quickly , some senators will continue to emphasize their right to consider nominees carefully and their responsibility to hold sufficient hearings .

against that political backdrop , this report demonstrates that the length of time required to nominate and confirm or reject a nominee varies widely .

even median durations must be interpreted cautiously .

the context surrounding each nomination is particularly important in understanding how long the process takes .

this report indicates that , from 1900-1980 , the president's portion of the process took longer than the senate's .

since 1981 , though , there has been a substantial increase in the median duration between the president's announcement of a nominee and the start of judiciary committee hearings .

as a result , the senate's portion of the process has taken longer than the president's .

prior to 1981 , lengthy nomination - and - confirmation processes usually occurred because either the senate was out of session when a vacancy on the court arose , or the nomination was controversial .

in recent decades , by contrast , slower decision - making has taken place during an era when congress is in session longer than during the early 20 th century .

since 1981 , the nomination - and - confirmation process has lasted a median of 113 days — almost twice as long as the 59-day median from 1900-1980 .

although the data in table 1 , table 2 , and table 3 provide a median measure of the process , political context is an essential backdrop for understanding the numbers .

the president and the senate share decision - making responsibilities for placing new justices on the court .

ultimately , the choices each institution makes determine how long nominations and confirmations take .

one possible explanation for the paradox of slower decisions despite more time in session is that , as some critics on both sides of the aisle contend , supreme court nominations have become battlegrounds for larger political debates .

another possibility is that the senate is considering nominations more carefully than in the past , and therefore taking more time to make decisions about nominees .

similarly , the senate might be using longer decision - making and scrutiny of nominees as a method of counterbalancing presidential power , especially when senators believe that the president has chosen an unqualified nominee .

some early 20 th century appointments to the supreme court were confirmed within days of a vacancy occurring .

more recent nominations and confirmations , by contrast , typically have taken several weeks or months .

how and when a vacancy occurs , the senate's schedule , judiciary committee involvement , institutional customs , and whether or not the nomination is controversial , all affect the speed with which the president nominates , and the senate passes judgment , on prospective justices .

