the issue before congress is whether to continue the federal prosecution of medical marijuana patients and their providers , in accordance with marijuana's status as a schedule i drug under the controlled substances act , or whether to relax federal marijuana prohibition enough to permit the medicinal use of botanical cannabis products when recommended by a physician , especially in those states that have created medical marijuana programs under state law .

two bills , versions of which have been introduced in prior congresses , have been proposed again in the 111 th congress .

the medical marijuana patient protection act ( h.r .

2835 ) , which would allow the medical use of marijuana in states that permit its use with a doctor's recommendation , was introduced on june 11 , 2009 , by representative barney frank .

the bill would also move marijuana from schedule i to schedule ii of the csa and exempt from federal prosecution authorized patients and medical marijuana providers who are acting in accordance with state laws .

the second bill , the truth in trials act ( h.r .

3939 ) , introduced by representative sam farr on october 27 , 2009 , would make it possible for medical marijuana users and providers who are being tried in federal court to reveal to juries that their marijuana activity was medically related and legal under state law .

the cannabis sativa plant has been used for healing purposes throughout history .

according to written records from china and india , the use of marijuana to treat a wide range of ailments goes back more than 2,000 years .

ancient texts from africa , the middle east , classical greece , and the roman empire also describe the use of cannabis to treat disease .

for most of american history , growing and using marijuana was legal under both federal law and the laws of the individual states .

by the 1840s , marijuana's therapeutic potential began to be recognized by some u.s. physicians .

from 1850 to 1941 cannabis was included in the united states pharmacopoeia as a recognized medicinal .

by the end of 1936 , however , all 48 states had enacted laws to regulate marijuana .

its decline in medicine was hastened by the development of aspirin , morphine , and then other opium - derived drugs , all of which helped to replace marijuana in the treatment of pain and other medical conditions in western medicine .

all three branches of the federal government play an important role in formulating federal policy on medical marijuana .

significant actions of each branch are highlighted here , beginning with the legislative branch .

in the face of federal intransigence on the issue , advocates of medical marijuana have turned to the states in a largely successful effort , wherever it has been attempted , to enact laws that enable patients to obtain and use botanical marijuana therapeutically in a legal and regulated manner , even though such activity remains illegal under federal law .

majorities of voters in nine states have now approved medical marijuana initiatives to protect patients from arrest under state law .

more broadly , national public opinion polls have consistently favored access to medical marijuana by seriously ill patients .

procon.org , a nonprofit and nonpartisan public education foundation , has identified 23 national public opinion polls that asked questions about medical marijuana from 1995 to the present .

respondents in every poll were in favor of medical marijuana by substantial margins , ranging from 60% to 85% .

among recent opinion surveys , a january 2010 abc news / washington post poll found that more than 8 in 10 americans ( 81% ) supported efforts to make marijuana legal for medical use , up from 69% in 1997 .

given three choices as to who should be allowed to use it where it is legal , 56% of respondents chose the most lenient position of prescribing it "for any patient the doctor thinks it could help. .

its use would be restricted to "patients who have serious but not fatal illnesses" by 21% , and another 21% would limit the drug "to patients who are terminally ill and near death. .

according to the pollsters' analysis , medical marijuana … receives majority support across the political and ideological spectrum , from 68 percent of conservatives and 72 percent of republicans as well as 85 percent of democrats and independents and about nine in 10 liberals and moderates .

support slips to 69 percent among seniors , vs. 83 percent among all adults under age 65 .

the journal of the american medical association analyzed public opinion on the war on drugs in a 1998 article .

the authors' observations concerning public attitudes toward medical marijuana remain true today: while opposing the use or legalization of marijuana for recreational purposes , the public apparently does not want to deny very ill patients access to a potentially helpful drug therapy if prescribed by their physicians .

the public's support of marijuana for medical purposes is conditioned by their belief that marijuana would be used only in the treatment of serious medical conditions .

in public opinion polls , then , the majority of americans appear to hold that seriously ill or terminal patients should be able to use marijuana if recommended by their doctors .

fourteen state governments have created medical marijuana programs , either through ballot initiatives or the legislative process .

many other state governments , however , along with the federal government , remain opposed to the national majority in favor of medical marijuana .

in the ongoing debate over cannabis as medicine , certain arguments are frequently made on both sides of the issue .

these arguments are briefly stated below and are analyzed in turn .

crs takes no position on the claims or counterclaims in this debate .

what follows is an attempt to analyze objectively the claims frequently made about the role that herbal cannabis might or might not play in the treatment of certain diseases and about the possible societal consequences should its role in the practice of modern medicine be expanded beyond the places where it is now permitted under state laws .

for those interested in learning more about medical marijuana research findings , the internet offers two useful websites .

the international association for cannabis as medicine ( iacm ) , based in germany , provides abundant information on the results of controlled clinical trials at http: / / www.cannabis - med.org .

information on peer - reviewed , double - blind studies on both animals and human subjects conducted since 1990 has been compiled by procon.org and is available at http: / / www.medicalmarijuanaprocon.org .

suitable and superior medicines are currently available for treatment of all symptoms alleged to be treatable by crude marijuana .

 — brief of the drug free america foundation , et al. , 2004 the federal government — along with many state governments and private antidrug organizations — staunchly maintains that botanical marijuana is a dangerous drug without any legitimate medical use .

marijuana intoxication can impair a person's coordination and decision - making skills and alter behavior .

chronic marijuana smoking can adversely affect the lungs , the cardiovascular system , and possibly the immune and reproductive systems .

of course , fda's 1985 approval of marinol proves that the principal psychoactive ingredient of marijuana — thc — has therapeutic value .

but that is not the issue in the medical marijuana debate .

botanical marijuana remains a plant substance , an herb , and its opponents say it cannot substitute for legitimate pharmaceuticals .

just because certain molecules found in marijuana might have become approved medicines , they argue , does not make the unpollinated bud of the female cannabis sativa plant a safe and effective medicine .

the drug free america foundation calls the medical use of crude marijuana "a step backward to the times of potions and herbal remedies. .

the federal government's argument that marijuana has no medical value is straightforward .

a drug , in order to meet the standard of the controlled substances act as having a "currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states," must meet a five - part test: ( 1 ) the drug's chemistry must be known and reproducible , ( 2 ) there must be adequate safety studies , ( 3 ) there must be adequate and well - controlled studies proving efficacy , ( 4 ) the drug must be accepted by qualified experts , and ( 5 ) the scientific evidence must be widely available .

according to the dea , botanical marijuana meets none of these requirements .

first , marijuana's chemistry is neither fully known nor reproducible .

second , adequate safety studies have not been done .

third , there are no adequate , well - controlled scientific studies proving marijuana is effective for any medical condition .

fourth , marijuana is not accepted by even a significant minority of experts qualified to evaluate drugs .

fifth , published scientific evidence concluding that marijuana is safe and effective for use in humans does not exist .

the same dea final order that set forth the five requirements for currently accepted medical use also outlined scientific evidence that would be considered irrelevant by the dea in establishing currently accepted medical use .

these include individual case reports , clinical data collected by practitioners , studies conducted by persons not qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the substance at issue , and studies or reports so lacking in detail as to preclude responsible scientific evaluation .

such information is inadequate for experts to conclude responsibly and fairly that marijuana is safe and effective for use as medicine .

the dea and other federal drug control agencies can thereby disregard medical literature and opinion that claim to show the therapeutic value of marijuana because they do not meet the government's standards of proof .

the official view of medical marijuana is complicated by the wider war on drugs .

it is difficult to disentangle the medical use of locally grown marijuana for personal use from the overall policy of marijuana prohibition , as the supreme court made clear in raich .

to make an exemption for medical marijuana , the court decided , "would undermine the orderly enforcement of the entire regulatory scheme .. .

the notion that california law has surgically excised a discrete activity that is hermetically sealed off from the larger interstate marijuana market is a dubious proposition.... " it remains the position of the federal government , then , that the schedule i substance marijuana is harmful — not beneficial — to human health .

its use for any reason , including medicinal , should continue to be prohibited and punished .

despite signs of a more tolerant public attitude toward medical marijuana , its therapeutic benefits , if any , will continue to be officially unacknowledged and largely unrealized in the united states so long as this position prevails at the federal level .

[i]t cannot seriously be contested that there exists a small but significant class of individuals who suffer from painful chronic , degenerative , and terminal conditions , for whom marijuana provides uniquely effective relief .

 — brief of the leukemia & lymphoma society , et al. , 2004 proponents of medical marijuana point to a large body of studies from around the world that support the therapeutic value of marijuana in treating a variety of disease - related problems , including relieving nausea , increasing appetite , reducing muscle spasms and spasticity , relieving chronic pain , reducing intraocular pressure , and relieving anxiety .

given these properties , marijuana has been used successfully to treat the debilitating symptoms of cancer and cancer chemotherapy , aids , multiple sclerosis , epilepsy , glaucoma , anxiety , and other serious illnesses .

as opponents of medical marijuana assert , existing fda - approved pharmaceuticals for these conditions are generally more effective than marijuana .

nevertheless , as the iom report acknowledged , the approved medicines do not work for everyone .

many medical marijuana users report trying cannabis only reluctantly and as a last resort after exhausting all other treatment modalities .

a distinct subpopulation of patients now relies on whole cannabis for a degree of relief that fda - approved synthetic drugs do not provide .

medical cannabis proponents claim that single - cannabinoid , synthetic pharmaceuticals like marinol are poor substitutes for the whole marijuana plant , which contains more than 400 known chemical compounds , including about 60 active cannabinoids in addition to thc .

they say that scientists are a long way from knowing for sure which ones , singly or in combination , provide which therapeutic effects .

many patients have found that they benefit more from the whole plant than from any synthetically produced chemical derivative .

furthermore , the natural plant can be grown easily and inexpensively , whereas marinol and any other cannabis - based pharmaceuticals that might be developed in the future will likely be expensive — prohibitively so for some patients .

in recognition of the therapeutic benefits of botanical marijuana products , various associations of health professionals have passed resolutions in support of medical cannabis .

these include the american public health association , the american nurses association , and the california pharmacists association .

the new england journal of medicine has editorialized in favor of patient access to marijuana .

other groups , such as the american medical association , are more cautious .

their position is that not enough is known about botanical marijuana and that more research is needed .

the recent discovery of cannabinoid receptors in the human brain and immune system provides a biological explanation for the claimed effectiveness of marijuana in relieving multiple disease symptoms .

the human body produces its own cannabis - like compounds , called endocannabinoids , that react with the body's cannabinoid receptors .

like the better known opiate receptors , the cannabinoid receptors in the brain stem and spinal cord play a role in pain control .

cannabinoid receptors , which are abundant in various parts of the human brain , also play a role in controlling the vomiting reflex , appetite , emotional responses , motor skills , and memory formation .

it is the presence of these natural , endogenous cannabinoids in the human nervous and immune systems that provides the basis for the therapeutic value of marijuana and that holds the key , some scientists believe , to many promising drugs of the future .

the federal government's own ind compassionate access program , which has provided government - grown medical marijuana to a select group of patients since 1978 , provides important evidence that marijuana has medicinal value and can be used safely .

a scientist and organizer of the california medical marijuana initiative , along with two medical - doctor colleagues , has written: nothing reveals the contradictions in federal policy toward marijuana more clearly than the fact that there are still eight patients in the united states who receive a tin of marijuana 'joints' ( cigarettes ) every month from the federal government... .

these eight people can legally possess and use marijuana , at government expense and with government permission .

yet hundreds of thousands of other patients can be fined and jailed under federal law for doing exactly the same thing .

can you think of any other untested , home - made , mind - altering medicine that you self - dose , and that uses a burning carcinogen as a delivery vehicle ? .

 — general barry mccaffrey , u.s. drug czar , 1996-2000 that medical marijuana is smoked is probably the biggest obstacle preventing its wider acceptance .

opponents of medical marijuana argue that smoking is a poor way to take a drug , that inhaling smoke is an unprecedented drug delivery system , even though many approved medications are marketed as inhalants .

dea administrator karen tandy writes: the scientific and medical communities have determined that smoked marijuana is a health danger , not a cure .

there is no medical evidence that smoking marijuana helps patients .

in fact , the food and drug administration ( fda ) has approved no medications that are smoked , primarily because smoking is a poor way to deliver medicine .

morphine , for example has proven to be a medically valuable drug , but the fda does not endorse smoking opium or heroin .

medical marijuana opponents argue that chronic marijuana smoking is harmful to the lungs , the cardiovascular system , and possibly the immune and reproductive systems .

these claims may be overstated to help preserve marijuana prohibition .

for example , neither epidemiological nor aggregate clinical data show higher rates of lung cancer in people who smoke marijuana .

the other alleged harms also remain unproven .

even if smoking marijuana is proven harmful , however , the immediate benefits of smoked marijuana could still outweigh the potential long - term harms — especially for terminally ill patients .

the therapeutic value of smoked marijuana is supported by existing research and experience .

for example , the following statements appeared in the american medical association's "council on scientific affairs report 10 — medicinal marijuana," adopted by the ama house of delegates on december 9 , 1997: "smoked marijuana was comparable to or more effective than oral thc [marinol] , and considerably more effective than prochlorperazine or other previous antiemetics in reducing nausea and emesis. .

 ( p. 10 ) "anecdotal , survey , and clinical data support the view that smoked marijuana and oral thc provide symptomatic relief in some patients with spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis ( ms ) or trauma. .

 ( p. 13 ) "smoked marijuana may benefit individual patients suffering from intermittent or chronic pain. .

 ( p. 15 ) the iom report expressed concerns about smoking ( p. 126 ) : "smoked marijuana is unlikely to be a safe medication for any chronic medical condition. .

despite this concern , the iom report's authors were willing to recommend smoked marijuana under certain limited circumstances .

for example , the report states ( p. 154 ) : until the development of rapid - onset antiemetic drug delivery systems , there will likely remain a subpopulation of patients for whom standard antiemetic therapy is ineffective and who suffer from debilitating emesis .

it is possible that the harmful effects of smoking marijuana for a limited period of time might be outweighed by the antiemetic benefits of marijuana , at least for patients for whom standard antiemetic therapy is ineffective and who suffer from debilitating emesis .

such patients should be evaluated on a case - by - case basis and treated under close medical supervision .

the iom report makes another exception for terminal cancer patients ( p. 159 ) : terminal cancer patients pose different issues .

for those patients the medical harm associated with smoking is of little consequence .

for terminal patients suffering debilitating pain or nausea and for whom all indicated medications have failed to provide relief , the medical benefits of smoked marijuana might outweigh the harm .

smoking can actually be a preferred drug delivery system for patients whose nausea prevents them from taking anything orally .

such patients need to inhale their antiemitic drug .

other patients prefer inhaling because the drug is absorbed much more quickly through the lungs , so that the beneficial effects of the drug are felt almost at once .

this rapid onset also gives patients more control over dosage .

for a certain patient subpopulation , then , these advantages of inhalation may prevail over both edible marijuana preparations and pharmaceutical drugs in pill form , such as marinol .

moreover , medical marijuana advocates argue that there are ways to lessen the risks of smoking .

any potential problems associated with smoking , they argue , can be reduced by using higher potency marijuana , which means that less has to be inhaled to achieve the desired therapeutic effect .

furthermore , marijuana does not have to be smoked to be used as medicine .

it can be cooked in various ways and eaten .

like marinol , however , taking marijuana orally can be difficult for patients suffering from nausea .

many patients are turning to vaporizers , which offer the benefits of smoking — rapid action , ease of dose titration — without having to inhale smoke .

vaporizers are devices that take advantage of the fact that cannabinoids vaporize at a lower temperature than that required for marijuana to burn .

vaporizers heat the plant matter enough for the cannabinoids to be released as vapor without having to burn the marijuana preparation .

patients can thereby inhale the beneficial cannabinoids without also having to inhale the potentially harmful by - products of marijuana combustion .

[t]he administrative law judge concludes that the provisions of the [controlled substances] act permit and require the transfer of marijuana from schedule i to schedule ii .

the judge realizes that strong emotions are aroused on both sides of any discussion concerning the use of marijuana .

nonetheless it is essential for this agency [dea] , and its administrator , calmly and dispassionately to review the evidence of record , correctly apply the law , and act accordingly .

 — francis l. young , dea administrative law judge , 1988 proponents of medical marijuana believe its placement in schedule i of the csa was an error from the beginning .

cannabis is one of the safest therapeutically active substances known .

no one has ever died of an overdose .

petitions to reschedule marijuana have been received by the federal government , and rejected , ever since the original passage of the controlled substances act in 1970 .

rescheduling can be accomplished administratively or it can be done by an act of congress .

administratively , the federal department of health and human services ( hhs ) could find that marijuana meets sufficient standards of safety and efficacy to warrant rescheduling .

even though thc , the most prevalent cannabinoid in marijuana , was administratively moved to schedule iii in 1999 , no signs exist that botanical marijuana will similarly be rescheduled by federal agency ruling anytime soon .

an act of congress to reschedule marijuana is only slightly less likely , although such legislation has been introduced in recent congresses including the 111 th .

the medical marijuana patient protection act ( h.r .

2835 / frank ) , which would move marijuana from schedule i to schedule ii of the controlled substances act , has seen no action beyond committee referral .

schedule ii substances have a high potential for abuse and may lead to severe psychological or physical dependence but have a currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states .

cocaine , methamphetamine , morphine , and methadone are classified as schedule ii substances .

many drug policy experts and laypersons alike believe that marijuana should also reside in schedule ii .

others think marijuana should be properly classified as a schedule iii substance , along with thc and its synthetic version , marinol .

substances in schedule iii have less potential for abuse than the drugs in schedules i and ii , their abuse may lead to moderate or low physical dependence or high psychological dependence , and they have a currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states .

rescheduling seems to be supported by public opinion .

a nationwide gallup poll conducted in march 1999 found that 73% of american adults favored "making marijuana legally available for doctors to prescribe in order to reduce pain and suffering. .

an aarp poll of american adults age 45 and older conducted in mid - november 2004 found that 72% agreed that adults should be allowed to legally use marijuana for medical purposes if recommended by a physician .

a january 2010 abc news / washington post poll found that more than 8 in 10 americans ( 81% ) supported efforts to make marijuana legal for medical use .

few members of congress , however , publicly support the rescheduling option .

the medical marijuana patient protection act ( h.r .

2835 ) , which would move marijuana from schedule i to schedule ii of the controlled substances act , as mentioned above , currently has 30 cosponsors .

the natural extension of this myth [that marijuana is good medicine] is that , if marijuana is medicine , it must also be safe for recreational use .

 — karen p. tandy , dea administrator , 2005 it is the position of the federal government that to permit the use of medical marijuana affords the drug a degree of legitimacy it does not deserve .

america's youth are especially vulnerable , it is said , and state medical marijuana programs send the wrong message to our youth , many of whom do not recognize the very real dangers of marijuana .

studies show that the use of an illicit drug is inversely proportional to the perceived harm of that drug .

that is , the more harmful a drug is perceived to be , the fewer the number of people who will try it .

opponents of medical marijuana argue that "surveys show that perception of harm with respect to marijuana has been dropping off annually since the renewal of the drive to legalize marijuana as medicine , which began in the early 1990s when legalization advocates first gained a significant increase in funding and began planning the state ballot initiative drive to legalize crude marijuana as medicine. .

they point to the 1999 national household survey on drug abuse ( nhsda ) , which "reveals that those states which have passed medical marijuana laws have among the highest levels of past - month marijuana use , of past - month other drug use , of drug addiction , and of drug and alcohol addiction. .

indeed , all 11 states that have passed medical marijuana laws ranked above the national average in the percentage of persons 12 or older reporting past - month use of marijuana in 1999 , as shown in table 2 .

it is at least possible , however , that this analysis confuses cause with effect .

it is logical to assume that the states with the highest prevalence of marijuana usage would be more likely to approve medical marijuana programs , because the populations of those states would be more knowledgeable of marijuana's effects and more tolerant of its use .

it is also the case that california , the state with the largest and longest - running medical marijuana program , ranked 34 th in the percentage of persons age 12-17 reporting marijuana use in the past month during the period 2002-2003 , as shown in table 1 .

in fact , between 1999 and 2002-2003 , of the 10 states with active medical marijuana programs , five states ( ak , hi , me , mt , vt ) rose in the state rankings of past - month marijuana use by 12- to 17-year - olds and five states fell ( ca , co , nv , or , wa ) .

of the five states that had approved medical marijuana laws before 1999 ( ak , az , ca , or , wa ) , only alaska's ranking rose between 1999 and 2002-2003 , from 7 th to 4 th , with 11.08% of youth reporting past - month marijuana use in 2002-2003 compared with 10.4% in 1999 .

no clear patterns are apparent in the state - level data .

clearly , more important factors are at work in determining a state's prevalence of recreational marijuana use than whether the state has a medical marijuana program .

the iom report found no evidence for the supposition that state medical marijuana programs lead to increased use of marijuana or other drugs ( pp .

6-7 ) : finally , there is a broad social concern that sanctioning the medical use of marijuana might increase its use among the general population .

at this point there are no convincing data to support this concern .

the existing data are consistent with the idea that this would not be a problem if the medical use of marijuana were as closely regulated as other medications with abuse potential.... [t]his question is beyond the issues normally considered for medical uses of drugs and should not be a factor in evaluating the therapeutic potential of marijuana or cannabinoids .

the iom report further states ( p. 126 ) : even if there were evidence that the medical use of marijuana would decrease the perception that it can be a harmful substance , this is beyond the scope of laws regulating the approval of therapeutic drugs .

those laws concern scientific data related to the safety and efficacy of drugs for individual use ; they do not address perceptions or beliefs of the general population .

the iom report also found ( p. 102 ) : "no evidence suggests that the use of opiates or cocaine for medical purposes has increased the perception that their illicit use is safe or acceptable. .

doctors can prescribe cocaine , morphine , amphetamine , and methamphetamine , but this is not seen as weakening the war on drugs .

why would doctors recommending medical marijuana to their patients be any different ? .

the so - called "gateway theory" of marijuana use is also cited to explain how medical marijuana could increase illicit drug use .

with respect to the rationale behind the argument that marijuana serves as a "gateway" drug , the iom report offered the following ( p. 6 ) : in the sense that marijuana use typically precedes rather than follows initiation of other illicit drug use , it is indeed a "gateway" drug .

but because underage smoking and alcohol use typically precede marijuana use , marijuana is not the most common , and is rarely the first , "gateway" to illicit drug use .

there is no conclusive evidence that the drug effects of marijuana are causally linked to the subsequent abuse of other illicit drugs .

a statistical analysis of marijuana use by emergency room patients and arrestees in four states with medical marijuana programs — california , colorado , oregon , and washington — found no statistically significant increase in recreational marijuana use among these two population subgroups after medical marijuana was approved for use .

another study looked at adolescent marijuana use and found decreases in youth usage in every state with a medical marijuana law .

declines exceeding 50% were found in some age groups .

these studies are consistent with the findings of a 2002 report by the government accountability office that concluded that state medical marijuana laws were operating as voters and legislators intended and did not encourage drug use among the wider population .

concerns that medical cannabis laws send the wrong message to vulnerable groups such as adolescents seem to be unfounded .

the dea and its local and state counterparts routinely report that large - scale drug traffickers hide behind and invoke proposition 215 , even when there is no evidence of any medical claim .

in fact , many large - scale marijuana cultivators and traffickers escape state prosecution because of bogus medical marijuana claims .

prosecutors are reluctant to charge these individuals because of the state of confusion that exists in california .

therefore , high - level traffickers posing as ' care - givers ' are able to sell illegal drugs with impunity .

 — " california medical marijuana information," dea web page it is argued by many that state medical marijuana laws weaken the fight against drug abuse by making the work of police officers more difficult .

this undermining of law enforcement can occur in at least three ways: by diverting medical marijuana into the recreational drug market , by causing state and local law enforcement priorities to diverge from federal priorities , and by complicating the job of law enforcement by forcing officers to distinguish medical users from recreational users .

marijuana grown for medical purposes , according to dea and other federal drug control agencies , can be diverted into the larger , illegal marijuana market , thereby undermining law enforcement efforts to eliminate the marijuana market altogether .

this point was emphasized by the department of justice ( doj ) in its prepublication review of a report by the government accountability office ( gao ) on medical marijuana .

doj criticized the gao draft report on the grounds that the "report did not mention that state medical marijuana laws are routinely abused to facilitate traditional illegal trafficking. .

gao responded that in their interviews with federal officials regarding the impact of state medical marijuana laws on their law enforcement efforts , "none of the federal officials we spoke with provided information that abuse of medical marijuana laws was routinely occurring in any of the states , including california. .

the government also failed to establish this in the raich case .

 ( it is of course possible that significant diversion is taking place yet remains undetected. ) .

just as with many pharmaceuticals , some diversion is inevitable .

some would view this as an acceptable cost of implementing a medical marijuana program .

every public policy has its costs and benefits .

depriving seriously ill patients of their medical marijuana is seen by some as a small price to pay if doing so will help to protect america's youth from marijuana .

others balance the harms and benefits of medical marijuana in the opposite direction .

legal analyst stuart taylor jr. recently wrote , "as a matter of policy , congress as well as the states should legalize medical marijuana , with strict regulatory controls .

the proven benefits to some suffering patients outweigh the potential costs of marijuana being diverted to illicit uses. .

following the passage of the california and arizona medical marijuana initiatives in 1996 , federal officials expressed concern that the measures would seriously affect the federal government's drug enforcement effort because federal drug policies rely heavily on the state's enforcement of their own drug laws to achieve federal objectives .

for instance , in hearings before the senate judiciary committee , the head of the drug enforcement administration stated: i have always felt ... that the federalization of crime is very difficult to carry out ; that crime , just in essence , is for the most part a local problem and addressed very well locally , in my experience .

we now have a situation where local law enforcement is unsure... .

the numbers of investigations that you would talk about that might be presently being conducted by the [arizona state police] at the gram level would be beyond our capacity to conduct those types of individual investigations without abandoning the major organized crime investigations .

state medical marijuana laws arguably feed into the deprioritization movement , by which drug reform advocates seek to influence state and local law enforcement to give a low priority to the enforcement of marijuana laws .

this movement to make simple marijuana possession the lowest law enforcement priority has made inroads in such cities as san francisco , seattle , and oakland , but it extends beyond the medical marijuana states to college towns such as ann arbor , mi , madison , wi , columbia , mo , and lawrence , ks .

federal officials fear that jurisdictions that "opt out" of marijuana enforcement "will quickly become a haven for drug traffickers. .

police officers in medical marijuana states have complained about the difficulty of distinguishing between legitimate patients and recreational marijuana smokers .

according to the dea: local and state law enforcement counterparts cannot distinguish between illegal marijuana grows and grows that qualify as medical exemptions .

many self - designated medical marijuana growers are , in fact , growing marijuana for illegal , "recreational" use .

this reasoning is echoed in the raich amici brief of community rights counsel ( p. 12 ) : creating an exception for medical use [of marijuana] could undermine enforcement efforts by imposing an often difficult burden on prosecutors of establishing the violator's subjective motivation and intent beyond a reasonable doubt .

given that marijuana used in response to medical ailments is not readily distinguishable from marijuana used for other reasons , congress rationally concluded that the control of all use is necessary to address the national market for controlled substances .

patients and caregivers , on the other hand , have complained that their marijuana that is lawful under state statute has been seized by police and not returned .

in some cases , patients and caregivers have been unexpectedly arrested by state or local police officers .

a november 2002 gao report on medical marijuana stated that "several law enforcement officials in california and oregon cited the inconsistency between federal and state law as a significant problem , particularly regarding how seized marijuana is handled. .

the failure of state and local law enforcement officers to observe state medical marijuana laws has especially been a problem in california .

the california highway patrol ( chp ) has , on numerous occasions , arrested patients or confiscated their medical marijuana during routine traffic stops .

"although voters legalized medical marijuana in california nearly nine years ago," reports the los angeles times , "police statewide have wrangled with activists over how to enforce the law. .

as a result of a lawsuit brought against the chp by a patient advocacy group , chp officers will no longer seize patients' marijuana as long as they possess no more than 8 ounces and can show a certified - user identification card or their physician's written recommendation .

the chp's new policy , announced in august 2005 , will likely influence the behavior of other california law enforcement agencies .

the committee on drugs and the law of the bar of the city of new york concluded its 1997 report "marijuana should be medically available" with this statement: "the government can effectively differentiate medical marijuana and recreational marijuana , as it has done with cocaine .

the image of the federal authorities suppressing a valuable medicine to maintain the rationale of the war on drugs only serves to discredit the government's effort. .

centuries of anglo - american law stand against the imposition of criminal liability on individuals for pursuing their own lifesaving pain relief and treatment .... because the experience of pain can be so subversive of dignity — and even of the will to live — ethics and legal tradition recognize that individuals pursuing pain relief have special claims to non - interference .

 — brief of the leukemia & lymphoma society , et al. , 2004 medical marijuana advocates believe that seriously ill people should not be punished for acting in accordance with the opinion of their physicians in a bona fide attempt to relieve their suffering , especially when acting in accordance with state law .

even if marijuana were proven to be more harmful than now appears , prison for severely ill patients is believed to be a worse alternative .

patients have enough problems without having to fear the emotional and financial cost of arrest , legal fees , prosecution , and a possible prison sentence .

the american public appears to agree .

the institute of medicine found that "public support for patient access to marijuana for medical use appears substantial ; public opinion polls taken during 1997 and 1998 generally reported 60-70 percent of respondents in favor of allowing medical uses of marijuana. .

the federal penalty for possessing one marijuana cigarette — even for medical use — is up to one year in prison and up to a $100,000 fine , and the penalty for growing a cannabis plant is up to five years and up to a $250,000 fine .

that patients are willing to risk these severe penalties to obtain the relief that marijuana provides appears to present strong evidence for the substance's therapeutic effectiveness .

although the supreme court ruled differently in raich , the argument persists that medical marijuana providers and patients are engaging in a class of activity totally different from those persons trafficking in marijuana for recreational use and that patients should not be arrested for using medical marijuana in accordance with the laws of the states in which they reside .

with its position affirmed by raich , however , dea continues to investigate — and sometimes raid and shut down — medical marijuana distribution operations in california and other medical marijuana states .

dea's position is that: [f]ederal law does not distinguish between crimes involving marijuana for claimed "medical" purposes and crimes involving marijuana for any other purpose .

dea likewise does not so distinguish in carrying out its duty to enforce the csa and investigate possible violations of the act .

rather , consistent with the agency's mandate , dea focuses on large - scale trafficking organizations and other criminal enterprises that warrant federal scrutiny .

if investigating csa violations in this manner leads the agency to encounter persons engaged in criminal activities involving marijuana , dea does not alter its approach if such persons claim at some point their crimes are "medically" justified .

to do so would be to give legal effect to an excuse considered by the text of federal law and the united states supreme court to be of no moment .

because nearly all arrests and prosecutions for marijuana possession are handled by state and local law enforcement officers , patients and caregivers in the medical marijuana states can , as a practical matter , possess medical marijuana without fear of arrest and imprisonment .

dea enforcement actions against medical marijuana dispensaries — as occurred in san francisco shortly after the raich decision was announced — can , however , make it more difficult for patients to obtain the drug .

the situation that grinspoon and bakalar described in 1995 in the journal of the american medical association persists a decade later: "at present , the greatest danger in medical use of marihuana is its illegality , which imposes much anxiety and expense on suffering people , forces them to bargain with illicit drug dealers , and exposes them to the threat of criminal prosecution. .

doctors , not the federal government , know what ' s best for their patients .

if a state decides to allow doctors to recommend proven treatments for their patients , then the federal government has no rightful place in the doctor ' s office .

 — attorney randy barnett , 2004 three states — california , maryland , and washington — filed an amici curiae brief supporting the right of states to institute medical marijuana programs .

their brief argued , "in our federal system states often serve as democracy's laboratories , trying out new , or innovative solutions to society's ills. .

the raich case shows that the federal government has zero tolerance for state medical marijuana programs .

the bush administration appealed the decision of the ninth circuit court of appeals to the supreme court , which reversed the ninth circuit and upheld the federal position against the states .

framed as a commerce clause issue , the case became a battle for states' rights against the federal government .

the raich case created unusual political alliances .

three southern states that are strongly opposed to any marijuana use , medical or otherwise — alabama , louisiana , and mississippi — filed an amici curiae brief supporting california's medical marijuana users on the grounds of states' rights .

their brief argued as justice brandeis famously remarked , "[i]t is one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous state may , if its citizens choose , serve as a laboratory ; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country. .

whether california and the other compassionate - use states are "courageous — or instead profoundly misguided — is not the point .

the point is that , as a sovereign member of the federal union , california is entitled to make for itself the tough policy choices that affect its citizens .

states' rights advocates argue that authority to define criminal law and the power to make and enforce laws protecting the health , safety , welfare , and morals reside at the state level and that a state has the right to set these policies free of congressional interference .

for justice o'connor , the raich case exemplified "the role of states as laboratories. .

she wrote in her dissenting opinion: if i were a california citizen , i would not have voted for the medical marijuana ballot initiative ; if i were a california legislator i would not have supported the compassionate use act .

but whatever the wisdom of california's experiment with medical marijuana , the federalism principles that have driven our commerce clause cases require that room for experiment be protected in this case .

the current efforts to gain legal status of marijuana through ballot initiatives seriously threaten the food and drug administration statutorily authorized process of proving safety and efficacy .

 — brief of the drug free america foundation , et al. , 2004 although the individual states regulate the practice of medicine , the federal government has taken primary responsibility for the regulation of medical products , especially those containing controlled substances .

pharmaceutical drugs must be approved for use in the united states by the food and drug administration , an agency of the department of health and human services .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act gives hhs and fda the responsibility for determining that drugs are safe and effective , a requirement that all medicines must meet before they can enter interstate commerce and be made available for general medical use .

clinical evaluation is required regardless of whether the drug is synthetically produced or originates from a natural botanical or animal source .

opponents of medical marijuana say that the fda's drug approval process should not be circumvented .

to permit states to decide which medical products can be made available for therapeutic use , they say , would undercut this regulatory system .

state medical marijuana initiatives are seen as inconsistent with the federal government's responsibility to protect the public from unsafe , ineffective drugs .

the bush administration argued in its brief in the raich case that "excepting drug activity for personal use or free distribution from the sweep of [federal drug laws] would discourage the consumption of lawful controlled substances and would undermine congress's intent to regulate the drug market comprehensively to protect public health and safety. .

three prominent drug abuse experts argued in their amici brief: this action by the state of california did not create a "novel social and economic experiment," but rather chaos in the scientific and medical communities .

furthermore , under court of appeals ruling , such informal state systems could be replicated , and even expanded , in a manner that puts at risk the critical protections so carefully crafted under the national food and drug legislation of the 20 th century .

the food and drug administration itself has stated that fda is the sole federal agency that approves drug products as safe and effective for intended indications.... fda's drug approval process requires well - controlled clinical trials that provide the necessary scientific data upon which fda makes its approval and labeling decisions.... efforts that seek to bypass the fda drug approval process would not serve the interests of public health because they might expose patients to unsafe and ineffective drug products .

fda has not approved smoked marijuana for any condition or disease indication .

the drug free america raich brief elaborates further ( pp .

12-13 ) : the ballot initiative - led laws create an atmosphere of medicine by popular vote , rather than the rigorous scientific and medical process that all medicines must undergo .

before the development of modern pharmaceutical science , the field of medicine was fraught with potions and herbal remedies .

many of those were absolutely useless , or conversely were harmful to unsuspecting subjects .

thus evolved our current food and drug administration and drug scheduling processes , which congress has authorized in order to create a uniform and reliable system of drug approval and regulation .

this system is being intentionally undermined by the legalization proponents through use of medical marijuana initiatives .

the organizers of the medical marijuana state initiatives deny that it was their intent to undermine the federal drug approval process .

rather , in their view , it became necessary for them to bypass the fda and go to the states because of the federal government's resistance to marijuana research requests and rescheduling petitions .

as for the charge that politics should not play a role in the drug approval and controlled substance scheduling processes , medical marijuana supporters point out that marijuana's original listing as a schedule i substance in 1970 was itself a political act on the part of congress .

scientists on both sides of the issue say more research needs to be done , yet some researchers charge that the federal government has all but shut down marijuana clinical trials for reasons based on politics and ideology rather than science .

in any case , as the iom report pointed out , "although a drug is normally approved for medical use only on proof of its 'safety and efficacy,' patients with life - threatening conditions are sometimes ( under protocols for 'compassionate use' ) allowed access to unapproved drugs whose benefits and risks are uncertain. .

this was the case with the fda's ind compassionate access program under which a limited number of patients are provided government - grown medical marijuana to treat their serious medical conditions .

some observers believe the pharmaceutical industry and some politicians oppose medical marijuana to protect pharmaceutical industry profits .

because the whole marijuana plant cannot be patented , research efforts must be focused on the development of synthetic cannabinoids such as marinol .

but even if additional cannabinoid drugs are developed and marketed , some believe that doctors and patients should still not be criminalized for recommending and using the natural substance .

the new england journal of medicine has editorialized that [a] federal policy that prohibits physicians from alleviating suffering by prescribing marijuana for seriously ill patients is misguided , heavy - handed , and inhumane .

marijuana may have long - term adverse effects and its use may presage serious addictions , but neither long - term side effects nor addiction is a relevant issue in such patients .

it is also hypocritical to forbid physicians to prescribe marijuana while permitting them to use morphine and meperidine to relieve extreme dyspnea and pain .

with both of these drugs the difference between the dose that relieves symptoms and the dose that hastens death is very narrow ; by contrast , there is no risk of death from smoking marijuana .

to demand evidence of therapeutic efficacy is equally hypocritical .

the noxious sensations that patients experience are extremely difficult to quantify in controlled experiments .

what really counts for a therapy with this kind of safety margin is whether a seriously ill patient feels relief as a result of the intervention , not whether a controlled trial "proves" its efficacy .

some observers suggest that until the federal government relents and becomes more hospitable to marijuana research proposals and more willing to consider moving marijuana to a less restrictive schedule , the medical marijuana issue will continue to be fought at state and local levels of governance .

as one patient advocate has stated , "as the months tick away , it will become more and more obvious that we need to continue changing state laws until the federal government has no choice but to change its inhumane medicinal marijuana laws. .

advocates have tried to legalize marijuana in one form or another for three decades , and the " medical marijuana " concept is a trojan horse tactic towards the goal of legalization .

 — brief of the drug free america foundation , et al. , 2004 medical marijuana opponents see the movement to promote the use of medical marijuana as a cynical attempt to subvert the controlled substances act and legalize the recreational use of marijuana for all .

they see it as a devious tactic in the more than 30-year effort by marijuana proponents to bring an end to marijuana prohibition in the united states and elsewhere .

they point out that between 1972 and 1978 , the national organization for the reform of marijuana laws ( norml ) successfully lobbied 11 state legislatures to decriminalize the drug , reducing penalties for possession in most cases to that of a traffic ticket .

also , in 1972 , norml began the first of several unsuccessful attempts to petition dea to reschedule marijuana from schedule i to schedule ii on the grounds that crude marijuana had use in medicine .

later , beginning with california in 1996 , "drug legalizers" pushed successfully for passage of medical marijuana voter initiatives in several states , prompting then - drug czar barry mccaffrey , writing in newsweek , to warn that "we're on a perilous path. .

"i think it's clear," he wrote , "that a lot of the people arguing for the california proposition and others like it are pushing the legalization of drugs , plain and simple. .

is it cynical or smart for norml and other drug reform organizations to simultaneously pursue the separate goals of marijuana decriminalization for all , on the one hand , and marijuana rescheduling for the seriously ill , on the other ? .

it is not unusual for political activists tactically to press for — and accept — half - measures in pursuit of a larger strategic goal .

pro - life activists work to prohibit partial - birth abortions and to pass parental notification laws .

gay rights activists seek limited domestic partner benefits as a stepping stone to full marriage equality .

thus is the tactic used on both sides of the cultural divide in america , to the alarm of those opposed .

it is certainly true that the medical cannabis movement is an offshoot of the marijuana legalization movement .

many individuals and organizations that support medical marijuana also support a broader program of drug law reform .

it is also true , however , that many health professionals and other individuals who advocate medical access to marijuana do not support any other changes in u.s. drug control policy .

in the same way , not everyone in favor of parental notification laws supports banning abortions for everyone .

and not every supporter of domestic partner benefits believes in same - sex marriage .

in these hot - button issues , ideology and emotion often rule .

marijuana users in general , and medical marijuana users in particular , are demonized by some elements of american society .

the ideology of the "drug warriors" intrudes on the science of medical marijuana , as pointed out by grinspoon and bakalar in the journal of the american medical association : advocates of medical use of marihuana are sometimes charged with using medicine as a wedge to open a way for "recreational" use .

the accusation is false as applied to its target , but expresses in a distorted form a truth about some opponents of medical marihuana: they will not admit that it can be a safe and effective medicine largely because they are stubbornly committed to exaggerating its dangers when used for nonmedical purposes .

the authors of the iom report were aware of the possibility that larger ideological positions could influence one's stand on the specific issue of patient access to medical marijuana when they wrote that [i]t is not relevant to scientific validity whether an argument is put forth by someone who believes that all marijuana use should be legal or by someone who believes that any marijuana use is highly damaging to individual users and to society as a whole .

 ( p. 14 ) in other words , it is widely believed that science should rule when it comes to medical issues .

both sides in the medical marijuana debate claim adherence to this principle .

the house government reform committee's april 2004 hearing on medical marijuana was titled "marijuana and medicine: the need for a science - based approach. .

and medical marijuana advocates plead with the federal government to permit scientific research on medical marijuana to proceed .

rescheduling marijuana and making it available for medical use and research is not necessarily a step toward legalizing its recreational use .

such a move would put it on a par with cocaine , methamphetamine , morphine , and methadone , all of which are schedule ii substances that are not close to becoming legal for recreational use .

proponents of medical marijuana ask why marijuana should be considered differently than these other scheduled substances .

it is also arguable that marijuana should indeed be considered differently than cocaine , methamphetamine , morphine , and methadone .

scientists note that marijuana is less harmful and less addictive than these schedule ii substances .

acceptance of medical marijuana could in fact pave the way for its more generalized use .

ethan nadelmann , head of the drug policy alliance , has observed , "as medical marijuana becomes more regulated and institutionalized in the west , that may provide a model for how we ultimately make marijuana legal for all adults. .

medical marijuana opponents have trumpeted his candor as proof of the hypocrisy of those on the other side of the issue .

others note , however , that his comment may be less hypocritical than astute .

