the complex humanitarian emergency has emerged as a category of crisis that can be defined in different ways .

for example , it can be viewed according to the situation on the ground — scale and intensity of population dislocation , destruction of social networks / community and infrastructure , insecurity of civilians and noncombatants , and human rights abuses ; by the complexity of the response needed to address these problems ; or by the multi - causal factors that may have contributed to the escalation of conflict in the first place .

beginning in the 1990s , crisis operations increased in war - torn countries and regions throughout the world along with the numbers of those providing relief , primarily humanitarian organizations and international actors .

multinational military forces also served a greater peacekeeping role in these internal wars .

the media added a new measure of influence to the response to such crises in the form of greater access and live reporting .

population displacement is often a significant consequence in crises resulting from conflict .

this may occur within the affected country or because people flee to countries in close proximity .

in these situations the plight of the refugee is one critical element of population movement ; the internally displaced person ( idp ) is another .

the displaced require particular protection , the basis of which may be found in international humanitarian law , and sustained emergency assistance , which is usually provided by u.n. system agencies , governments , international entities , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

in many protracted civil conflicts , where groups within a country are fighting and in the absence of a political solution , the course agreed on by the international community might be to provide humanitarian assistance to the victims .

this assistance may last for many years .

refugees and idps may be stranded in camps , urban areas , or informal settlements and separated from their homes for long periods .

conducting a humanitarian operation in an area of conflict often means that access to populations in need and the distribution of emergency relief supplies is hampered by security concerns , not only for those needing assistance but for humanitarian personnel as well .

thus , providing humanitarian and refugee assistance is increasingly complicated and expensive — sources of funding , civil - military relations and operations , human rights concerns , aid worker security , protection , and access are just some of the central issues facing the aid community .

the ongoing conflicts in and around syria and iraq demonstrate some of these challenges .

in addition , natural disasters affect millions of people each year who require prolonged and urgent assistance .

the event may be sudden ( like the 2010 earthquake in haiti , the 2013 typhoon in the philippines , or the 2014 earthquake in nepal ) or protracted ( like drought conditions in the horn of africa and southern africa , food insecurity in the sahel , and the possible long - term effects of climate change ) .

responses to natural disasters are typically multilateral and less likely to be hindered by the politics at hand , although the situation in burma following the may 2008 cyclone demonstrated the opposite .

the united states is a major contributor to relief efforts in international crises and disaster situations .

key relief - related policy issues likely to be of concern in the 114 th congress include budget priorities , levels of funding , sources of other support available worldwide , and the ways in which operational assistance is delivered .

congress has consistently supported humanitarian efforts as a means of responding to natural disasters ( such as floods and earthquakes ) and man - made crises ( such as war ) in the short term , mitigating humanitarian impacts , and promoting a u.s. presence .

from fy2008 to fy2012 , the u.s. government contributed more than $4 billion annually to disaster relief worldwide .

in fy2013 , the u.s. contribution was more than $5.6 billion , and in fy2014 this number rose to $6.4 billion .

the recent increases largely reflect humanitarian needs related to the crisis in syria .

humanitarian assistance generally receives strong bipartisan congressional support .

congress has given the president broad authority in this area .

the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ) , as amended , authorizes the united states to participate in disaster relief efforts and gives the president great flexibility to respond to disasters with a wide range of government - funded humanitarian assistance .

in 1993 , president clinton designated for the first time the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) as the special coordinator for international disaster assistance .

in this capacity the administrator coordinates the u.s. government's response to both natural and man - made disasters .

the administrator also calls upon federal agencies to provide assistance ; contracts with and funds private voluntary agencies to provide humanitarian assistance ; and coordinates the u.s. response with that of other countries .

categories of humanitarian assistance can be broken down into several main elements including relief and rehabilitation , food assistance , refugee programs , and logistical and operational support .

usaid , the state department , and the department of defense provide humanitarian assistance and cover a mix of these activities as described below .

usaid is the central u.s. agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector foreign assistance .

the united states responds with varying amounts of relief and recovery assistance , typically in coordination with its international partners .

the sheer number of players in the field , representing a range of actors and interests , creates a complicated coordination challenge and often contributes to duplication of efforts or competition over the same sources of money and projects .

those involved may include , for example , numerous u.n. agencies , other international organizations ( ios ) , bilateral and multilateral donors , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

international actors provide relief either through financial contributions to the government of the affected country or to ngos , or by directly providing in - kind support in the form of relief supplies and emergency personnel .

local , regional , and national authorities may also have a role in the provision of assistance , law enforcement , and access control .

it is important to note that local aid organizations may be critical because they often know the terrain , the available resources , and the community , whereas the international community may bring to bear greater resources and coordinating capacity .

relief operations are often daunting in terms of the demands of those in need — from life - saving action required to the provision of food and shelter under harsh physical conditions .

in addition , the humanitarian response system has many moving parts .

the united nations works with a wide number and variety of aid organizations and donors .

within the u.n. system , in addition to the office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) , the world food program ( wfp ) , the world health organization ( who ) , the u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , and the u.n. development program ( undp ) all contribute to efforts to respond to a crisis .

ocha also coordinates with ios such as the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) and the international organization for migration ( iom ) , and a wide range of ngos , many of which are implementing partners and provide much of the operational support on the ground .

in addition , other internationals — governments , militaries , intergovernmental entities such as the european union — are often part of the response network .

a key determinant in the response to humanitarian emergencies is level of prior planning , including the identification of responders — local , national , or international — and their level of preparedness .

furthermore , it is widely recognized that in many crises , it is the people who are least able to help themselves — those who are poor and those who have few , if any , options to live elsewhere — who are most affected .

experts continue to emphasize the importance of drawing on lessons learned from responses to previous crises and disasters .

some of the ongoing challenges include communication between the government , aid agencies , and the public ; coordination among emergency responders ; civil - military cooperation and division of duties ; and the planning and logistics involved in providing aid to less accessible , often more insecure , areas .

members of the 114 th congress may take the following issues into account when considering u.s. humanitarian assistance activities worldwide .

finding the resources to sustain u.s. funding or pledges to humanitarian crises may be difficult in light of domestic budget constraints .

when disasters require immediate emergency relief , the administration may fund pledges by depleting most global humanitarian accounts .

in order to respond to future humanitarian crises , however , these resources would need to be replenished .

if not replenished , u.s. capacity to respond to other emergencies could be affected .

in recent years , the united states has moved away from annual supplemental funding to replenish humanitarian or other accounts .

instead , it has increased levels of funding during the regular appropriations process .

while congress may be reluctant to allocate funds for disasters before they happen , some experts have argued there are negative impacts of relying too heavily on post - disaster supplemental funding .

for example , budget uncertainty may result in program cuts , delays in decision making , and disruptions in service .

humanitarian programs may incur greater expense in restarting activities that had to be cut back due to insufficient funding earlier in the year .

this in turn may raise questions about the credibility and reliability of the united states as a partner in the provision of humanitarian assistance .

congress has an interest in the cost and effectiveness of foreign affairs activities , including humanitarian assistance , that promote u.s. interests overseas .

both congress and the administration encourage other countries to provide disaster assistance and to turn pledges into actual commitments .

often it is not easy to measure the precise contributions made by various countries and organizations , or to compare them to u.s. assistance .

it is not always evident whether figures listing donor amounts represent pledges of support or more specific obligations .

pledges made by governments do not always result in actual contributions .

some offers of assistance are not accepted for various reasons .

it also cannot be assumed that the funds committed to relief actually represent new contributions , since the money may previously have been allocated elsewhere .

moreover , it is not readily apparent how the actual cost of the humanitarian emergency might be shared among international donors .

comparing u.s. and international aid is also difficult because of the often dramatically different forms the assistance takes ( relief items versus cash , for instance ) .

given the protracted nature of many modern crises , some donors face "donor fatigue. .

or a reluctance to continue providing funds for a seemingly endless need .

some members of congress may feel that the u.s. provides a disproportionate share of assistance in some situations and should step back to let others play a larger role .

other members may believe that the united states has an obligation to lead such efforts , or see a foreign policy benefit for doing so .

finding a balance between burdensharing on the one hand and an effective u.s. response on the other can negatively impact relief operations during emergencies when immediate funds are required for a response and are not forthcoming .

some experts are concerned about funding priorities and the ongoing need for resources for other disaster areas .

some members of congress have raised concerns about transparency of donor contributions , allocation of monies , and monitoring of assistance projects .

for example , the united nations continues to address concerns about its financial tracking and reporting system .

in responding to international disasters , many contributions are also made directly to ios and ngos , which could raise the same questions about transparency requirements .

moreover , while conditions and time limits have been proposed by congress as a means of ensuring greater accountability , they can also add pressure for organizations to spend contributed funds quickly , sometimes leading to unnecessary spending , waste , and duplicated efforts .

many also argue that restrictions on use of funds often do not allow flexibility to adapt projects to better meet the changing needs on the ground .

since the 1990s , limitations on the operating environment of humanitarian agencies have been a topic of intense debate and discussion .

a number of reports have highlighted increased incidences of insecurity and attacks on humanitarian staff .

while a more consistent and expanded response by the international community to humanitarian crises over the past two decades has meant that a greater number of aid workers are operating in crisis areas , most security incidents tend to be concentrated in a limited number of high - profile contexts .

at the same time , other reports indicate that the ability of aid workers to access populations at risk has decreased over time .

this could in part be due to operations taking place in a greater number of conflict areas , but other factors may include the actions of multiple non - state actors or the role of sovereign governments in denying access .

furthermore , some experts stress that humanitarian agencies need to be able to operate independently of external military and political agendas but may not be able to do so .

one reason that humanitarian workers may be less secure than in the past is that they are often not viewed as neutral .

for example , some contend that , increasingly , the lines are blurred between humanitarian and other actors , such as the military , in the delivery of humanitarian assistance , the inclusion of humanitarian response in counter - insurgency operations , and the incorporation of humanitarian action within integrated u.n. missions .

adherence to international humanitarian law and the traditional humanitarian principles of impartiality , neutrality , and independence are often cited as the underpinnings of the provision of humanitarian assistance , but their application may vary by organization mandate and situation .

the security of the environment in which humanitarian organizations are operating is complicated not only by the specific crisis itself , but the ways in which humanitarian actors define their roles and responsibilities .

a growing number of humanitarian workers have been put at great risk or lost their lives in providing humanitarian assistance .

the degree to which a security force protects humanitarian relief workers and parties to the conflict will have some bearing on who is in charge , the security measures taken and provided , and the perception of whether the humanitarian community has taken sides in the conflict .

security and access are serious concerns and remain key priorities within the humanitarian community .

the provision of humanitarian assistance raises the potential for unexpected consequences .

first , it is important to examine whether humanitarian assistance is going to those for whom it is intended .

evaluating and tracking provision of supplies is difficult during a conflict and impossible to completely control .

second , there is the role of the ngo , including its mission and sources of funding , in what has become a major independent enterprise in conflict areas .

there is the potential for misuse , intended or unintended , which may require closer analysis of the performance of providers .

third , there is the question raised by some experts as to whether the provision of humanitarian assistance is helpful — particularly in cases where there is no consensus on how or when to intervene but only on the need to demonstrate action .

some question whether humanitarian assistance in some instances actually prolongs conflict .

a related issue concerns an interest on the part of many members of congress in the labeling or "branding" of u.s. humanitarian aid delivered to areas of conflict so that recipients are aware of its origin .

the u.s. government tries to balance the desire to maintain visibility as a contributor of humanitarian assistance with concerns for the security of aid recipients and implementing partners who could become possible targets of attacks .

finding appropriate ways for the united states to leverage its political objectives without politicizing humanitarian aid remains a significant challenge .

there has been some debate about whether the united states receives adequate political benefit from its humanitarian assistance efforts and whether those who receive assistance remain unaware of its origins , or assume it is from a foreign government other than the united states .

syria is a case in point where some members of congress and observers have argued that the united states should begin to more aggressively brand u.s. aid to enhance local perceptions that the people of the united states stand in solidarity with syrians .

humanitarian groups argue that strategic objectives such as winning hearts and minds potentially compromise the neutrality of humanitarian assistance in general .

others contend that a targeted attack on a u.s. - labeled humanitarian organization could jeopardize broader humanitarian efforts and perhaps funding .

it is often unclear whether raising awareness of u.s. humanitarian assistance would do much to change local perceptions in conflict areas .

more broadly , political considerations play a role in the way assistance is given and to whom .

while the images of human suffering portrayed by the media only reinforce the need to do something , humanitarian assistance carries some weight as an instrument of "neutral" intervention in crises and is the most flexible policy tool that can be quickly brought to bear in a crisis .

it can buy time and keep options open , and it may be an avenue to achieve minimal consensus on an international response .

sometimes humanitarian assistance can also expand beyond its immediate function .

it may provide the means to maintain some form of contact with a country / region , or mitigate tensions over policy towards a region within the u.s. government or with and among its allies .

sometimes humanitarian assistance is expanded beyond its immediate function to avert a crisis , to provide support to allies , and to maintain a presence in the region .

how it is used and whether it becomes more of a strategic , policy tool depends upon the situation , what other governments are doing , and the degree to which the united states has further interest in the region .

providing humanitarian assistance also raises questions about implications for future action .

on the one hand , if the united states decides to reduce its humanitarian support , would this diminish u.s. standing among its allies or affect its interests in other ways ? .

on the other hand , since the president has a great deal of flexibility over u.s. involvement , once commitment to a humanitarian effort is made , does this make the long - term u.s. participation in reconstruction and political solutions more likely ? .

regardless , it is clear that as crises proliferate , the level and sources of u.s. humanitarian assistance will inevitably have an important impact not only on the relief operation itself , but on broader foreign policy goals .

