the office of infrastructure protection ( oip ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has been developing and maintaining a national asset database .

the database contains information on a wide range of individual assets , from dams , hazardous materials sites , and nuclear power plants to local festivals , petting zoos , and sporting good stores .

the presence of a large number of entries of the latter type ( i.e. , assets generally perceived as having more local importance than national importance ) has attracted much criticism from the press and from members of congress .

many critics of the database have assumed that it is ( or should be ) dhs's list of the nation's most critical assets and are concerned that , in its current form , it is being used inappropriately as the basis upon which federal resources , including infrastructure protection grants , are allocated .

according to dhs , both of those assumptions are wrong .

the purpose of this report is to discuss the national asset database: what is in it , how it is populated , what the database apparently is , what it is not , and how it is intended to be used .

the report also discusses some of the issues on which congress could focus its oversight .

this report relies primarily on a dhs office of the inspector general ( dhs ig ) report , released on july 11 , 2006 , but makes reference to other government documents as well .

the genesis of the national asset database remains somewhat unclear .

a list of critical sites was begun in the spring of 2003 as part of operation liberty shield .

the list contained 160 assets , including chemical and hazardous materials sites , nuclear plants , energy facilities , business and finance centers , and more .

the assets were selected by the newly formed protective services division within the office of infrastructure protection , in what was then called the information analysis and infrastructure protection directorate , department of homeland security .

the secretary of dhs asked states to provide additional security for these sites .

during the course of the year ( 2003 ) , dhs continued to collect information on various assets from a variety of sources .

by early 2004 , dhs had accumulated information on 28,368 assets .

although operation liberty shield was now considered over , the initial list of 160 critical assets , those judged to be in need of additional protection because of their vulnerability and the potential consequences if attacked , grew to 1,849 assets and became known as the protected measures target list .

it is not clear when the information being gathered became known as the national asset database .

by january 2006 , according to the dhs ig report , the database had grown to include 77,069 assets , ranging from nuclear power plants and dams to a casket company and an elevator company .

it also contains locations and events ranging from times square in new york city to the mule day parade in columbia tennessee ( which , according to the city's website , draws over 200,000 spectators each year for the week - long event ) .

the ig report categorized entries in the national asset database by critical infrastructure / key resource sector ( see figure 1 ) .

additionally , the dhs ig report identified some of the entries with more specificity .

for example , the database contained , at the time , 4,055 malls , shopping centers , and retail outlets ; 224 racetracks ; 539 theme parks and 163 water parks ; 1,305 casinos ; 234 retails stores ; 514 religious meeting places ; 127 gas stations ; 130 libraries ; 4,164 educational facilities ; 217 railroad bridges ; and 335 petroleum pipelines .

the dhs gets information for the database from a variety of sources .

according to the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) , sources include existing government and commercially available databases ; sector - specific agencies and other federal entities ; voluntary submittals by owners and operators ; periodic requests for information from states and localities and the private sector ; and dhs - initiated studies .

the number of assets in the database is expected to grow as additional information is gathered .

the dhs ig report focused much of its attention on information provided by states and localities as the result of two data requests made by dhs .

according to the dhs ig report , the vast majority of the 77,069 entries was collected as a result of those requests .

according to the ig report , the first data call to the states , made by the office of domestic preparedness in 2003 , yielded poor quality data .

the ig report described the guidance given states and localities as "minimal. .

the guidance apparently did tell states , however , to "consider any system or asset that , if attacked , would result in catastrophic loss of life and / or catastrophic economic loss. .

as a result , assets such as the petting zoos , local festivals and other places where people within a community congregate , or local assets ostensibly belonging to one of the critical infrastructure sectors , were among the assets reported .

according to the ig report , many state officials were surprised to learn that additional assets from their states were added to the database , which raises additional questions about how the information was collected .

according to the ig report , the second request to the states for critical infrastructure information came from the office of infrastructure protection in july 2004 and was "significantly more organized and achieved better results. .

guidance was more specific , as was the information requested .

dhs requested information for 17 data fields .

of those , dhs considered the following to be most important: address , owner , owner type , phone , local law enforcement point of contact , and latitude and longitude coordinates .

states were also asked to identify those assets that they felt met a level of national significance .

criteria for identifying assets of national significance was provided by dhs .

the criteria described certain thresholds , such as refineries with refining capacity in excess of 225,000 barrels per day , or commercial centers with potential economic loss impact of $10 billion or capacity of more than 35,000 people .

although the request was more specific , states were given much leeway as to what to include , and oip accepted into the database every submitted asset .

as a result , additional assets of questionable national significance were added to the database .

the dhs ig report drew two primary conclusions .

the first is that the database contains many "unusual , or out - of - place , assets whose criticality is not readily apparent," while , at the same time , it "may have too few assets in essential areas and may present an incomplete picture. .

the second conclusion was that the types of assets that were included and the information provided are inconsistent from state to state , locality to locality .

for example , california entries included the entire bay area regional transit system as a single entry , while entries listed for new york city included 739 separate subway stations .

the ig report made 4 recommendations: review the national asset database for out - of - place assets and assets marked as not nationally significant , and determine whether those assets should remain in the database ; provide state homeland security advisers the opportunity to review their assets in the database to identify previously submitted assets that may not be relevant ; during future data calls , provide states a list of their respective database assets to reduce ... duplicate submissions ; and establish a milestone for the completion of a comprehensive risk assessment of critical infrastructure and key resources and ensure they are accurately captured in the national infrastructure protection plan .

the national strategy for homeland security recognized that not all assets within each critical infrastructure sector are equally important , and that the federal government would focus its effort on the highest priorities .

the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructure and key assets stated that dhs will develop a methodology for identifying assets with national - level criticality and using this methodology will build a comprehensive database to catalog these critical assets .

judging from the criticism leveled at it , many believe the national asset database is ( or should be ) dhs's list of assets critical to the nation .

however , in his written response to the ig report , then - undersecretary for preparedness , george foresman , to whom the office of infrastructure protection reported , stated that the national asset database is "not a list of critical assets...[but rather] a national asset inventory...[providing] the 'universe' from which various lists of critical assets are produced. .

according to the national infrastructure protection plan , the national asset database is a comprehensive catalog with descriptive information regarding the assets and systems that comprise the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources .

the assistant secretary for infrastructure protection , robert stephan , has called the database a 'phonebook' of 77,000 facilities , assets and systems from across the nation , needed to facilitate more detailed risk analyses .

some may ask why there should be this difference in perception regarding the national asset database .

one possible explanation is that , as noted above , the national asset database started out as the protected measures target list , which was a prioritized list of assets considered critical at the national level .

also , as reported in at least one media source , when asked for its list of critical assets , members of congress were shown the expanded list containing the questionable assets .

based on subsequent response , congressional interest appears focused on a prioritized list .

also , what is meant by the term "critical infrastructure" continues to generate some confusion .

the definition provided in the usa patriot act and in other policy documents refers to specific assets or systems within a selected set of sectors or categories .

however , the term also is used often to identify the sectors and categories themselves .

for example , the transportation sector is often called a critical infrastructure , when , according to the statutory definition , only those assets within the transportation sector whose loss would be debilitating to the nation should be called critical infrastructure .

given the varied usage of the term critical infrastructure , the national infrastructure protection plan description of the national asset database above , is unclear .

is it a list of assets that are critical , or is it a list of assets that make up each of the critical sectors , with criticality to be determined later ? .

there appear to be two primary uses for the database: as a first step in a prioritization process that eventually will help focus risk reduction activities ; and , to provide a degree of situational awareness .

according to assistant secretary stephan , the database "does not drive the department's funding decisions. .

assuming that the undersecretary is not changing the definition of critical infrastructure , and accepting dhs's argument that the national asset database is not a prioritized list of critical assets , and that it is not the basis for determining grant allocations , two issues remain: the quality of the information contained in the database ; and , whether the value of keeping low criticality assets in the database warrant the costs associated with maintaining them in the database .

another potential issue could arise if the current voluntary nature of the database changes .

congress may ultimately focus its oversight of the national asset database on these areas .

the house of representatives , as part of the 110 th congress's first 100 hours of legislation , passed h.r .

1 , implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 .

title ix of this act includes a section ( sec .

902 ) dealing with the national asset database .

the section did a number of things .

it amended the homeland security act to include the requirement that the secretary of homeland security establish a national asset database .

it also required the secretary to establish within this database a subset of assets that the secretary determines are most at risk .

this subset of assets shall be called the national at - risk database .

this requirement indicated that the house disagrees with the undersecretary that the national asset database should not include a prioritization of assets .

section 902 also established a national asset database consortium , made up of representatives from at least two , but no more than four , national laboratories along with officials from other federal agencies with appropriate experience in working with and identifying critical infrastructure .

the consortium is to advise the secretary on how to identify , generate , organize , and maintain the national asset database .

in addition , the secretary is to solicit comments from the consortium on the appropriateness of the risk methodologies employed by the national infrastructure protection plan and alternative methods for defining risk and identifying specific criteria by which to set priorities .

the secretary is to secure recommendations from the consortium 60 days after this act is enacted .

the section also required the secretary to annually review the database to examine assets in the database to determine if the information on these assets is incorrect or if they do not meet national asset guidelines used by the secretary to determine which assets should remain in the database .

it required the secretary to remove from the database any asset whose information is not verifiable or which does not meet the nation asset guidelines .

the requirement disagrees with the undersecretary's position that less - than - nationally - critical assets should remain in the database .

also , the secretary is to provide the database to states for review and to meet annually with the states to discuss guidelines their submissions of information for the database .

this requirement is in agreement with recommendations made by the inspector general .

section 902 also required the secretary to ensure that the information contained in the database can be organized by sector , state , locality , and region .

section 902 required the secretary to report to congress annually on those assets in the database considered to be most at risk .

the report is to include name , location , and sector of each asset .

it is also to include any changes in the criteria used to define or identify critical infrastructure and any changes in the compiling of the database .

it is also to include the extent to which the database has been used as a tool for allocating resources .

it is likely that dhs would classify much of the information specific to particular assets in the database .

title xi in the senate's companion bill , s. 4 , improving america ' s security act of 2007 , although not mentioning a national asset database , also required the secretary to develop a risk - based prioritized list of critical infrastructure and key resources .

the list should consider those assets or systems that , if destroyed or disrupted , by attack or natural catastrophe , would cause significant loss of life , severe economic harm , mass evacuations , or lead to the loss of vital public services .

the list should reflect a cross - sector analysis to determine priorities for prevention , protection , recovery , and reconstitution .

the act also instructed the secretary to report to congress annually the criteria used to create the list , the methodology used to solicit and verify information submitted to the list , and how the list will be used in program activities , including grant making .

in the compromise bill , implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) , the senate agreed with the house with some modification .

title x established the national asset database in statute and instructed the secretary of homeland security to establish and maintain a classified prioritized critical infrastructure list of systems and assets included in the database that the secretary determines would cause regional or national "catastrophic effects" if destroyed or disrupted .

it instructed the secretary to annually update the database , including establishing data collection guidelines , reviewing those guidelines with state officials , and to work with state officials before finalizing what should be included in the database .

the secretary was also instructed to identify and evaluate methods for soliciting relevant information on assets from the private sector , including use of the protected critical infrastructure information program .

the bill also required the secretary to submit an annual report , that , among other items , should include the name , location , and sector classification of those assets listed in the classified prioritized list , those assets that are most at risk of terrorism , and the extent to which database and / or the prioritized list have been used to allocate federal funds .

this report shall be unclassified , although a classified annex may be included .

the compromise bill also required an annual report on the comprehensive assessments carried out in each sector and should include any countermeasures or actions recommended or taken to address issue identified in those assessments .

this report may be classified .

the secretary was also required to report annually on the actions taken by the federal government to ensure the preparedness of the private sector to reduce interruptions in the operations of critical infrastructures associated with acts of terrorism or natural catastrophe , or other national emergency , in accordance with the defense production act of 1950 .

this report is to go to the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee , in addition to the respective homeland security committees .

the compromise bill left the consortium concept proposed by the house to the secretary's discretion .

the house version of the fy2008 department of homeland security appropriations bill , h.r .

2638 , contained report language directing the national protection and programs directorate to remove from the national asset database items it deems insignificant , and encouraged the directorate to provide states and local partners the opportunity to review their assets listed in the database and to recommend items for removal .

the language also stated that the directorate should clarify its guidance when soliciting information to ensure uniform and accurate information .

the senate version ( s. 1644 ) contained no similar language .

