running away from home is not a recent phenomenon .

folkloric heroes huckleberry finn and davy crockett fled their abusive fathers to find adventure and employment .

although some youth today also leave home due to abuse and neglect , they often endure far more negative outcomes than their romanticized counterparts from an earlier era .

without adequate and safe shelter , runaway and homeless youth are vulnerable to engaging in high - risk behaviors and further victimization .

youth who live away from home for extended periods may become removed from school and systems of support .

runaway and homeless youth are vulnerable to multiple problems while they are away from a permanent home , including untreated mental health disorders , drug use , and sexual exploitation .

they also report other challenges including poor health and the lack of basic provisions .

congress began to hear concerns about the vulnerabilities of the runaway population in the 1970s due to increased awareness about these youth and the establishment of runaway shelters to assist them in returning home .

congress and the president went on to enact the runaway youth act of 1974 as title iii of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( p.l .

93-415 ) to assist runaways through services specifically for this population .

since that time , the law has been updated to authorize services to provide support for runaway and homeless youth outside of the juvenile justice , mental health , and child welfare systems .

the runaway youth act — now known as the runaway and homeless youth act — authorized federal funding to be provided through annual appropriations for three programs that assist runaway and homeless youth: the basic center program ( bcp ) , transitional living program ( tlp ) , and street outreach program ( sop ) .

together , the programs make up the runaway and homeless youth program ( rhyp ) , administered by the family and youth services bureau ( fysb ) in the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs ) administration for children and families ( acf ) .

basic center program: provides funding to community - based organizations for crisis intervention , temporary shelter , counseling , family unification , and after care services to runaway and homeless youth under age 18 and their families .

in some cases , bcp - funded programs may serve older youth .

over 31,000 youth participated in fy2016 , the most recent year for which data are available .

transitional living program: supports community - based organizations that provide homeless youth ages 16 through 22 with stable , safe , longer - term residential services up to 18 months ( or longer under certain circumstances ) , including counseling in basic life skills , building interpersonal skills , educational advancement , job attainment skills , and physical and mental health care .

over 6,000 youth participated in fy2016 .

street outreach program: provides funding to community - based organizations for street - based outreach and education , including treatment , counseling , provision of information , and referrals for runaway , homeless , and street youth who have been subjected to , or are at risk of being subjected to , sexual abuse , sexual exploitation , prostitution , and trafficking .

sop grantees made contact with more than 36,000 youth in fy2016 .

this report begins with an overview of the runaway and homeless youth population .

it then describes the challenges in defining and counting this population , as well as the factors that influence homelessness and leaving home .

the report also provides background on federal efforts to support runaway and homeless youth , including the evolution of federal policies to respond to these youth , with a focus on the period from the runaway youth act of 1974 to the present time .

the report then describes the administration and funding of the basic center , transitional living , and street outreach programs that were created from authorizations in the act .

the appendixes include funding information for the bcp program and discuss other federal programs that may be used to assist runaway and homeless youth .

prior to the enactment of the runaway youth act of 1974 ( title iii , juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act of 1974 , p.l .

93-415 ) , federal policy provided limited services to runaway and homeless youth .

if they received any services , most of these youth were served through the local child welfare agency , juvenile justice court system , or both .

the 1970s marked a shift to a more rehabilitative model for assisting youth who had run afoul of the law , including those who committed status offenses such as running away .

during this period , congress focused increasing attention on runaways and other vulnerable youth due , in part , to emerging sociological models to explain why youth engaged in deviant behavior .

the first runaway shelters were created in the late 1960s and 1970s to assist them in returning home .

the landmark runaway youth act of 1974 decriminalized runaway youth and authorized funding for programs to provide shelter , counseling , and other services .

since the law's enactment , congress and the president have expanded the services available to both runaway youth and homeless youth under what is now referred to as the runaway and homeless youth program .

in more recent years , other federal entities have been involved in responding to the challenges facing runaway and homeless youth .

these efforts are coordinated through the u.s. interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) .

figure 1 traces the evolution of federal policy in this area .

as mentioned , the runaway and homeless youth program is administered by the family and youth services bureau ( fysb ) within hhs's administration for children and families ( acf ) .

the runaway and homeless youth act includes three authorizations of appropriations .

the authorization of appropriations for the basic center program and transitional living program is $127.4 million for each of fy2019 and fy2020 .

under the law , 90% of the federal funds appropriated under the two programs must be used for the bcp and tlp ( together , the programs and their related activities are known as the consolidated runaway and homeless youth program ) .

of this amount , 45% is reserved for the bcp and no more than 55% is reserved for the tlp .

the remaining share of consolidated funding is allocated for ( 1 ) a national communication system to facilitate communication between service providers , runaway youth , and their families ( national safeline ) ; ( 2 )  training and technical support for grantees ; ( 3 ) evaluations of the programs ; ( 4 ) federal coordination efforts on matters relating to the health , education , employment , and housing of these youth ; and ( 5 ) studies of runaway and homeless youth .

the authorization of appropriations for the street outreach program is $25 million for each of fy2019 and fy2020 .

although the sop is a separately funded component , sop services are coordinated with those provided under the bcp and tlp .

the authorization of appropriations for the periodic estimate of incidence and prevalence of youth homelessness is such sums as may be necessary for fy2019 and fy2020 .

funding has not been provided by hhs under this authority , and as noted , funds appropriated to hud for this purpose have been used to support voices of youth count .

table 1 shows funding levels for the runaway and homeless youth program from fy2006 through fy2019 .

over this period , funding has increased notably for the program three times , most recently from fy2017 to fy2018 .

congress has provided some guidance on how the additional funds are to be spent .

in the conference report to accompany the fy2019 consolidated appropriations act , congress stated that the increase should be provided to current tlp grantees whose awards end on march 31 , 2019 .

the funding is to be used to continue services until new awards are made to those grantees , or for those grantees that did not receive a new grant , to provide services until the end of fy2019 .

funding may then be used for additional new awards .

the basic center program is intended to provide short - term shelter and services for youth and their families at centers operated by bcp grantees , which are public and private community - based organizations .

youth eligible to receive bcp services include those youth who are at risk of running away or becoming homeless ( and may live at home with their parents ) , or have already left home , either voluntarily or involuntarily .

to stay at the shelter , youth must be under age 18 , or an older age if the bcp center is located in a state or locality that permits this higher age .

some centers may serve homeless youth through street - based services , home - based services , and drug abuse education and prevention services .

grantees seek to connect youth with their families , whenever possible , or to locate appropriate alternative placements .

they also provide individual or group and family counseling , health care , education , and employment assistance .

as specified in the law , bcp grantees or centers are intended to provide services as an alternative to involving runaway and homeless youth in the law enforcement , juvenile justice , child welfare , and mental health systems .

youth may stay in a center continuously up to 21 days .

in fy2017 , the program served 23,288 youth , and in fy2018 it funded 280 bcp shelters ( most recent figures available ) .

these centers , which can shelter as many as 20 youth , are generally supposed to be located in areas that are frequented or easily reached by runaway and homeless youth .

bcp grantees must make efforts to contact the parents and relatives of runaway and homeless youth .

grantees are also required to establish relationships with law enforcement , health and mental health care , social service , welfare , and school district systems to coordinate services .

grantees maintain confidential statistical records of youth , including youth who are not referred to out - of - home shelter services .

further , grantees are required to submit an annual report to hhs detailing the program activities and the number of youth participating in such activities , as well as information about the operation of the centers .

bcp grants are allocated directly to grantees for a three - year period .

funding is generally distributed to entities based on the proportion of the nation's youth under age 18 in the jurisdiction where the entities are located .

the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico each receive a minimum allotment of $200,000 .

separately , the territories ( currently , this includes american samoa and guam ) each receive a minimum of $70,000 .

the amount of funding for each state or territory can further depend on whether grant applicants in that jurisdiction applied for funding , and if so , whether the applicant fulfilled the requirements in the authorizing law and grant application .

for example , the authorizing law directs hhs to give priority to applicants who have demonstrated experience in providing services to runaway and homeless youth .

hhs is to re - allot any funds designated for grantees in one state to grantees in other states that will not be obligated before the end of a fiscal year .

see table a - 1 for the amount of funding allocated for each state in fy2017 and fy2018 .

the costs of the bcp are shared by the federal government ( 90% ) and grantees ( 10% ) .

in fy2008 , hhs began funding a three - year rural host homes demonstration project , which was initiated to expand bcp shelter and support services to runaway and homeless youth who live in rural areas not served by shelter facilities .

the project supported grantees that provided youth with shelter ( via host home families who were recruited , screened , and trained ) and preventive services , including transportation , counseling , educational assistance , and aftercare planning , among others .

over the course of the three years , the project served 781 youth , 411 of whom received shelter and 370 of whom received preventive services without shelter .

recognizing the difficulty that youth face in becoming self - sufficient adults , the transitional living program provides longer - term shelter and assistance for youth ages 16 through 22 ( or older if the youth entered the tlp prior to reaching age 22 ) who may leave their biological homes due to family conflict , or have left and are not expected to return home .

pregnant and / or parenting youth are eligible for tlp services .

in fy2017 , the tlp provided services to 3,517 youth .

in fy2018 , the program funded 229 organizations .

each tlp grantee may shelter up to 20 youth at various sites , such as host family homes , supervised apartments owned by a social service agency , scattered - site apartments , or single - occupancy apartments rented directly with the assistance of the grantee .

youth may remain at tlp sites for up to 540 days ( 18 months ) , or longer for youth under age 18 .

youth ages 16 through 22 may remain in the program for a continuous period of 635 days ( approximately 21 months ) under "exceptional circumstances. .

this term means circumstances in which a youth would benefit to an unusual extent from additional time in the program .

a youth in a tlp who has not reached age 18 on the last day of the 635-day period may , in exceptional circumstances and if otherwise qualified for the program , remain in the program until his or her 18 th birthday .

youth receive several types of services at tlp - funded programs: basic life - skills training , including consumer education and instruction in budgeting and the use of credit ; parenting support and child care ( as appropriate ) ; building interpersonal skills ; educational opportunities , such as ged courses and postsecondary training ; assistance in job preparation and attainment ; and mental and physical health care services .

tlp grantees are required to develop a written plan designed to help youth transition to living independently or another appropriate living arrangement , and they are to refer youth to other systems that can help to meet their educational , health care , and social service needs .

the grantees must also submit an annual report to hhs that includes information regarding the activities carried out with funds and the number and characteristics of the homeless youth .

as part of the fy2002 budget request , the george w. bush administration proposed a $33 million initiative to fund maternity group homes — or centers that provide shelter to pregnant and parenting teens who are vulnerable to abuse and neglect — as a component of the tlp .

although the tlp authorized services for pregnant and parenting teens prior to fy2002 , the bush administration sought funds specifically to serve this population .

increased funds were ultimately provided to enable these youth to access tlp services .

the 2003 amendments to the runaway and homeless youth act ( p.l .

108-96 ) provided explicit authority to use tlp funds for this purpose .

since fy2004 , funding for adult - supervised transitional living arrangements that serve pregnant or parenting women ages 16 to 21 and their children has been awarded to organizations that receive tlp grants .

these organizations provide youth with parenting skills , including child development education , family budgeting , health and nutrition , and other skills to promote family well - being .

tlp grants are distributed competitively by hhs to community - based public and private organizations throughout the country for a five - year period .

grantees must provide at least 10% of the total cost of the program .

hhs is carrying out a study to learn more about the long - term outcomes of 1,250 youth who have used tlp services .

the study seeks to describe the outcomes and to isolate and describe promising practices and other factors that may contribute to their successes or challenges .

of particular interest for the study is how services are delivered , the demographics of youth , and their socio - emotional wellness and life experiences .

it involves both a process evaluation and impact evaluation , with youth randomly assigned to the treatment ( i.e. , participation in the tlp ) and control groups .

the study seeks to address the following questions: ( 1 ) how do tlp programs operate , what types of program models are used to deliver services , and what services are delivered to homeless youth ? .

 ( 2 ) what are the long - term housing outcomes and protective factors for youth who participate in the tlp program immediately , six months , 12 months , and 18 months after exiting the program ? .

 ( 3 ) what interventions can be attributed to any positive outcomes experienced by youth who participate in the tlp ? .

according to hhs , the pilot study revealed challenges "in collecting data from a large enough sample size of youth to detect any effects so that conclusions could be drawn about the impact of homeless youth served by tlps. .

hhs is not certain how it will move forward with the study .

in fy2016 , hhs began the transitional living program special population demonstration project .

the project funded nine grantees over a two - year period that tested approaches for serving populations that need additional support: lgbtq runaway and homeless youth ages 16 to 21 ; and young adults who have left foster care because of emancipation .

grantees were expected to provide strategies that help youth build protective factors , such as connections with schools , employment , and appropriate family members and other caring adults .

according to hhs , a process evaluation will assess how grantees are implementing the demonstration project .

hhs separately funded a project from fy2012 through fy2014 to build the capacity of tlps in serving lgbtq youth .

known as the 3 / 40 blueprint: creating the blueprint to reduce lgbtq youth homelessness , the purpose of the grant was develop information about serving the lgbtq youth population experiencing homelessness , such as through efforts to identify innovative intervention strategies , determine culturally appropriate screening and assessment tools , and better understand the needs of lgbtq youth served by rhy providers .

the website developed by the grantee , the university of illinois at chicago , identifies promising practices that serve lgbtq youth who are experiencing homelessness and publishes information about their challenges .

in fy2009 , hhs began the support systems for rural homeless youth demonstration project .

six states received grants to support tlps in rural communities in serving young adults who have few or no connections to a supportive family structure or community resources .

the five - year project sought to provide services across three main areas: survival support , which includes housing , health care ( including mental health ) , and substance abuse treatment and prevention ; community , which includes community service , youth and adult partnerships , mentoring , and peer support groups ; and education and employment , which includes high school or ged completion , postsecondary education , and job training and employment .

the six states — colorado , iowa , minnesota , nebraska , oklahoma , and vermont — each received annual grants of $200,000 .

according to hhs , all of the sites engaged youth in positive youth development activities that included safe places for youth to go .

in addition , they raised awareness about homelessness in rural areas and addressed some of the unique needs around employment , housing , and transportation .

however , the sites also confirmed that there is a general lack of available housing for homeless youth and that transportation was the most critical impediment to serving these youth .

the street outreach program provides runaway and homeless youth living on the streets or in areas that increase their risk of using drugs or being subjected to sexual abuse , prostitution , sexual exploitation , and trafficking are eligible to receive services .

the program's goal is to assist youth in transitioning to safe and appropriate living arrangements .

sop services include the following: treatment and counseling ; crisis intervention ; drug abuse and exploitation prevention and education activities ; survival aid ; street - based education and outreach ; information and referrals ; and follow - up support .

grants are awarded for a three - year period , and grantees must provide 10% of the funds to cover the cost of the program .

in fy2018 , 96 grantees were funded .

in fy2017 grantees made contact with 24,366 youth .

the family and youth services bureau initiated the street outreach program data collection project in 2012 to learn more about the lives and needs of homeless and runaway youth served by sop grantees .

the purpose of the project was to design services to better meet the needs of these youth .

fysb collected information through focus groups and computer - assisted personal interviews with 656 youth ( ages 14 to 21 years ) served by grantees in 11 cities .

the project found that participants were homeless on average for nearly two years and had challenges with substance abuse , mental health , and exposure to trauma .

youth most identified that they were in need of job training or help finding a job , transportation assistance , and clothing .

the top barriers to obtaining shelter were shelters being full , not knowing where to go for shelter , and lacking transportation to get to a shelter .

the study researchers concluded that more emergency shelters could help prevent youth from sleeping on the street .

further , they noted that youth on the streets need more intensive case management ( eg , careful assessment and treatment planning , linkages to community resources , etc. ) .

and more intensive interventions .

hhs funds the runaway and homeless youth training and technical assistance center ( rhyttac ) to provide technical assistance to rhyp grantees .

hhs awarded a five - year cooperative agreement , from september 30 , 2017 , through september 29 , 2020 , to national safe place to operate rhyttac .

national safe place is a national youth outreach program that aims to educate young people about the dangers of running away or trying to resolve difficult , threatening situations on their own .

rhyttac is designed to provide training and conference services to rhyp grantees that enhance and promote continuous quality improvement to services provided by rhyp grantees .

further , rhyttac offers resources and information through its website , tip sheets , a quarterly newsletter , toolkits , sample policies and procedures , and other resources .

rhyttac also provides assistance to individual grantees in response to their questions or concerns , as well as concerns raised by hhs as part of the runaway and homeless youth program monitoring system ( see subsequent section ) .

a portion of the funds for the bcp , tlp , and related activities are allocated for a national communications system known as the national runaway safeline ( "safeline" ) .

the safeline is intended to help homeless and runaway youth ( or youth who are contemplating running away ) through counseling , referrals , and communicating with their families .

beginning with fy1974 and every year after , the safeline , which until 2013 was called the national runaway switchboard , has been funded through the basic center program grant or the consolidated runaway and homeless youth program grant .

the safeline is located in chicago and operates each day to provide services to youth and their families across the country .

services include ( 1 ) a channel through which runaway and homeless youth or their parents may leave messages ; ( 2 ) 24-hour referrals to community resources , including shelter , community food banks , legal assistance , and social services agencies ; and ( 3 ) crisis intervention counseling to youth .

in calendar year 2017 , the safeline handled nearly 30,000 contacts with youth ( via phone , computer , emails , and postings ) , of which nearly three - quarters were from youth and 9% were from parents ; the other callers were relatives , friends , and others .

other services are also provided through the safeline .

since 1995 , the "home free" family reunification program has provided bus tickets for youth ages 12 to 21 to return home or to an alternative placement near their home through home free .

hhs evaluates each rhyp grantee through the runaway and homeless youth monitoring system .

staff from regional acf offices and other grant recipients ( known as peer reviewers ) inspect the program site , conduct interviews , review case files and other agency documents , and conduct entry and exit conferences .

the monitoring team then prepares a written report that identifies the strengths of the program and areas that require corrective action .

the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 required that within one year of its enactment ( october 8 , 2009 ) , hhs was to issue rules that specified performance standards for public and nonprofit entities that receive bcp , tlp , and sop grants .

on april 14 , 2014 , hhs issued a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) for the new performance standards and other requirements for the runaway and homeless youth program grantees .

on december 20 , 2016 , hhs implemented a final rule that was similar to the provisions in the nprm .

these standards are used to monitor individual grantee performance .

the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) and the house committee on education and labor have exercised jurisdiction over the runaway and homeless youth program .

hhs must submit reports biennially to the committees on the status , activities , and accomplishments of program grant recipients and evaluations of the programs performed by hhs .

the most recent report was submitted in january 2018 , and covered fy2014 and fy2015 .

the 2003 reauthorization law ( p.l .

108-96 ) of the runaway and homeless youth act required that hhs , in consultation with the u.s. interagency council on homelessness , submit a report to congress on the promising strategies to end youth homelessness within two years of the reauthorization , in october 2005 .

the report was submitted to congress in june 2007 .

as mentioned above , the 2008 reauthorization law ( p.l .

110-378 ) required hhs , as of fy2010 , to periodically submit to congress an incidence and prevalence study of runaway and homeless youth ages 13 to 26 , as well as the characteristics of a representative sample of these youth .

as discussed , congress appropriated funding to hud for this purpose and the study , known as voices of youth count , includes multiple publications about its findings .

the 2008 law also directed the government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate the process by which organizations apply for bcp , tlp , and sop , including hhs's response to these applicants .

gao submitted a report to congress in may 2010 on its findings .

gao found weaknesses in several of the procedures for reviewing grants , such as that peer reviewers for the grant did not always have expertise in runaway and homeless youth issues and feedback on grants was not provided in a permanent record .

in addition , gao found that hhs delayed telling successful grantees that the grant had been awarded to them .

hhs has implemented the recommendations made in the report .

appendix a .

basic center program ( bcp ) funding appendix b .

additional federal support for runaway and homeless youth since the creation of the runaway and homeless youth program , other federal initiatives have also established services for such youth .

youth homelessness demonstration program ( yhdp ) : the omnibus appropriations laws for fy2016 through fy2018 enabled hud to set aside up to $33 million ( fy2016 ) , $43 million ( fy2017 ) , and $80 million ( fy2018 ) from the homeless assistance grants account to implement projects that demonstrate how a "comprehensive approach" can "dramatically reduce" homelessness for youth through age 24 .

the appropriations laws each fiscal year direct this funding to up to 10 communities with the fy2016 funding ; up to 11 communities with the fy2017 funding , including at least five rural communities ; and up to 25 communities with the fy2018 funding , including at least eight rural communities .

hud has allocated $33 million to 10 communities for fy2016 and $43 million for fy2017 .

in addition , hud is taking steps to evaluate the yhdp grantee communities in developing and carrying out a coordinated community approach to preventing and ending youth homelessness .

100-day challenges to end youth homelessness : since 2016 , cities have partnered with public and private entities to accelerate efforts to prevent and end youth homelessness .

a way home america and rapid results institute , organizations that focus on pressing social problems , have provided support to the organizations .

hhs provided training and technical assistance through rhyttac to the first three cities involved in the challenge: los angeles , ca ; cleveland , oh ; and austin , tx .

in general , participating communities have housed homeless youth and have identified new housing options for this population .

youth with child welfare involvement at - risk of homelessness ( yahr ) : hhs has funded grants to build evidence on what works to prevent homelessness among youth and young adults who have child welfare involvement .

hhs awarded funds to 18 grantees for a two - year planning period ( 2013-2015 ) .

six of the grantees received additional funding to refine and test their service models during a second phase ( 2015-2018 ) .

a subset of those grantees will then be selected to conduct a rigorous evaluation of their impact on homelessness .

in school year 2016-2017 , more than 1.3 million children and youth were homeless .

of these students , over 118,000 were homeless youth unaccompanied by their families .

the department of education administers the education for homeless children and youth program , which was established under the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-77 ) , as amended .

this program assists state education agencies ( seas ) to ensure that all homeless children and youth have equal access to the same , appropriate education , including public preschool education , that is provided to other children and youth .

grants made by seas to local education agencies ( leas ) under this program must be used to facilitate the enrollment , attendance , and success in school of homeless children and youth .

program funds may be appropriated for activities such as tutoring , supplemental instruction , and referral services for homeless children and youth , as well as providing them with medical , dental , mental , and other health services .

mckinney - vento liaisons for homeless children and youth in each lea is responsible for coordinating activities for these youth with other entities and agencies , including local basic center and transitional living program grantees .

states that receive mckinney - vento funds are prohibited from segregating homeless students from non - homeless students , except for short periods of time for health and safety emergencies or to provide temporary , special , supplemental services .

fy2019 funding for the program is $93.5 million .

according to a 2017 survey of 43,000 college students at selected colleges and universities , 9% of those attending four - year universities and 12% of those attending community college had been homeless in the last year .

in addition , 37% of university students and 46% of community college students were housing insecure in the past year , meaning that they had difficulty paying rent or lived with others beyond the expected capacity of the housing , among other scenarios .

the higher education act ( hea ) authorizes financial aid and support programs that target homeless students and other vulnerable populations .

for purposes of applying for federal financial aid , a student's expected family contribution ( efc ) is the amount that can be expected to be contributed by a student and the student's family toward his or her cost of education .

certain groups of students are considered "independent," meaning that only the income and assets of the student ( and not their parents or guardians ) are counted .

individuals under age 24 who have been verified during the school year as either ( 1 ) unaccompanied and homeless or ( 2 ) unaccompanied , self - supporting , and risk of homelessness .

this verification can come from a mckinney - vento liaison for homeless children and youth in the local education agency ; the director ( or designee ) of a program funded under the runaway and homeless youth program ; the director ( or designee ) of an emergency shelter or transitional housing program funded by hud ; or a financial aid administrator .

separately , hea provides that homeless children and youth are eligible for what are collectively called the federal trio programs .

this includes the following trio programs: talent search , upward bound , student support services , and educational opportunity centers .

the trio programs are designed to identify potential postsecondary students from disadvantaged backgrounds , prepare these students for higher education , provide certain support services to them while they are in college , and train individuals who provide these services .

hea directs the department of education ( ed ) , which administers the programs , to ( as appropriate ) require applicants seeking trio funds to identify and make services available , including mentoring , tutoring , and other services , to these youth .

trio funds are awarded by ed on a competitive basis .

in addition , hea authorizes services for homeless youth through trio student support services — a program intended to improve the retention and graduation rates of disadvantaged college students — that include temporary housing during breaks in the academic year .

in fy2019 , trio appropriations are $1.1 billion .

separately , hea allows additional uses of funds through the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education ( fipse ) to establish demonstration projects that provide comprehensive support services for students who are or were homeless at age 13 or older .

fipse is a grant program that seeks to support the implementation of innovative educational reform ideas and evaluate how well they work .

as specified in the law , the projects can provide housing to the youth when housing at an educational institution is closed or unavailable to other students .

fy2019 appropriations for fipse are $5 million .

recently emancipated foster youth are vulnerable to becoming homeless .

in fy2017 , nearly 20,000 youth "aged out" of foster care .

the chafee foster care independence program ( cfcip ) , created under the chafee foster care independence act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-169 ) , provides states with funding to support children and youth ages 14 to 21 who are in foster care and former foster youth ages 18 to 21 ( and up to age 23 in states that extend foster care to age 21 ) .

states are authorized to receive funds based on their share of the total number of children in foster care nationwide .

however , the law's "hold harmless" clause precludes any state from receiving less than the amount of funds it received in fy1998 or $500,000 , whichever is greater .

the program specifies funding for transitional living services , and as much as 30% of the funds may be dedicated to room and board .

the program is funded through mandatory spending , and as such $140 million ( $143 million as of fy2020 ) is provided for the program each year through the annual appropriations process .

the family violence prevention and services act ( fvpsa ) , title iii of the child abuse amendments of 1984 ( p.l .

98-457 ) , authorized funds for family violence prevention and service grants that work to prevent family violence , improve service delivery to address family violence , and increase knowledge and understanding of family violence .

from fy2007 to fy2009 , one of these projects focused on runaway and homeless youth in dating violence situations through hhs's domestic violence / runaway and homeless youth collaboration on the prevention of adolescent dating violence initiative .

the initiative was created because many runaway and homeless youth come from homes where domestic violence occurs and may be at risk of abusing their partners or becoming victims of abuse .

the initiative funded eight states and community - based organizations to address the issue of teen dating violence among runaway and homeless youth .

the grants funded activities such as curriculum on dating violence , small groups for teens , and a sexual assault / dating violence reduction program .

the initiative resulted in an online toolkit for advocates in the runaway and homeless youth and domestic and sexual assault fields to help programs better address relationship violence with runaway and homeless youth .

