on july 18 , 2005 , president bush and indian prime minister manmohan singh signed a jointstatement that announced the creation of a "global partnership," which would include "full" civilnuclear cooperation between the united states and india .

this is at odds with nearly three decadesof u.s. nonproliferation policy and practice .

president bush committed to persuading congress toamend the pertinent laws to approve the agreement , as well as persuading u.s. allies to create anexception to multilateral nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) guidelines for india to allow for nuclearcooperation .

india committed to separating its civilian from its military nuclear facilities , declaringcivilian facilities to the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) and placing them under iaeasafeguards , and signing an additional protocol , which provides enhanced access and informationfor iaea inspectors .

 ( 1 ) the united states is obligated under the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) to ensurethat any cooperation it provides to a non - nuclear weapon state does not contribute to that state'scapability to produce nuclear weapons .

in 1978 , congress passed the nuclear nonproliferation act,which strengthened the restrictions on u.s. nuclear cooperation to include comprehensive ( full - scope ) safeguards on all nuclear material in non - nuclear weapon states , specifically to helpensure that peaceful cooperation would not be diverted to weapons purposes .

the 1978 actfollowed india's 1974 peaceful nuclear explosion , which demonstrated to most observers that nucleartechnology originally transferred for peaceful purposes could be misused .

that test also providedthe impetus for creating the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) .

 ( 2 ) in 1992 , the nsg adopted thefull - scope safeguards condition for nuclear exports , and the 1995 npt extension conference andthe 2000 npt review conference both endorsed the nsg's new requirement .

india shares a unique status with pakistan and israel as de facto nuclear weapon statesoutside the npt that have been treated politically , for nonproliferation purposes , as non - nuclearweapon states .

 ( 3 ) the threestates do not have comprehensive nuclear safeguards .

instead , they have safeguards agreements thatcover only specified facilities and materials .

 ( 4 ) presently , very few of india's nuclear facilities are subject tointernational inspections .

the bush administration made a "credible" and "defensible" - - from a nonproliferationstandpoint - - separation plan a prerequisite for asking congress to create an exception to current lawfor nuclear cooperation with india .

p.l .

109-401 , the law that provides the executive branch withauthority to waive restrictions under the atomic energy act with respect to india , requires thepresident to determine that the following actions had occurred: india has provided the united states and the iaea with a credible plan toseparate civil and military facilities , materials , and programs , and has filed a declaration regardingits civil facilities with the iaea ; india and the iaea have concluded all legal steps required prior to signatureby the parties of an agreement requiring the application of safeguards in perpetuity in accordancewith iaea standards , principles , and practices ( including iaea board of governors documentgov / 1621 ( 1973 ) ) to india's civil nuclear facilities , materials and programs as declared in the plan,including materials used in or produced through the use of india's civil nuclearfacilities ; india and the iaea are making substantial progress toward concluding anadditional protocol consistent with iaea principles , practices , and policies that would apply toindia's civil nuclear program ; india is working actively with the united states for the early conclusion of amultilateral treaty on the cessation of the production of fissile materials for use in nuclearweapons ; india is working with and supporting u.s. and international efforts to preventthe spread of enrichment and reprocessing technology to any state that does not already possessfull - scale functioning enrichment or reprocessing plants ; india is taking the necessary steps to secure nuclear and other sensitivematerials and technology through the application of comprehensive export control legislation andregulations , and through harmonization and adherence to missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) and nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) guidelines ; and the nsg has decided by consensus to permit supply to india of nuclear itemscovered by the guidelines of the nsg .

indian and u.s. officials engaged for several months in discussions on identification ofcivilian facilities .

u.s. officials encouraged india to make a comprehensive declaration of its civilianinfrastructure .

 ( 5 ) in variouswritten and oral statements to congress , state department officials seem to suggest that morefacilities under safeguards would be better than fewer , but critics ( on both the u.s. and indian sides ) have suggested that some facilities would be more important to include or exclude .

for example,the cirus reactor , reportedly the source of plutonium for the 1974 nuclear test , despite india'spledge to use it only for peaceful purposes , is important to some critics to declare as civilian and place under safeguards because of its controversial past .

to u.s. officials , facilities associated withthe fast breeder reactor program , which could produce plutonium for weapons in the future,reportedly would be key to get under safeguards , particularly if the united states wants to cooperatewith india in the global nuclear energy partnership program .

 ( 6 ) to indian officials , however,the fast breeder reactor program is key to the future of india's three - stage nuclear fuel cycle and mustbe kept out of safeguards for maximum flexibility and energy independence .

 ( 7 ) several nonproliferation critics of the potential agreement have suggested that no matter howmany facilities india places under safeguards , the opening of the international uranium market - - forbidden to india since 1992 by the nsg - - in effect frees up india's domestic uranium for itsnuclear weapons program , and therefore , would assist the indian nuclear weapons program .

 ( 8 ) consequently , only india's haltin the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons would ensure that u.s. assistance does notaid india's nuclear programs .

 ( 9 ) indian officials note that the peaceful nuclear cooperationagreement is not about limiting their strategic program , just about expanding their peaceful nuclearprogram .

some critics have suggested various options for placing specific facilities under safeguardsto diminish the potential "surplus effect" of opening up that uranium market .

 ( 10 ) one observer , robert einhorn , has suggested that in the absence of a fissile materialproduction halt , safeguards on indian facilities serve primarily a symbolic role in demonstratingindia's commitment to nonproliferation .

 ( 11 ) nonetheless , the safeguards approach , according toadministration officials , is key to assuring that the united states complies with article i of the npt - - that u.s. cooperation does not in any way assist a nuclear weapons program in a non - nuclearweapon state .

u.s. officials have stated that a voluntary safeguards arrangement like those of theother five nuclear weapon states would not meet our npt article i obligations .

in their view , indiamust accept some kind of safeguards arrangement that allow safeguards to endure in perpetuity .

indian officials , on the other hand , suggested that having the same responsibilities and practices asother advanced nuclear states translates into a voluntary safeguards arrangement .

 ( 12 ) this report provides background on india's nuclear fuel cycle , a discussion of various issuesinvolved in separating civilian and military nuclear facilities and potential concerns for congress asit considers whether the united states has adequate assurances that its nuclear cooperation does notassist , encourage , or induce india's nuclear weapons development , production , or proliferation .

india's nuclear program , from its inception in 1948 , has been described as inherentlydual - purpose .

 ( 13 ) withthe establishment of its atomic energy commission in 1948 , india pursued both civilian and militaryapplications of nuclear energy .

the first indigenous research reactor , apsara , was developed in the1950s .

canada provided early assistance under the colombo plan , as did the united states underthe atoms for peace program .

a humiliating defeat in a border war with china in 1962 , followedby china's first nuclear test in 1964 , intensified india's drive for nuclear weapons .

india turned tothe cirus ( canada - india reactor united states ) reactor , as the source for plutonium for its 1974"peaceful nuclear explosive" test .

foreign assistance dwindled after the 1974 test , but canada hadalready transferred the blueprints for heavy water reactors under an agreement for peaceful nuclearcooperation .

as a result , india developed a fairly independent nuclear infrastructure that supportedboth civilian and military purposes .

for example , plutonium separated in india's reprocessing plantshas been used both for weapons and to make mixed oxide fuel ( plutonium mixed with uranium ) fornuclear power plants .

india's nuclear fuel cycle development has been driven by an acknowledged lack of uraniumreserves .

in india's view , energy independence could not be derived from domestic uranium reserves - - estimated at 0.8% of world reserves , or 50-60,000 tons - - but could be from production ofplutonium , recycling of spent fuel , and utilization of thorium ( estimated at 32% of worldreserves ) .

 ( 14 ) as a result,india planned 40 years ago to develop a three - stage fuel cycle to reduce its reliance on uranium anduse thorium .

the first stage would rely on natural uranium - fueled reactors to make plutonium ; thesecond stage would use that plutonium in fast reactors blanketed with thorium to produce u - 233 ( and more plutonium ) ; and the third stage would use u - 233 fuel and thorium fuel in fast reactorsblanketed with thorium to produce more u - 233 for use for future fuel .

india has not advancedbeyond the first stage of the fuel cycle , aside from running a fast breeder test reactor ( 40 mwth fastbreeder test reactor or fbtr ) based on a french design and a small research reactor that usesu - 233 fuel ( kamini ) .

the chairman of the atomic energy commission , dr. anil kakodkar , asserted in a speechin march 2005 that indigenous uranium resources would support 10 gwe of nuclear installedcapacity but that breeder reactors , using plutonium bred from indigenous uranium , could support 500gwe of power generation .

 ( 15 ) the current energy plan is to have 12 gwe installed capacityby 2015 and 20 gwe by 2020 .

reportedly , the increase to 20 gwe would be achieved through amix of pressurized heavy water reactors ( phwrs ) , light water reactors and fast breeder reactors,including construction of 5 fast breeder reactors of 500 mwe each and the import of 8 light waterreactors of 1000 mwe each .

 ( 16 ) india's indigenous , pressurized heavy water reactors ( fueled withnatural uranium ) are planned to provide just half of that 20 gwe capacity ( i.e. , 10 gwe ) , but someobservers have suggested that indigenous supplies of uranium may not support that many reactorsand that india's uranium crisis is already acute .

 ( 17 ) for example , india's jaduguda uranium mill produces just 220tons of yellowcake a year , whereas the 13 operating natural - uranium fueled reactors require 300 tonsper year , and consequently have reduced their operating capacity from 90% in 2002-2003 to 81%in 2003-2004 and 76% in 2004-2005 .

 ( 18 ) according to two reports , the department of atomic energy hasbeen unable to mine certain uranium deposits because local governments have not yet givenclearance .

 ( 19 ) .

on march 2 , 2006 , during president bush's visit to india , u.s. and indianofficials agreed upon a final separation plan .

according to india's official report,india was guided by the following principles: credible , feasible , and implementable in a transparentmanner ; consistent with the understandings of the 18 julystatement ; consistent with india's national security and r&d requirementsas well as not prejudicial to the three - stage nuclear programme inindia ; must be cost effective in its implementation ; and must be acceptable to parliament and public opinion .

 ( 42 ) regarding the application of safeguards , india identified its "overarching criterion"as whether "subjecting a facility to iaea safeguards would impact adversely onindia's national security. .

moreover , facilities were excluded from the civilian listif they were located in a larger hub of strategic significance ( eg , barc ) , even ifthey were not normally engaged in activities of strategic significance .

 ( 43 ) this lastcriterion appears to suggest that the plan did not really seek to separate facilities .

the key elements of india's separation plan are ( 44 ) eight indigenous indian power reactors ( raps 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ; kaps1 , 2 ; naps 1 , 2 ) in addition to 6 already under safeguards ; future power reactors may also be placed under safeguards , ifindia declares them as civilian ; some facilities in the nuclear fuel complex ( eg , fuelfabrication ) will be specified as civilian in 2008 ; and nine research facilities and three heavy water plants would bedeclared as civilian , but are "safeguards - irrelevant. .

the following facilities and activities were not on the separation list: eight indigenous indian power reactors ( kaiga 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ; maps1 , 2 ; taps 3 , 4 ) ; fast breeder test reactor ( ftbr ) and prototype fast breederreactors ( pfbr ) under construction ; enrichment facilities ; spent fuel reprocessing facilities ( except for the existingsafeguards on the power reactor fuel reprocessing ( prefre ) plant ) ; research reactors: cirus ( which will be shut down in 2010 ) ,dhruva , advanced heavy water reactor ; three heavy water plants ; and various military - related plants ( eg , a prototype navalreactor ) .

the eight additional reactors would be put under safeguards between 2007and 2014 .

the implementation document presented to parliament stated that "india isnot in a position to accept safeguards on the prototype fast breeder reactor ( pfbr ) and the fast breeder test reactor ( ftbr ) , both located at kalpakkam .

the fastbreeder programme is at the r&d stage and its technology will take time to matureand reach an advanced stage of development. .

as for future reactors , the documentstated that "india has decided to place under safeguards all future civilian thermalpower reactors and civilian breeder reactors , and the government of india retains thesole right to determine such reactors as civilian. .

 ( 45 ) in responseto a question about whether it was possible for there to be non - civilian breederreactors that india would build in the future , under secretary of state nicholas burnsstated that "india could build reactors that would service their nuclear weaponsindustry...but the great majority of the growth we think will come on the civilianside. .

 ( 46 ) as for research reactors , cirus would be shut down in 2010 and notsubjected to safeguards .

the fuel core of the apsara reactor would be taken out ofbarc and made available to be safeguarded .

some facilities in the nuclear fuelcomplex would be specified as civilian in 2008 , and the tarapur and rajasthan spentfuel storage pools would be made available for safeguards ( tarapur 1-2 andrajasthan 1-2 reactors themselves are already safeguarded. ) .

in addition , india woulddeclare 3 heavy water plants ( thal , tuticorin and hazira ) as civilian , but these wouldnot be subject to safeguards ; 9 research facilities would be declared as civilian also,but these would be considered "safeguards - irrelevant. .

india's enrichment facility would not be covered , and india's offering up thetarapur power reactor fuel reprocessing plant ( prefre ) for "campaign" modesafeguards after 2010 is a continuation of its current policy .

the dhruva researchreactor is excluded .

under secretary of state burns stated that india "would enter into permanentsafeguard arrangements with the international atomic energy agency. .

however,the indian statement that an indian - specific safeguards agreement would "guardagainst withdrawal of safeguarded nuclear material from civilian use at any time aswell as providing for corrective measures that india may take to ensure uninterruptedoperation of its civilian nuclear reactors in the event of disruption of foreign fuelsupplies"raises questions about exactly what kind of safeguards arrangement isenvisioned .

burns noted that the arrangement "achieved a degree of transparency andoversight and impact on the indian nuclear program that was not possible for threedecades. .

 ( 47 ) figure 2 shows a rough depiction of how the final separation applies toindia's civilian and military nuclear facilities .

figure 2 .

india's separation plan sources: dr. frederick mackie , lawrence livermore national laboratory , and the congressional research service .

u.s. officials acknowledge the importance of a credible indian separationplan for ensuring that the united states complies with its article i obligations underthe nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) - - to not in any way assist a nuclearweapons program in a non - nuclear weapon state .

for almost thirty years , the u.s.legal standard has been that only nuclear safeguards on all nuclear activities in a stateprovides adequate assurances .

the administration has sought , and congress hasprovided , backing for a lower level of assurance by proposing that the separation plantake the place of comprehensive safeguards .

from a broad perspective , congress may consider whether opening upinternational cooperation to india after all these years has a net positive effect onindia's nuclear weapons program .

under secretary of state nicholas burns toldreporters on march 2 , 2006 , that the agreement will not have an impact on india'sstrategic program .

 ( 55 ) however , some observers believe that unlessindia stops production of fissile material for weapons purposes , nuclear safeguardswill do little to ensure that assistance is not diverted .

from a narrower perspective , the text of a peaceful nuclear cooperationagreement is necessary for congress to assess whether or not the united states cancomply with its npt obligations not to assist india's nuclear weapons program .

p.l.109-401 , which gives the president authority to waive certain requirements of theatomic energy act , still requires the administration to send congress not only thetext of a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement , but also a nuclear proliferationassessment statement ( npas ) , which must address the extent to which u.s. treatycommitments are met .

under p.l .

109-401 , the following sections require reports to congressrelated to the separation plan: under the submission to congress provision of section 104 ( section 104 .

 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ) , the administration will be required to provide "a summaryof the plan provided by india to the united states and the iaea to separate india'scivil and military nuclear facilities , materials , and programs , and the declarationmade by india to the iaea identifying india's civil facilities to be placed under iaeasafeguards , including an analysis of the credibility of such plan and declaration,together with copies of the plan and declaration. .

under the reporting to congress provision of section 104 ( section 104 .

 ( g ) ( 1 ) ) the administration will be required to keep committees informedof ( a ) ( ii ) : material noncompliance with the separationplan ; ( b ) : "construction of a nuclear facility in india after thedate of enactment of this title" ; ( c ) : "significant changes in the production by india ofnuclear weapons or in the types or amounts of fissile material produced" ; and ( d ) : "changes in the purpose or operational status of anyunsafeguarded nuclear fuel cycle activities in india. .

under the implementation and compliance report provisionof section 104 ( section 104 .

 ( g ) ( 2 ) ) , the administration is required to report , 180 daysafter entry into force of the section 123 agreement and annuallythereafter: ( a ) : a description of any additional nuclear facilities andnuclear materials that the government of india has placed or intends to place underiaea safeguards ; ( f ) : an analysis of whether u.s. civil nuclearcooperation with india is in any way assisting india's nuclear weaponsprogram ; ( h ) : an estimate relating to india's production ofuranium , fissile material for nuclear explosives ; ( i ) : an estimate of the amount of electricity produced byindia's declared and undeclared reactors ; and ( j ) : an analysis of whether imported uranium hasaffected the rate of production in india of nuclear explosivedevices .

in the president's signing statement on december 18 , 2006 , he noted that theexecutive branch would construe "provisions of the act that mandate , regulate , orprohibit submission of information to the congress , an international organization , orthe public , such as sections 104 , 109 , 261 , 271 , 272 , 273 , 274 , and 275 , in a mannerconsistent with the president's constitutional authority to protect and controlinformation that could impair foreign relations , national security , the deliberativeprocesses of the executive , or the performance of the executive's constitutionalduties. .

this could suggest that the executive branch might limit the scope ofreporting required by congress in those sections .

limiting the scope of reportingcould have an adverse impact on congress's ability to assess the nuclear cooperationagreement at three different times: when the agreement is submitted forcongressional approval ; at random times when there are certain developments inindia's nuclear fuel cycle ; and on an annual basis when the administration reports onimplementation and compliance .

