the issue of living organ donation is important to congress because it represents one important set of possibilities for balancing the needs of people seeking organs with one another , and with the needs of potential organ donors .

on one side of the balance , the drive to increase the supply of transplantable organs is fueled by people awaiting organ transplants .

they are , in a sense , competing with one another on waiting lists for potentially life - saving scarce resources .

on the other side of the balance , the drive to ensure that the transplant system is ethical and equitable precludes some mechanisms that would increase the supply of transplantable organs .

some options that have been rejected to date in the united states include paying healthy persons to donate their organs , and mandating that transplantable organs be harvested from all cadavers .

to maintain the most ideal balance for the organ transplantation system , congress may now wish to clarify whether certain new types of living organ donation should be adopted to increase the supply of transplantable organs , or prohibited for ethical and / or equitable reasons .

living donation provides thousands of organs for transplantation each year .

in 2009 , the most recent year for which complete statistics are available , 6,610 organs were provided by living donors , which accounted for a little more than a fifth of the 30,828 total organs donated .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

more than 96% of the organs donated by living donors were kidneys .

all of the organs collected from kidney and other living donors were transplanted , and just over 85% of organs recovered from deceased donors were transplanted .

the annual number of living organ donations has followed a few trends over the past decade , peaking in 2004 .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the number of living organ donations rose each year from 2000 to 2004 , then fell each year from 2004 to 2008 .

in 2009 there were more living organ donations than in 2008 , but still fewer than there were in even 2001 .

more than 6,000 people have died each year between 2000 and 2009 while awaiting an organ for transplant .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

more than half of those were awaiting kidneys .

the number who have died awaiting a kidney transplant rose each year from 2000 to 2009 .

the overall effect that mechanisms for expanding the pool of potential living organ donors , such as paired and list donation , will or might have on the available supply of various organs is difficult to measure .

this is due largely to the fact that paired and list donation systems have only been implemented and tested for kidney donation , which is discussed below .

the central ethical question involved in organ transplantation is how to balance the needs of people seeking organs with one another , and with the needs of potential organ donors .

this question has given rise to many issues , discussed below , including those related to evolving transplantation systems , the directive that physicians do no harm , risk - benefit ratios , informed consent , type o recipients , resource allocation , parity , and the possibility of paying for organs .

in order to help address the ethical issues , two groups have made recommendations , and a third has held deliberations .

first , the acot has made a series of recommendations to the secretary .

second , the institute of medicine ( iom ) issued a report in 2006 , organ donation: opportunities for action .

third , the president's council on bioethics ( pcbe ) , which was created in 2001 to advise the president on bioethical issues , took up the issue of organ transplantation in its june 2006 and february 2007 meetings .

relevant recommendations and discussions from acot , iom , pcbe and a variety of articles are summarized in the following sections .

as new transplantation systems test the boundaries of old regulations , the primary question arises — does congress want to maintain direct control over key components of the system to help ensure that ethical boundaries are not breached , or does congress want to delegate more of its authority in order to make the system more flexible ? .

current law permits and defines paired organ donation ( p.l .

110 - 144 ) and is , in various instances , both more and less broad than earlier proposals that were made .

it is broader in that it allows paired donations for many types of organs , while many earlier proposals were restricted to kidneys ( h.r .

710 eh and s. 487 , 110 th ) .

it is less broad in that it exempts paired but not list donation from the prohibition of exchange of valuable consideration ( s. 2306 , 109 th ) , it does not specifically enable the secretary to determine that other similar practices are also exempt ( h.r .

710 eas , 110 th ) , and it does not exempt the broader categories of familial , emotional , psychological , or physical benefits ( s. 573 is , 108 th ) , or tax credits ( h.r .

218 ) .

acot proposed one possible alternative that would enable more flexibility for developing transplantation systems .

the committee recommended that the hhs secretary seek the authority from congress to promulgate regulations clarifying the scope of the term valuable consideration , thus allowing for the regulations' revision as transplantation technologies and methods evolve .

this would allow the secretary to make modifications as new systems are developed and to develop any definitions necessary to interpret the regulations .

in medical practice generally , three primary guiding principles are that a physician should , above all , do no harm to a patient , that a procedure's benefits to a patient should outweigh its risks , and that one must obtain informed consent prior to medical procedures .

the practice of obtaining organs from living donors challenges all three of these principles .

because p.l .

110 - 114 will presumably expand the practice of living organ donation , it raises issues with respect to these three principles , but not to a greater extent than such issues already raised by the current practice of living organ donation .

the traditional first rule of medicine — above all , do no harm — would seem on its face to proscribe the practice of removing a healthy organ from a healthy person , making one a patient solely to benefit another person who is already a patient .

indeed , one survey of 100 liver transplant surgeons found that 77% experienced a moral dilemma in placing a living donor at risk .

still , 72% also agreed that transplant centers had a duty to offer their patients the possibility of transplantation using living donors .

iom considered this point in its report , and suggested that the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) conduct a long and full review of living donation .

the iom also noted difficulties with living donation and the principle that a doctor should not perform a procedure unless the potential benefits outweigh the risks .

this calculation is generally made for each patient independently — it is not ethically acceptable for one patient to bear all of the risks and another to reap all of the benefits .

on this point , iom noted that a living donor may gain psychosocial benefits from donating an organ to one in need , which could arguably outweigh the risks to the donor's physical health .

however , in order to help ensure that the risk is not too great for a particular donor due to a preexisting medical condition or the like , iom recommended that an independent donor advocate be appointed to assess the risk - benefit ratio .

even with a donor advocate to make the risk - benefit assessments , one major factor complicates the assessment of the ratio: little is known about the long term health and quality - of - life effects of being a living organ donor .

this lack of information makes it difficult for professionals to ensure that they consider the full spectrum of risks to be outweighed by benefits .

therefore , iom recommended ( as acot had before ) that living donor registries be established to enable follow - up research on the long - term effects of living donation .

in addition , in june 2006 , hhs solicited public comments from the organ transplant community for living donation after "several widely publicized living donor deaths" and an increasing trend in the number of living donations .

ethically justifiable living organ donation presupposes the competent donor's voluntary informed consent .

acot specified that living donors' informed consent must be competent , free from coercion , and fully informed of the risks and benefits as a donor , among other things .

as iom noted , obtaining informed consent is confounded by the same lack of long - term health data that makes assessing the risk - benefit ratios difficult .

it is not possible to fully inform potential living donors ( a necessary component of informed consent ) without information about the likely impact of the procedure on long - term health .

iom suggested that creating a living donor registry would enhance informed consent as well as inform the risk - benefit analysis .

further problems in obtaining informed consent are related to the requirement that it be given voluntarily .

establishing a voluntary process may be complicated if donors are not legally competent to consent ( eg , children ) , or if situations are coercive ( eg , loved ones feel pressured to become living donors ) .

some potential donors have expressed relief at discovering that they were incompatible with their intended recipients .

expanded use of paired exchanges , and the prospect of list exchanges , may eliminate the incompatibility excuse for potential donors , and may thus create a coercive situation .

iom's recommendation that each living donor receive an advocate is aimed at protecting voluntary informed consent as well as evaluating the risk - benefit ratio .

in addition , iom recommends that the advocates address gender disparities in living donation .

women represent 56% to 59% of living kidney donors each year , and one study suggests that this is due primarily to the fact that women are asked to donate more often than men .

approximately 46% of the population has the blood type o , yet they represent 51.9% of people awaiting organ transplants , and 52.5% of people awaiting kidney transplants .

more than half have to wait more than five years for an organ ( 53.2% ) or kidney ( 54.8% ) .

no other blood type comes close to rivaling these waiting times .

the percentage of people who have to wait more than five years is as follows: for blood type a — 28.3% for organs , and 22.8% for kidneys , for blood type b — 16.1% for organs , and 20.2% for kidneys , and for blood type ab — no recipients have to wait more than five years .

as noted previously , several authors have expressed concern that individuals with the blood type o , an already disadvantaged population in the transplantation system , may be further disadvantaged by a list donation system .

implementing a system with a disparate impact , particularly one that falls on an already disadvantaged group , has caused some authors to recommend that list paired donation have a minimal role on a national level .

it has caused others to recommend that the system be modified to protect type o recipients .

a different set of authors has come out in favor of the list exchange program despite the impact on people with type o blood .

they claim that the impact on type o recipients would be transient .

though some people would be bumped to the top of the transplant list , their absence from that list when they would have come to its top ( four to five years later ) would eventually balance out the impact of the system .

current law avoids the type o issue by focusing only on paired , and not list , donation .

earlier proposals would have raised this issue by explicitly permitting list donation ( eg , s. 2306 , 109 th , and s. 573 is , 108 th ) , or potentially allowing the practice ( h.r .

710 eas , 110 th ) .

directed donation , which allows an organ donor to specify the recipient , creates issues related to the equitable allocation of organs .

paired and list donation ( both of which are types of directed donation ) create parity issues regarding what the intended recipient should be entitled to receive in lieu of the donation .

current law allows a form of directed donation ( paired donation ) , and thus raise the issues discussed below .

people on waiting lists for organs may wait years for a transplant , and may die before an organ becomes available .

the rules governing who gets an organ are , therefore , quite important .

in general , the ranking on the waiting list depends on biological matching , medical status , patient location , age of the patient , and length of time the patient has been on the waiting list for a transplant .

by contrast , directed donation allows the donor to choose who receives their organ ( or , in the case of list donation , who is to advance on the waiting list ) .

the pcbe noted that this raises the question of whether it is ethical for one person to receive an organ before another more needy person , simply because someone cares for them enough to make a donation .

pcbe also noted that prohibiting such acts of love as living donation in the name of justice would be perverse .

some have suggested that in paired and list donations , the donated and received organs must be of equal value to ensure an equitable exchange .

while this might be possible with a paired exchange , it is almost certainly not the case with a list donation , because the intended recipient will receive a kidney from a deceased donor instead of a living one .

 ( deceased donor organs do not typically last as long as living donor organs ) .

other issues related to parity have been raised , such as whether one donor in a paired exchange may change his or her mind if the other donor has already undergone surgery .

to prevent these scenarios , it has been suggested that both donors should undergo surgery at the same time .

other authors have suggested that outcome parity cannot be guaranteed in list and paired exchange programs .

if one organ fails , the recipient is not necessarily entitled to receive another .

the demand for transplantable organs has inspired a wide variety of proposals to increase the supply , including some that would allow or encourage forms of payment for organs .

congress has considered several proposals to give donors honorific or tax incentives for donating organs .

the use of financial incentives has been studied , proposed and debated in the general literature .

various organizations , including the american medical association and unos have supported the study of financial options to encourage organ donations .

arguments have been made that donors of organs should be treated no differently than donors of tissues ( such as human hair , blood plasma , sperm , and eggs ) .

it has also been argued that because the practice of transplanting organs is profitable for the professional parties involved , those from whose bodies the organs are harvested should be able to share in some of the profits .

there has been resistance to proposals that encourage commodification of human organs .

the iom conducted an extensive analysis of various types of financial incentives to encourage donation , such as payment through regulated futures markets , payment of funeral expenses , providing bereavement counseling , tax incentives , and providing health insurance .

iom concluded that none should be promoted at this time because of a lack of evidence that these incentives would improve donation rates , because once put in motion a system of financial incentives would be difficult to reverse , and because of fears that such systems might disproportionately affect the poor .

this recommendation came as a disappointment to some who seek to increase the supply of transplantable organs .

while current law clarifies that paired donation does not violate nota's prohibition on the exchange of human organs for valuable consideration , it does not permit the payment of money in exchange for organ donation .

to date , congress has not considered legislation that would do so .

