in the 1990s , wars and political instability provided an opportunity for al qaeda and other terrorist groups to infiltrate the balkans .

however , u.s. and european peacekeeping troops , aid , and the prospect of euro - atlantic integration have helped to bring more stability to the region in recent years .

moreover , the september 11 , 2001 attacks on the united states underscored for the countries of the region the dangers of global terrorism , and resulted in increased u.s. attention and aid to fight the terrorist threat .

in addition , some countries outside of the region , especially saudi arabia , which were formerly key sources of terrorists and terrorist financing , have cracked down on islamic militants , which has in turn had a positive impact on the balkans .

as a result of these factors , many experts currently do not view the balkans as a key region harboring or funding terrorists , at least when compared to the middle east , north africa , south asia , southeast asia , and western europe .

nevertheless , experts caution that the region may continue to play a role in terrorist plans , largely as a transit route for terrorists , as well as for bases for attacks in other regions , such as western europe .

there have also been efforts to recruit people from the region into terrorist groups .

moreover , observers agree that the region's continuing problems leave it vulnerable to terrorist groups in the future .

the july 2004 report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( known as the 9 / 11 commission ) referred to central and eastern europe as a region potentially vulnerable to terrorists , due to significant muslim populations and weak border controls and security services .

this problem may increase if terrorists currently concentrated in iraq disperse to the balkans and other regions .

some sources , especially serbian and russian experts and officials , have claimed that the balkans continue to form a more dangerous threat to the united states and neighboring western europe than is usually acknowledged .

although large numbers of indigenous muslims live in the balkans , due to its poverty and instability the region has not attracted large numbers of muslim immigrants , who have been an important source of recruits for islamic extremists in western europe .

moreover , opposition to terrorism has been strong among bosniaks ( bosnian muslims ) and albanians , the largest indigenous muslim groups in the balkans .

these groups are generally more secular in outlook than muslims elsewhere .

most view themselves as part of europe and are grateful for the perceived u.s. role in defending them against serbian aggression in the 1990s , and for the continuing u.s. contribution to the security of their countries .

charges of terrorism are often used as political weapons among countries or ethnic groups to try to attract international support for their cause .

for example , serbian and bosnian serb politicians often make charges of al qaeda training camps in bosnia and kosovo in an effort to discredit bosniaks and albanians .

for their part , bosniak and albanian leaders deny the charges and accuse the serbs of supporting "terrorism" by harboring indicted war criminals .

some observers say that the terrorist threat is in fact much less serious than the region's more pressing problems , such as corruption , poverty , and potential political instability .

they say that the international focus on the terrorist threat may divert attention from these more relevant issues .

on the other hand , this rivalry between groups and the international focus on terrorism may have some positive aspects .

it may push countries in the balkans to cooperate zealously with the united states on terrorism issues , in hopes of securing u.s. support for their regional goals and euro - atlantic integration .

in addition , there may be additional political support in the united states and other countries for dealing with the region's problems if they are viewed as a potential source of terrorism .

given these factors , perhaps of greater concern to most experts than the existence of a significant muslim population in the balkans is the weakness of government institutions , rampant corruption and poverty .

however , despite these difficulties , the countries in the region have provided very good cooperation with the united states in the global war on terrorism , according to u.s. officials .

consistent with u.n. security council resolutions adopted in the post - 9 / 11 fight against terrorism , these countries have worked with the united states and other countries to arrest or expel terrorist suspects , shut down non - governmental organizations linked with terrorism , and freeze or seize assets of persons and groups suspected of terrorist financing .

this report focuses on three countries: bosnia and herzegovina , albania , and serbia ( including serbia's kosovo province , which is currently under international supervision ) .

the report deals with the role of islamic terrorist groups such as al qaeda rather than indigenous nationalist groups pursuing local or regional objectives .

after the breakup of communist yugoslavia , bosnia and herzegovina was torn apart by a civil war between bosniaks ( bosnian muslims ) , serbs , and croats from 1992 to 1995 .

the war resulted in the deaths of many thousands of persons and the displacement and impoverishment of large parts of the population .

a desperate bosniak - dominated bosnian government , facing an international arms embargo and outgunned by breakaway bosnian serb forces , accepted the help of iran , as well as several thousand islamic radicals , mercenaries , and others .

the 1995 dayton peace accords , which ended the conflict , required all foreign forces to leave bosnia .

most did , but some islamic radicals remained behind .

it is estimated that about 700 to 1,000 former fighters stayed behind in bosnia after the war and became bosnian citizens by marrying bosnian women .

others received citizenship through bribing bosnian officials .

some al qaeda operatives in bosnia had connections to members of bosnia's intelligence service , another legacy of bosniak wartime cooperation with islamic militants .

the experience of the bosnia conflict has also had an impact on terrorist groups worldwide .

bin laden and other al qaeda figures mention the bosnian war as a place where al qaeda was active , and as an important militant islamic cause .

terrorist recruiting videos often include footage of combat in bosnia .

in addition to fighters , bosniaks also received assistance during and after the war from islamic charities and humanitarian organizations , many of them from saudi arabia .

some of these groups served as fronts for al qaeda , which used them for planning attacks in bosnia and elsewhere .

in the view of some observers , saudi arabian - built mosques at which some extremist foreign and bosnian clerics continue to preach hatred of the united states and western countries may enhance terrorist recruiting efforts .

according to u.s. officials , the u.s. embassy in sarajevo and u.s. military bases in bosnia were subject to several terrorist threats after september 11 , 2001 .

however , bosnian opposition to terrorism has been broad , despite the still - deep ethnic divide in the country .

the united states still enjoys a strong reservoir of support in bosnia , especially among bosniaks , for bringing peace to the country and providing post - war aid .

the largely secular and european outlook among bosniaks has caused friction with foreign islamic extremists .

efforts by the islamists to recruit bosniaks into their organizations have met with limited success .

some bosniaks fear that terrorists will give bosnia a bad name in europe , thereby hindering their ability to travel there and setting back bosnian efforts to join european institutions .

on the other hand , some experts are concerned that widespread unemployment among bosniak youth , coupled with dissatisfaction with u.s. foreign policy , could aid terrorist recruitment .

the 2005 state department terrorism report discusses an islamist extremist organization called active islamic youth , which is associated with former foreign islamic fighters in bosnia .

it says that the group engages in outreach activities aimed at bosnian youth and publishes materials promoting islamic fundamentalism , religious intolerance , and anti - western rhetoric .

in 2006 , a joint u.s. - croatian intelligence report reportedly said the terrorist groups were attempting to recruit so - called "white muslims," from bosnia and other balkan countries , whose physical appearance might arouse less suspicion in europe than a person of middle eastern appearance .

bosnian officials have offered mixed assessments of this threat: some say that it is a significant concern , while others admit it as a possibility but note that they have no concrete evidence so far for widespread recruiting efforts of this kind .

in addition to facing the same problems of poverty and corruption as other countries in the region , bosnia also suffers from institutional failings that are a result of bosnia's recent development .

the dayton peace accords divided bosnia and herzegovina into two semi - autonomous "entities" — the largely bosniak - croat federation and the mainly bosnian serb republika srpska — with a weak central government .

critics have charged that this structure has stymied bosnia's efforts to develop effective government institutions .

the 2006 state department country reports on terrorism notes that , while bosnia's counterterrorism cooperation with the united states was good , the weakness of the bosnian state "made it vulnerable to exploitation as a terrorist safe haven or as a potential staging ground for terrorist operations in europe. .

u.s. and international efforts to strengthen the central government have been resisted by the bosnian serbs , who frequently charge the bosniaks with terrorist ties .

in may 2005 , bosnian serb police chief dragomir andan claimed that the terrorists who carried out the march 2004 madrid bombings had been trained at alleged al qaeda camps in bosnia and herzegovina .

eu police and other officials in bosnia said that they had seen no evidence to support such charges .

such charges have coincided with an ongoing effort by international officials in bosnia to put the police , a key pillar of bosnian serb leaders' power , under central government control in order to more effectively combat organized crime and terrorism .

as in the case of bosnia , instability in albania gave a foothold to al qaeda in the 1990s .

poor internal security , lax border controls , and high rates of crime produced an environment conducive to terrorist activity .

some foreign islamic extremists used albania as a safe haven and gained albanian citizenship .

some former albanian officials were thought to maintain links with these foreign extremists .

islamic non - governmental organizations , some of them fronts for al qaeda , were established in albania after the collapse of the communist regime in 1991 .

the situation worsened during civil unrest in albania in 1997 , when central authority broke down and large military weapons stocks were looted .

wars in neighboring kosovo in 1999 and macedonia in 2001 also had a negative impact on albania's stability .

terrorist threats in the middle and late 1990s caused the temporary closure of the u.s. embassy in albania and the cancellation of planned visits to albania by senior u.s. officials .

in 1998 , albania and the united states foiled a planned attack on the u.s. embassy in tirana , raided an al qaeda forgery ring , and arrested several al qaeda figures .

since the september 11 , 2001 attacks , some media sources and political leaders from serbia have alleged that ethnic albanian "terrorists" continue to maintain links with islamic terrorist groups such as al - qaeda .

the albanian government denies that terrorist training camps are present on its territory .

u.s. and european government experts say that albania does not at the moment appear to harbor a serious terrorist threat .

in 2004 , albania announced the discovery of chemical weapons stocks acquired by the communist regime in albania during the 1970s .

albanian officials had not known of their existence until they were discovered by accident in a bunker .

although this cache is now guarded , it had been unguarded during the disorder of the 1990s .

moreover , due to a lack of documentation by the former regime , it is uncertain if there are other unreported stocks .

experts have expressed concern that some of these potentially could have fallen into the hands of terrorists .

in 2004 , the government arrested local arms traffickers for dealing in surface - to - air missiles , which the state department believes may have been intended for "regional extremists. .

albania continues to cooperate closely with the united states and other governments in sharing information and investigating terrorist - related groups and activities , according to u.s. officials .

albania adopted a national action plan against terrorism in 2002 .

albania has expelled suspected islamic extremists and terrorists .

albania has also cooperated extensively to block financial and other assets of persons and groups operating in albania with suspected links to terrorists .

in 2004 , the albanian parliament passed a strong money - laundering law that included antiterrorist financing provisions , bringing albania's legislation into compliance with international standards .

since december 2004 , the albanian government has frozen the assets of four organizations ( taibah , international revival of islamic heritage society , al haramein , and global relief foundation ) and four individuals ( nabil abdul saydi , patricia rosa vinck , yasin al - kadi , and abdul latif saleh ) , all identified by the united nations as suspected of supporting or funding extremist groups or organizations .

in january 2007 , albania strengthened its criminal code in order to bring it into line with counterterrorism legislation in eu countries .

among other provisions , the code provides for the prosecution of those recruiting or training persons for terrorist acts , or for providing training in the creation or use of weapons for criminal purposes .

albania has ratified all 12 un international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism .

however , the effectiveness of the government's counterterrorist efforts are hampered by inadequate financial resources , corruption , a lack of fully trained officers responsible for borders and ports , and poor communications and data processing infrastructure .

according to the 2002 serbian census , muslims make up only about 3% of serbia's population of 7.5 million ( excluding the province of kosovo , a serbian province that is currently under international supervision ) .

most are concentrated in the sandzak region of southwestern serbia .

they are muslims of slavic ethnicity , often referred to as bosniaks or simply as muslims .

in addition , ethnic albanian muslims are concentrated in the presevo valley region of southeastern serbia , bordering on kosovo .

islamic terrorism has not been seen as a major threat in serbia .

however , a recent incident has raised some concerns .

in march 2007 , serbian police raided a training camp for islamic extremists in a cave in sandzak and arrested four local muslim men .

they also found weapons , explosives , military uniforms and other supplies .

on april 20 , 2007 , serbian police raided the hideout of ismail prenetic , who serbian police said was the leader of a terrorist group .

prenetic was shot dead by police after he or an accomplice lobbed a grenade at them .

in january 2008 , 15 men associated with the terrorist camp went on trial in serbia .

the 2006 state department country reports on terrorism said that serbia has been "eager to cooperate with the united states on a wide range of issues including border security , information sharing , antiterrorism financing , and export control. .

in june 2005 , serbian police arrested abdelmajid bouchar in a train traveling from the hungarian border to belgrade .

a policeman became suspicious in part because he claimed to be an iraqi refugee on route to western europe , despite the fact that he was traveling in the opposite direction at the time .

bouchar , a moroccan , is a key suspect in the 2004 train bombings in madrid , spain .

serbian authorities extradited him to spain in august 2005 .

serbian police believe that he may have been only passing through serbia , noting that the country lies on key transportation routes between europe and asia , but that they could not be certain whether he had contacts with terrorist supporters in serbia or elsewhere in the region .

despite its effective action in the bouchar case , serbia , like other countries in the region , suffers from serious corruption and organized crime problems , and this situation could in principle make the country vulnerable to terrorism .

in 1998 and 1999 , ethnic albanian guerrillas in serbia's kosovo province , angry at serbian repression , fought an increasingly violent conflict with serbian troops in the province .

the united states and its nato allies , outraged by serb atrocities against ethnic albanian civilians and fearing that the conflict could drag in other countries and destabilize the region , engaged in a nato bombing campaign against serbia from march to june 1999 .

yugoslav leader slobodan milosevic agreed to withdraw his forces from the province in june 1999 , clearing the way for the deployment of u.s. and other nato peacekeepers .

since the departure of serbian troops from kosovo in 1999 , kosovo has been administered by the united nations mission in kosovo ( unmik ) , as called for by un security council resolution 1244 .

serbian and russian intelligence sources have repeatedly asserted the existence of a strong al qaeda presence in kosovo , allegedly including training camps .

however , observers have warned that caution is needed in assessing these claims , given that both countries have an interest in discrediting kosovar albanians , particularly their claims to independence from serbia .

there have been few reports from western sources of terrorists operating from kosovo .

radical islamic organizations , some with links to terrorism , have attempted to recruit followers among kosovo albanian muslims but these attempts have met with limited success .

ethnic albanian nationalists have committed terrorist attacks on serbian civilians in kosovo , but there is little evidence so far that they are working with al qaeda or other radical islamic groups .

some observers have expressed concern that powerful ethnic albanian organized criminal groups from kosovo , albania and macedonia ( which play key roles in organized crime in europe and the united states ) could form an alliance with terrorist groups , but so far no such links have been detected , according to u.s. officials .

unmik has devolved many powers to kosovo's provincial institutions of self - government ( pisg ) , but the main responsibility for security lies with unmik and the nato - led peacekeeping force kfor .

unmik's counterterrorism task force has the main responsibility for counterterrorism efforts .

in addition , the kosovo police service ( kps ) has established its own counterterrorism unit , with six officers .

according to u.s. officials , unmik has successfully prosecuted individuals for terrorism and developed new tools to combat terrorist financing .

in 2004 , unmik established a financial information center to monitor suspicious financial transactions and deter money laundering and identify sources of terrorist financing .

in 2005 , unmik police froze the assets of 34 individuals and groups on suspicion of links to terrorist activity .

unmik's central intelligence unit ( ciu ) continues to cooperate closely with the united states and other governments in sharing information and investigating terrorist - related groups and activities .

unmik and the kps monitored individuals entering kosovo at official points of entry .

since july 2005 , an unmik regulation has required persons who are not employed by an international organization to register with the kps' office of foreign registration upon entering kosovo .

pisg , in cooperation with unmik , increased monitoring of 11 foreign ngos suspected of extremism and issued regulations restricting their activities , including the appropriation of one mosque .

it also required each ngo to submit documentation that explains its projects and shows its bank accounts .

the kosovo islamic community ( kic ) evaluated foreign ngos and prohibited them from using public facilities for gatherings if their views were found to be extremist .

kosovo's counterterrorism efforts are hampered by porous boundary lines easily crossed by individuals trafficking in people or goods .

an insufficient number of kps border officials limited the ability to monitor wide expanses of mountainous terrain between crossing points .

corruption among border and customs officials is also a problem .

kfor patrols kosovo's border , but many smuggling routes exist that would allow potential terrorists to evade detection .

terrorism investigations are hindered by witness intimidation and weak witness protection laws .

in august 2007 , seven inmates broke out of a prison in western kosovo with the help of prison guards .

one of the men was ramadan shiti , a convicted terrorist from syria .

several of the men have been recaptured , but shiti remains at large .

in early 2008 , the united states and most eu countries may recognize kosovo' independence .

under a plan for supervised independence , unmik may be succeeded by the international civilian representative ( icr ) that will lack unmik's direct administrative control .

however , the icr would have the power to void any decisions or laws of the kosovo government that are inconsistent with the plan , as well as the power to remove kosovo government officials who act in a way that is inconsistent with the settlement .

the icr's mandate would last until an international steering group determines that kosovo has implemented the settlement .

the first review of settlement implementation would take place after two years .

under the plan , a mission under the eu's european security and defense policy ( esdp ) would monitor and advise the kosovo government on all issues related to the rule of law , specifically the police , courts , customs officials , and prisons .

it would also have the ability to assume "limited executive powers" to ensure that these institutions work properly .

kfor will likely retain control of overall security for kosovo for a considerable time after a status settlement , but could be eventually replaced by an eu force .

the united states and its allies may have to ensure that kosovo's counterterrorism efforts remain strong as the country acquires greater control over its security as an independent state .

u.s. officials have cited the threat of terrorism in the balkans as an important reason for the need for continued u.s. engagement in the region .

in addition to the need to combat terrorist infrastructure in the region , u.s. officials say that u.s. efforts to bring stability to the region also help to fight terrorism .

they note that political instability , weak political and law enforcement institutions and poverty provide a breeding ground for terrorist groups .

these objectives are also outlined in the president's national strategy for combating terrorism , which calls for the united states to work with other countries to deny terrorists sponsorship , support and sanctuary , as well as to work to diminish the underlying conditions that terrorists seek to exploit .

the united states has a variety of instruments to fight terrorism in the balkans .

one is the direct involvement of u.s. troops .

nato - led peacekeeping forces in bosnia and kosovo ( dubbed sfor and kfor respectively ) have provided important resources for anti - terrorist efforts in the region .

nato troops and intelligence services work with their local counterparts and independently to track down and arrest suspected terrorists .

the powerful influence exercised by international officials in bosnia and kosovo gives the united states more freedom to arrest and deport terrorists than in many european countries , which might object on civil liberties or other grounds .

sfor withdrew from bosnia in late 2004 , and was replaced by an eu - led force .

the changeover resulted in the departure almost all of the u.s. troops in bosnia .

the european union - led successor force to sfor has counterterrorism as part of its mandate .

in kosovo , kfor has 16,000 troops , including about 1,600 u.s. troops , which are expected to remain in kosovo after the province's status is resolved .

kfor may eventually be replaced by an eu - led force , although u.s. and european officials stress that kfor will remain in kosovo for some time after status is determined .

the reduction of direct international control over kosovo will require the united states and other countries to establish close links with kosovo government structures .

the united states and its allies have made the creation of effective mechanism for fighting organized crime and terrorism one of its objectives in kosovo .

the overall u.s. aid program to the region , aimed at bringing stability to the region through strengthening the rule of law and promoting economic reform , also serves to combat the sometimes lawless climate in the region in which terrorists can thrive .

for fy2008 , the president requested $32.95 million for bosnia , $20 million for albania , $53.25 million for serbia , and $151.65 million for kosovo .

the relatively large sum for kosovo for fy2008 , and an additional $279 million for kosovo in an fy2007 supplemental funding request , is owing to a u.s. desire to support kosovo quickly after its political status is determined .

in bosnia , part of the u.s. aid supports technical assistance , training and equipment to build the capacities of the police forces in both entities , the state border service , the state information and protection agency , the high judicial prosecutorial council and other organizations .

one project , co - funded with the eu , was the donation of an integrated data network for bosnia's police forces .

u.s. aid also helps to develop bosnia's export control regime , including over weapons of mass destruction and dual - use technology .

u.s. aid to albania also includes assistance to strengthen albania's border controls , port security , and law enforcement agencies , and cut off terrorist financing .

aid to kosovo includes funds to strengthen the kosovo police service ( kps ) and kosovo's judiciary .

the united states views the region , with its reputation as a crossroads for various forms of smuggling , as an important participant in the proliferation security initiative , which aims to work to interdict wmd - related items .

the united states has encouraged regional cooperation on terrorism and international crime through the southeast european cooperation initiative ( seci ) .

seci's regional center to combat transborder crime , based in romania , attempts to build cooperation to combat organized crime and various forms of trafficking , enhance border security , and improve training for border security personnel .

u.s. assistance also includes bilateral aid to the countries of the region to fight terrorism .

the antiterrorism assistance ( ata ) program provides equipment and training to fight terrorism , with an emphasis on training the trainers .

ata programs provide advice to countries on counterterrorism and police administration and management , how to teach counterterrorism in police academies , and modern interrogation and investigative techniques .

the administration requested $650,000 in ata assistance for bosnia for fy2008 .

in the longer term , efforts to stabilize the region and thereby perhaps reduce its attractiveness to terrorists , are also dependent upon integrating it into euro - atlantic institutions .

the prospect of euro - atlantic integration for the region is encouraging these countries to take steps that will enable them to more effectively fight terrorism .

the european union has stated its goal of incorporating all of the countries of the region into the eu , although this prospect seems a long way off , with the possible exception of croatia .

all of the countries of the region are seeking or may one day seek nato membership as well .

three nato candidate states — albania , croatia , and macedonia — are linked in the u.s. - brokered "adriatic charter," which is aimed at improving their qualifications for nato membership .

the adriatic charter countries have contributed troops to peacekeeping efforts in afghanistan .

in addition , albania and macedonia have contributed soldiers to u.s. - led operations in iraq .

one or all of the adriatic charter countries may be invited to join nato at the alliance's april 2008 summit .

most observers believe that croatia's qualifications for membership are stronger than those of the other two countries .

bosnia and herzegovina lacks the prospect of nato membership until it unifies its police forces , implements key political reforms , and cooperates with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia .

nevertheless , it has deployed a small military contingent to iraq and joined nato's partnership for peace program in december 2006 .

kosovo's undetermined status excludes it from even potential eu and nato membership , at least until its independence is recognized .

the united states and its allies have been able to reduce the terrorist threat from the balkans over the past decade for several reasons , some of which may be applicable to other regions and others not .

the u.s. insistence that all foreign forces leave bosnia in 1995 , backed up by congressional aid conditions , may have reduced the possible threat to u.s. forces in bosnia in the immediate post - war period as well as removed a serious threat to bosnian stabilization efforts .

u.s. military interventions in bosnia and kosovo were perceived by muslims in the region to be undertaken to benefit them , thereby bolstering pro - american sentiment .

most elites in the region , both muslim and otherwise , view the region's future as integration in euro - atlantic institutions , making them especially eager to help the united states fight terrorism in the region .

however , observers note that complacency would be unwise .

conditions could emerge that could increase the terrorist threat in the future .

the stability of the region is fragile and law enforcement and other public institutions are still weak .

some terrorists now fighting in iraq may decide to redeploy to other regions , including the balkans , in the future .

conversely , future recruits from the balkans could also go to iraq to join the insurgency .

terrorists could obtain weapons and explosives from the region's thriving black market in such items for use in attacks in western europe or other regions .

