the great lakes watershed is the largest system of fresh surface water in the world .

the watershed covers approximately 300,000 square miles and is shared by eight u.s. states ( illinois , indiana , michigan , minnesota , new york , ohio , pennsylvania , and wisconsin ) and one canadian province ( ontario ) .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the great lakes have national and international importance because of their abundant natural resources and relationship to the economies of both the united states and canada .

the great lakes contain nearly 90% of the surface freshwater of the united states and 20% of the surface freshwater of the world .

the great lakes basin also supports an expanding population and accompanying development .

an estimated 40 million people rely on the great lakes basin to provide jobs , drinking water , and recreation , among other things .

the great lakes are recognized by many as an international natural resource that has been significantly altered over the last two centuries .

in the last several decades , agricultural activity throughout the basin , and urban and industrial development concentrated along the shoreline , have degraded water quality in the great lakes , posing potential threats to wildlife populations , human health , and the great lakes ecosystem .

development has also led to changes in terrestrial and aquatic habitats , the introduction of non - native species , the contamination of sediments , and the listing of more than 50 threatened or endangered species in the basin .

in response , the federal governments of the united states and canada and the state and provincial governments in the great lakes basin are implementing several restoration activities .

the u.s. congress has recognized the importance of the great lakes ecosystem and has played a role in restoration efforts in the great lakes .

congress has enacted more than 30 federal laws specifically focused on restoring aspects of the great lakes basin .

these laws have authorized several activities ranging from grant programs that fund mitigation of toxic substances to restoration programs that improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat .

congress has not , however , enacted legislation to authorize an overall detailed plan for restoring the great lakes , such as the comprehensive everglades restoration plan for restoring the greater everglades ecosystem in florida .

in 2004 , the great lakes interagency task force was created by an executive order .

its purpose is to provide strategic direction on federal great lakes policy .

the task force is chaired by the administrator of the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and contains 10 agency and cabinet - level officers .

the task force , in collaboration with the council of great lakes governors , the great lakes cities initiative , great lakes tribes , and the great lakes congressional task force , convened a group known as the great lakes regional collaboration .

the collaboration includes representatives from great lakes states , local communities , tribes , nongovernmental organizations , and other interests in the great lakes region .

the structure and goals of the collaboration were established through the great lakes framework , which outlined three goals for the collaboration .

the first goal of the collaboration was to create a workable strategy to restore and protect the great lakes within one year of the creation of the task force .

this great lakes regional collaboration strategy was released in december 2005 .

the second goal of the collaboration is to serve as a forum for addressing regional issues related to the protection and restoration of the great lakes .

the third goal is to create an oversight forum to coordinate the implementation of the strategy .

the strategy is a series of recommendations for actions and activities aimed at restoring the great lakes ecosystem .

recommendations from the strategy are intended to be implemented over the next five years and represent the highest priorities for restoration , according to the strategy teams .

the strategy encompasses eight issue areas: aquatic invasive species , fish and wildlife habitat ( habitat / species ) , coastal health , contaminated sediments , nonpoint source pollution , toxic pollutants , indicators and information , and sustainable development .

under each issue area , a description of the issue and recommendations for addressing the issue are presented .

each recommendation contains several specific activities and is justified by the collaboration with its rationale .

the activities range from supporting existing programs to creating new ones , and in some cases , identifying projects to be implemented in specific geographical locations ( eg , the completion of a fish barrier in the chicago waterway system ) .

an estimated cost for implementing the recommendations over five years is provided after each set of recommendations .

the estimated costs represents the sum of federal and nonfederal contributions .

goals and interim milestones are also provided for each issue area .

the implementation of the strategy relies on existing authorities , programs , and funding at federal , state , and local levels of government , as well as the creation of some new actions ( eg , enacting new legislation ) .

further , the strategy aims to improve coordination among stakeholders and relies on the shared resources of all collaborators , especially noting the role of tribes .

according to the strategy , the coordinated use of existing resources should allow some of the recommendations to be implemented , but other recommendations will require "modest additional funding , and some [recommendations] will be impossible to implement absent substantial new expenditures. .

the collaboration emphasizes that the strategy is not meant to chart out the complete restoration of the great lakes ecosystem , and that decisions to implement activities affecting the great lakes should be guided by the strategy .

the following sections provide a summary of issue areas and recommendations made in the strategy .

the strategy envisions itself as the first step towards restoring the great lakes in the near term .

its goals and recommendations reflect a five - year span and , according to the strategy , "do not represent all that needs to be done to completely restore the great lakes. .

the short - term outlook of the strategy and its $20 billion price tag generate questions regarding the process to completely restore the great lakes ecosystem .

such questions include ( 1 ) what will it take to completely restore the ecosystem ? .

 ( 2 ) how much will it cost and how long it will take ? .

 ( 3 ) what are the federal and non - federal roles in the process ? .

 ( 4 ) how will the process be governed ? .

 ( 5 ) how will success be measures and when will we know it is done ? .

and , ( 6 ) how likely is it that substantial increases will be made to current funding levels for restoration , given the current budget environment ? .

the answers to these questions are not addressed in the strategy , but may come from the collaborative process that created the strategy .

the collaboration is expected to continue to serve as a broad forum to address issues related to restoration and protection of the great lakes ecosystem .

