one of the motivating factors for congress to create medicare part d in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) ( p.l .

108-173 ) was seniors' rising out - of - pocket drug costs .

prior to mma , 38% of medicare beneficiaries did not have drug insurance coverage .

people without sufficient drug insurance were paying drug prices that were 15% higher on average than the prices paid by insurance companies .

some medicare beneficiaries who did not have drug insurance coverage coped with these higher prices by filling fewer of their prescriptions and taking medications less frequently than their doctors recommended .

medicare part d provides voluntary insurance coverage of drugs for beneficiaries , albeit at a high price to the federal government .

the federal cost of part d benefits is estimated to be $44.7 billion in 2007 .

medicare part d was designed to take advantage of market competition .

in accordance with market competition principles , the drug plans that administer the drug benefit are corporations who may rely on rebate negotiation and price - volume discounts as a way to affect prices .

a provision in the mma , termed the "noninterference" provision , prevents the federal government from being a third party in drug price negotiations between the part d drug plans and pharmaceutical manufacturers .

both the new speaker of the house and new senate majority leader have expressed their support for repealing this "noninterference" provision , and regard it as a priority for consideration in the 110 th congress .

furthermore , one poll indicates that about 85% of americans also seem to support repealing the provision and allowing the government to negotiate prices .

should the "noninterference" provision be repealed , congress may wish to provide guidance on how they expect the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to negotiate prices .

a debate could occur about the options and mechanisms of a new drug pricing policy for the medicare drug plan .

in order to clarify and inform the debate , this report provides an overview of the pharmaceutical pricing policies used by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and medicaid — two of the largest federal purchasers of prescription drugs , other than medicare .

this report first provides a brief background of the current u.s. pharmaceutical pricing for medicare , and the implications of this policy .

the report then discusses the types of pricing policies used by the va and medicaid to stem the rise in drug expenditures .

the report concludes by discussing the implications of negotiating drug prices and options that may lower costs for the medicare part d program and its beneficiaries .

under current law , prescription drugs for medicare beneficiaries are provided through prescription drug plans ( pdps ) and medicare advantage prescription drug ( ma - pd ) plans .

unlike ma - pds , which cover the costs of the entire set of medicare benefits ( parts a , b , and d ) , the pdps only cover the costs of prescription drugs ( part d ) .

the plans have contracts with the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to provide prescription drug coverage to medicare beneficiaries .

individually and with a great deal of flexibility , the plans construct benefit packages ( including the formulary , deductible , co - payments , and utilization management tools ) , arrange a network of pharmacies to dispense the drugs , and negotiate prices and / or rebates with the pharmaceutical manufacturers .

enrollees are required to make copayments ( which is the entire price if the drug is not covered ) and pay premiums that may be affected by the negotiated prices ( i.e. , the lower the prices paid by the plan , the lower the amounts the plan must charge in premiums ) .

beneficiaries' satisfaction or dissatisfaction with their drug plan is likely to be related to the amount they pay for drugs , among other factors .

among those who have been arguing for the federal government to negotiate the prices of prescription drugs under the medicare part d program , considerable attention has been paid to the va pharmaceutical procurement model .

before discussing va's pharmacy procurement system , it is essential to understand that the veterans health care system is an integrated ( closed ) system , where physicians and other clinical staff are employees of the va .

unlike medicare , which administers medical care through the private sector , the va provides care directly to veterans .

the va purchases its pharmaceutical needs directly from manufacturers and provides prescription medications to veterans through its pharmacies and its own consolidated mail outpatient pharmacy ( cmop ) network .

this closed system contributes towards successfully implementing a national formulary , which does not exist in medicare or medicaid .

the section below discusses the va's contracting techniques used to purchase pharmaceuticals .

that is followed by an overview of va's formulary management process .

currently , the va utilizes four contracting mechanisms to acquire its pharmaceutical supplies: ( 1 ) the federal supply schedule ( fss ) ; ( 2 ) performance - based incentive agreements , or blanket purchase agreements ( bpas ) ; ( 3 ) pricing under the veterans health care act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-585 ) ; and ( 4 ) national standardization contracts .

on a drug - by - drug basis , the va selects the mechanism that offers the lowest price .

it is important to understand the va's formulary management process because it has a direct bearing on the purchasing mechanisms .

prior to 1995 , the va's 156 medical centers managed their pharmaceutical needs through individual formularies .

the department's drug product and management division based in hines , illinois , managed and monitored drug usage and purchasing for those facilities , but had no utilization oversight responsibilities .

in september 1995 , the va established a pharmacy benefit management ( pbm ) health care strategic group , tasked with establishing a national formulary , managing pharmaceutical costs , and overseeing pharmacologic guideline development for common diseases within the va health care system .

in november 1995 , as part of its reform efforts the va created a nationwide system of veterans integrated service networks ( visns ) , consisting of 22 geographically defined networks , and each entity was instructed to create a formulary .

to develop their formularies each visn generally combined their medical center formularies , and on april 30 , 1996 , visn formularies became effective .

to ensure that all veterans have access to pharmaceuticals — no matter where they live in the u.s — the va established a national formulary by combining the core of drugs common in the visn formularies .

the national formulary took effect on june 1 , 1997 .

the standardization helped the va lower its prescription drug costs through bulk purchases: "from a system standpoint , this standardization not only defined the core national pharmacy benefits package , but also provided leverage for bulk purchasing , and with that , contracting within drug classes when appropriate. .

according to the va , the overall strategy of creating a formulary process is to create a comprehensive pharmaceutical benefit offered to all va patients seeking care in the va. va's pbm continuously reviews formulary decisions to ensure that patients achieve the desired outcomes .

the va's formulary management process involves the va medical advisory panel ( map ) , the visn formulary leaders committee , va's clinical subject matter experts , and the va pbm staff .

the map consists of 12 field - based practicing physicians , one dod physician , and six clinical pharmacists .

the pbm staff's role is facilitative , except for clinical subject matter specialists who provide input when selecting drugs .

based on input from the above - mentioned stakeholders , va's pbm reviews pharmaceutical purchases and identifies high - usage pharmaceutical items .

the team reviews these products based on patient treatment , treatment protocol , and patient outcome .

currently , the va formulary consists of 1,294 chemical entities , many of which are available in more than one dosage form .

these chemical entities represent 4,778 specific drug products dispensed by the va. for instance , the va formulary has a single entry for the chemical entity felodipine , a drug used to treat high blood pressure .

however , va dispenses three dose - specific formulations of felodipine ; 2.5mg tablets , 5mg tablets and 10mg tablets .

of the total number of drugs on the formulary , 44% are brand - name medications and 56% are generic drugs .

based on the amount of drugs dispensed ( 30-day equivalent prescription volume ) , va dispenses about 68% generic drugs and 32% brand - name drugs .

medicaid is composed of 50 state ( and the district of columbia ) administered programs that provide coverage of health care services , including pharmaceuticals , to certain low - income individuals .

the state programs operate independently under broad federal guidelines .

the states and the federal government , however , share in the cost of each program based on a statutory formula .

the federal share of program expenditures , subject to both a federal floor and ceiling , ranged , in fy2006 , from a low of 50% to a high of 76% .

for each $1 of state spending on medicaid services , a state is able to claim a federal matching payment of $1 to $1.52 .

reimbursement levels for all medicaid covered items and services , including prescription drugs , are set by the states .

unlike many other medicaid items and services , however , prescription drug prices are subject to upper limits established in federal law that restrict the amount of federal matching payments available for those products .

in addition , federal law also requires manufacturers whose drugs are made available to medicaid beneficiaries , to pay rebates to states .

the medicaid rebates were established to achieve a "best price" policy — based on the philosophy that medicaid as a health coverage program of last resort should have access to the lowest prices offered to other drug purchasers in the market .

in addition , states can and do aggressively negotiate for lower medicaid drug prices .

many states administer their own upper limit payment formulas , generally intended to keep prices below the federal upper limits .

many states also have negotiated supplemental rebates , over and above those required under federal law .

these rebates are often related to the state formularies .

for example , under florida's medicaid supplemental rebate program , manufacturers that agree to pay the supplemental rebates will have their products included on the states' list of preferred drugs .

all others are subject to prior authorization .

depending on the policy outcome the congress wishes to achieve by establishing the authority for the secretary to negotiate drug prices , there are a number of alternative ways to go about doing so .

medicaid and the va provide models for a few of these alternatives .

if , for example , congress' primary objective is to lower the overall cost of the program , a set of ceiling prices may be sufficient to achieve such an objective .

if , on the other hand , the primary purpose of such actions would be to lower overall costs , while minimizing the number of parties who are negatively affected by policy , then mandated rebates could be appropriate .

however , none of those approaches directly impact the premiums drug plans might charge or co - payments that beneficiaries face at the pharmacy ; rather , indirect effects are possible .

if congress' primary objective is to impact those amounts , an explicit policy targeted at cost sharing or premiums could ensure those objectives are met .

the following section identifies a few alternative approaches that congress may consider .

one way in which lower drug prices might translate into lower overall costs is through a medicare ceiling price .

ceiling prices could be established to resemble medicaid's federal upper limits , or the federal supply schedule prices .

there are however , both administrative , and other complications to establishing such a system .

without combining such a policy with a national medicare formulary — and the threat of excluding high priced drugs from such a formulary — cms may not be able to negotiate adequately favorable ceiling prices .

also , a ceiling price policy does not necessarily translate into lower costs at the pharmacy counter for beneficiaries , nor does it translate into lower purchasing prices for pharmacies .

other policies could be combined with ceiling prices to ensure lower prices for beneficiaries or pharmacies .

finally , ceiling prices that reduce reimbursements significantly could have indirect effects on beneficiary access to future innovative drug products , and even economic impacts on other payers and providers .

for example , manufacturers may lose profits , which may adversely affect pharmaceutical research and development , as well as increase costs for non - medicare consumers .

pharmaceutical manufacturers have argued that lower profits impede their ability to research and develop new disease treatments .

this argument has been both supported and refuted by many academics .

the manufacturers may also choose to recoup the lost profits by increasing the drug prices for other consumers .

such a policy would need to be carefully crafted to minimize unintended consequences .

another way of lowering out - of - pocket payments for beneficiaries might be to mandate larger rebates from manufacturers to part d drug plans .

this system could resemble medicaid's rebate system .

larger rebates would lower part d drug plans' net costs of drugs for beneficiaries .

assuming market competition works in the part d program , lower net costs could be passed onto beneficiaries in the form of lower premiums , and perhaps also lower copayments .

alternatively , manufacturers could provide these rebates directly to the cms .

if market competition does not fully work , congress might need to require that part d plans pass lower costs onto beneficiaries through reduced premiums .

as previously discussed , lower medicare profits for manufacturers may adversely affect pharmaceutical research and development , and may also increase costs for non - medicare consumers .

however , larger rebates may not adversely affect wholesalers or pharmacists .

a new medicare pharmacy purchasing system would be another option that might help translate lower manufacturer drug prices for medicare part d into lower out - of - pocket and overall costs for beneficiaries .

one example of such a system could resemble the va's mail - order pharmacy system .

the new medicare pharmacy purchasing system could negotiate drug prices and purchase drugs from manufacturers or wholesalers , and then distribute the drugs and receive payment from beneficiaries .

this approach is potentially the most administratively burdensome of the options , since it would require developing a medicare pharmacy distribution system .

pharmacists may experience increased administrative costs if they were to be required to track and purchase drugs separately for their medicare customers , since pharmacists rarely track drugs by payer under the current system .

some of the burden could be alleviated through heavy use of a mail - order system .

if a mail - order system is established , pharmacists , and possibly wholesalers , could lose profits because they would lose medicare business .

the part d plans might have a considerably reduced role in the new system .

as with any price reduction , manufacturers' profits from medicare might be reduced and they may choose to recoup lost profits by increasing drug prices to other consumers .

finally , a complete mail - order system is not a realistic option because many beneficiaries may prefer to talk to their pharmacist directly , and may not wish to participate in a mail - order program .

