in the past year , policy consequences of u.s. aid restrictions on international criminal court ( icc ) member countries that have not signed agreements exempting u.s. citizens from icc prosecution have prompted policy - makers to alter the policy somewhat .

latin america has been at the forefront of that reassessment .

in particular , some negative consequences for u.s. relations with latin america have occurred as a result of icc - related sanctions .

restrictions on military training aid have resulted in a dramatic decline in the number of latin american military personnel receiving training in the united states .

similarly , restrictions on economic aid have hindered the ability of u.s. democracy and rule of law programs to work with governments in the region , especially in the andean countries .

although most members of congress still support efforts to shield u.s. citizens serving abroad from icc prosecution , many are beginning to oppose the use of sanctions to attempt to persuade countries to sign bilateral immunity ( so - called "article 98" agreements ) .

some members of congress advocate ending all icc - related aid restrictions , while others believe that at least some restrictions should remain in place in order to encourage other countries to sign article 98 agreements .

the issue of whether to continue these aid restrictions is likely to be considered by the 110 th congress .

this paper discusses the evolving policy debate in the u.s. government concerning the use of icc - related foreign aid restrictions .

it focuses on the case of latin america and the caribbean , a region in which twelve countries ( including brazil , bolivia , ecuador and mexico ) have faced aid cutbacks for failing to sign an article 98 agreement .

there has been strong bipartisan support in congress for legislation aimed at protecting u.s. soldiers and civilian officials from the jurisdiction of the icc .

until recently , there had also been strong support for sanctioning some foreign assistance to governments of countries that are parties to the icc and that do not have article 98 agreements with the united states .

the aspa and the nethercutt amendment have had an impact on u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean .

in the last year , policy consequences of the aspa - mandated aid restrictions have prompted debates within the administration and in congress .

in particular , consequences of aid cutbacks for u.s. security cooperation in latin america have begun to be examined and have led to some policy shifts .

this shift became evident in administration policy , congressional hearings , and in new legislation .

at the beginning of 2006 , the bush administration appeared to be divided over whether to continue linking u.s. assistance to article 98 agreements .

secretary of state condoleezza rice acknowledged that invoking aspa sanctions on key u.s. military allies may be "sort of the same as shooting ourselves in the foot" and that waivers of military aid restrictions are being considered on a case - by - case basis .

in addition , the defense department's quadrennial defense review called for a possible de - linking of military training programs from aspa .

although the defense department , and particularly the u.s. southern command , opposed aspa sanctions on military aid , the bureau of political - military affairs of the state department reportedly strongly supported keeping the sanctions in place .

on june 22 , 2006 , adolfo franco , assistant administrator for latin america and the caribbean at the u.s. agency for international development , suggested that the bush administration was considering lifting icc - related sanctions against latin american countries .

he stated that the administration had not yet decided whether to lift the sanctions on all countries affected in the region or only for a select few .

some analysts asserted that the administration might lift the sanctions in order to improve the united states' image in the region .

similar policy debates occurred during congressional hearings held early in 2006 that mentioned the effects of article 98 sanctions on u.s. relations with latin america .

on march 8 , 2006 , the subcommittee on western hemisphere affairs of the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on the "consequences for latin america of the american servicemembers' protection act. .

subcommittee chair , senator norm coleman , expressed concern that , as a result of the aspa sanctions , the united states is "missing key opportunities to engage officers ... from the sanctioned countries" and that this could lead to "a loss of u.s. diplomatic influence in the region. .

witnesses focused their testimonies on describing the political and military effects that aspa and nethercutt sanctions have had on countries in latin america and the caribbean .

one analyst asserted that the loss of imet is severing "an important linkage between future military leaders [from the region learning about]...the u.s. model of civilian control of the military. .

reduced opportunities in the united states , he added , may lead countries in the region to look elsewhere , including china , russia , or venezuela for training .

similarly , esf restrictions may hamstring both u.s. bilateral and regional efforts to push desperately needed structural reforms , especially in the andean countries .

another analyst asserted that the implementation of aspa has damaged u.s. standing in the region and that "the effort to punish countries that don't sign article 98 agreements has been perceived ... as bullying or arm - twisting. .

the witnesses suggested several ways to mitigate the possible negative consequences of aspa on latin america and the caribbean .

those suggestions included encouraging the bush administration to issue national interest waivers to key allies in latin america or declare more countries in the region to be major non - nato allies ( thereby exempting them from the aid restrictions ) .

another suggested option would be to repeal section 2007 of the aspa and omit the nethercutt provision from 2007 foreign operations appropriations legislation .

on march 14 , 2006 , general bantz craddock , then - commander of the u.s. southern command , while testifying before the senate armed services committee , stated that the aspa continues to have "unintended consequences" for latin america , and that without imet funding , countries have been unable to afford the unsubsidized cost of courses offered in the united states .

he stated that "this loss of engagement prevents the development of long - term relationships with future [latin american] military and civilian leaders. .

senator john mccain agreed with general craddock's concerns about aspa sanctions .

he asserted that the united states was paying "a very heavy price" in countries where military aid programs have been cut .

his concerns about military aid cuts were echoed by senators john warner , carl levin , hillary clinton , and james inhofe .

on june 21 , 2006 , representative dan burton , former chair of the house international relations committee's subcommittee on the western hemisphere , publicly asked the bush administration to changes its policy regarding aspa sanctions , citing congressional concerns about china's expanding influence in the region .

by the fall of 2006 , the bush administration was ready to use waivers to waive restrictions on fy2006 imet and esf funds .

on october 2 , 2006 , president bush directed the secretary of state to waive fy2006 imet restrictions for 21 countries .

barbados , bolivia , brazil , costa rica , ecuador , mexico , paraguay , peru , st. vincent and the grenadines , trinidad and tobago , and uruguay were among the countries that received presidential waivers .

on november 28 , 2006 , pursuant to section 574 of p.l .

109-102 , president bush also deemed that it was in the u.s. national interest to waive nethercutt restrictions on fy2006 esf assistance for bolivia , costa rica , cyprus , ecuador , kenya , mali , mexico , namibia , niger , paraguay , peru , samoa , south africa , and tanzania .

as previously mentioned , the 109 th congress took action to end the ban on imet restrictions but has left nethercutt aid restrictions in the foreign operations appropriations bills .

on september 30 , 2006 , the senate unanimously consented to a conference report on the fy2007 defense authorization , h.r .

5122 / s. 2766 , which was passed by the house on september 29 .

the conference agreement , following the senate version of the bill , modifies aspa to end the ban on international military education and training ( imet ) assistance to countries that are members of the icc and that do not have article 98 agreements in place .

the president signed the bill into law , p.l .

109-364 , on october 17 .

restrictions on foreign military financing ( fmf ) remain in place under aspa .

although some members of congress advocate ending all icc - related sanctions , others believe that some aid restrictions should remain in place in order to encourage other countries to sign article 98 agreements .

the issue of whether to continue these aid restrictions is likely to be considered during the 110 th congress .

