on june 28 , 2007 , the house approved $43.8 billion for agencies funded through the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill ( h.r .

2829 ) , a $3.1 billion increase over fy2007 enacted funding and $101 million above the president's fy2008 request .

discretionary spending in the bill totaled $21.4 billion , a decrease of $245 million from the president's request , but $1.9 billion more than was enacted in fy2007 .

the senate appropriations fsgg subcommittee marked up its version of the bill july 10 , and the full committee reported it july 12 .

the senate bill recommended $44.2 billion in appropriations , a $3.4 billion increase over fy2007 enacted funding and $414 million above the president's fy2008 request .

discretionary spending in the senate bill totaled $21.8 billion , approximately $20 million above the president's request and $2.3 billion more than was enacted in fy2007 .

the senate took no further action on h.r .

2829 , and the agencies included in the fsgg appropriations bill were funded until december 31 , 2007 , by a series of continuing resolutions .

under the continuing resolutions , fsgg agencies were generally funded at fy2007 rates .

fsgg appropriations were ultimately included in a consolidated appropriations bill , h.r .

2764 , which passed the senate , as amended , on december 18 , and passed the house on december 19 , 2007 .

president bush signed h.r .

2764 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , on december 26 , 2007 .

division d of the act provides a total of $43.3 billion for fsgg agencies , $2.6 billion more than enacted in fy2007 , but $421 million less than requested by the president .

compared with h.r .

2829 , the act provides $583 million less than approved by the house , and $829 million less than approved by the senate appropriations committee .

discretionary spending in the act totals $20.6 billion , which is $1.1 billion more than enacted in fy2007 , but $1.1 billion less than the amount requested by the president .

compared with h.r .

2829 , discretionary funding in the act is $1.1 billion below the amount recommended by the senate appropriations committee , and $883 million less than the amount approved by the house .

table 1 notes the status of h.r .

2829 and the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( h.r .

2764 ) .

in early 2007 , the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures .

each chamber created a new subcommittee on financial services and general government ( fsgg ) .

in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee was formed primarily of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee .

in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee .

additionally , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , the judiciary , housing and urban development , and related agencies were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions .

appropriations provisions relating to fsgg agencies are in division d of the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 .

division d provides funding through five titles , each of which is discussed in a separate section of this report .

in addition , division d includes three titles relating to general provisions .

the language for government - wide general provisions was proposed by the administration in the appendix to the fy2008 budget request , and was included in title vii of division d. the house appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government is the primary source of the house funding figures used throughout the report .

senate funding figures are taken from s.rept .

110-129 , which accompanied h.r .

2829 .

other sources include the president's fy2008 budget request , the house appropriations committee print of p.l .

110-161 and its accompanying explanatory statement , and agency budget materials .

on june 28 , 2007 , the house approved $43.8 billion for fy2008 appropriations for fsgg agencies .

compared to fy2007 enacted amounts , the house bill , h.r .

2829 , would have increased appropriations for each of five titles , with the largest gains proposed for the district of columbia ( +10.8% ) and the smallest for the executive office of the president ( +0.25% ) .

the house bill would have also increased funding for the department of the treasury ( +5.4% ) , the judiciary ( +4.7% ) , and independent agencies ( +9.7% ) .

compared to the president's fy2008 request , the house bill would have increased funding for the district of columbia ( +9.5% ) , the department of the treasury ( +1.0% ) , and independent agencies ( +1.0% ) .

funding under the house bill would have decreased relative to the president's request for the judiciary ( - 3.9% ) and the executive office of the president ( - 2.1% ) .

on july 12 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fsgg appropriations bill .

compared to fy2007 enacted amounts , the senate bill would have increased funding for each of the five titles , with the largest gains proposed for independent agencies ( +11.0% ) and the smallest for the executive office of the president ( +0.9% ) .

the senate bill would have also increased funding for the department of the treasury ( +5.4% ) , the judiciary ( +6.0% ) , and the district of columbia ( +3.8% ) .

compared to the president's fy2008 request , the senate bill would have increased funding for the department of the treasury ( +0.9% ) , the district of columbia ( +2.7% ) , and independent agencies ( +2.0% ) .

funding under the senate bill would have decreased relative to the president's request for the executive office of the president ( - 1.5% ) and the judiciary ( - 2.7% ) .

no further action on h.r .

2829 was taken by the senate .

the agencies included in the fsgg appropriations bill were funded from the start of fy2007 until december 31 , 2007 , by a series of continuing resolutions .

under the continuing resolutions , fsgg agencies were generally funded at fy2007 rates , although the district of columbia had special funding provisions .

the fsgg agencies were ultimately funded through h.r .

2764 , a consolidated appropriations bill which passed the senate on december 18 , and passed the house , as amended , on december 19 .

the bill was signed by president bush on december 26 , 2007 , becoming p.l .

110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 .

table 2 lists , by title , the enacted amounts for fy2007 , the president's request for fy2008 , funding levels approved by the house under h.r .

2829 , the amounts reported by the senate appropriations committee under h.r .

2829 , and the amounts enacted .

this section examines fy2008 appropriations for the treasury department and its operating bureaus , including the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

table 3 shows the fy2007 enacted amount , the president's fy2008 request , the fy2008 amount approved by the house , the fy2008 amount recommended by the senate appropriations committee , and the amount enacted for fy2008 .

all but three offices in the executive office of the president ( eop ) are funded in the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill .

table 4 shows enacted appropriations for fy2007 , and , for fy2008 , amounts requested by the administration , passed by the house , reported by the senate , and as enacted in p.l .

110-161 .

as a co - equal branch of government , the judiciary presents its budget to the president , who transmits it to congress unaltered .

table 5 shows appropriations for the judiciary as enacted for fy2007 , and , for fy2008 , amounts requested by the administration , passed by the house , reported by the senate , and enacted .

the authority for congressional review and approval of the district's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( home rule act ) .

the constitution gives congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 50 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor .

the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , modification , and approval .

both the president and congress may propose financial assistance to the district in the form of special federal payments in support of specific activities or priorities .

table 6 shows the fy2007 enacted amount , the president's fy2008 request , the amounts requested by the house of representatives and the senate , and the amounts enacted .

in addition to funding for the department of the treasury , the executive office of the president , the judiciary , and the district of columbia , a collection of 20 independent entities are slated to receive funding through this appropriations bill in fy2008 .

table 7 lists appropriations as enacted for fy2007 , and , for fy2008 , it lists the amounts requested by the president , approved by the house , reported by the senate appropriations committee , and enacted , for each of the agencies .

the financial services and general government appropriations language includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs .

there are also be general provisions at the end of an individual title within the appropriations act which relate only to agencies and accounts within that specific title .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions was included in the fy2008 budget , appendix .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years .

for various reasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language is preferable to making the provisions permanent .

presented below are some of the government - wide general provisions that were included in p.l .

109-115 , the transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill for fy2006 , but that are not included in the fy2008 budget proposal .

 ( the section numbers refer to the provisions as they appeared in p.l .

109-115 .

h.r .

5576 , the fy2007 transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill , as passed by the house and reported in the senate , was not enacted. ) .

inclusion of the provisions in h.r .

2829 , as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and in p.l .

110-161 is noted .

section 809 , which prohibits payment to political appointees who are filling positions for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed .

included as section 709 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 819 , which prohibits the obligation or expenditure of appropriated funds for employee training that ( 1 ) does not meet identified needs for knowledge , skills , and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties ; ( 2 ) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants ; ( 3 ) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation ; ( 4 ) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi - religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems ; or ( 5 ) is offensive to , or designed to change , participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace .

included as section 718 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 820 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce employee non - disclosure agreements if they do not contain whistleblower protection clauses .

included as section 719 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 823 , which requires that the committees on appropriations approve the release of any "non - public" information , such as mailing or telephone lists , to any person or any organization outside the federal government .

included as section 722 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 834 , which states that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states .

included as section 733 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 836 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowship program or to implement opm's proposed regulations limiting the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch .

included as section 735 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l .

110-161 .

section 837 , which would have required agencies to report to congress on the amount of the acquisitions made from entities that manufacture the articles , materials , or supplies outside the united states .

this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house or reported in the senate , or as enacted in p.l .

110-161 .

section 839 , which requires appropriate executive department and agency heads either to transfer funds to , or reimburse , the federal aviation administration to ensure the uninterrupted , continuous operation of the midway atoll airfield .

this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house , but is included as section 737 of the bill as reported in the senate , and is included as section 738 of p.l .

110-161 .

section 840 , which would have provided certain requirements for conducting a public - private competition for the performance of an activity that is not inherently governmental for executive agencies with less than 100 full - time employees .

this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house or reported in the senate , or as enacted in p.l .

110-161 .

section 842 , which prohibits the use of funds to convert an activity or function of an executive agency to contractor performance if more than 10 federal employees perform the activity , unless the analysis reveals that savings would exceed 10 percent of the most efficient organization's personnel - related costs for performance of the activity or function by federal employees , or $10 million , whichever is lesser .

included as section 738 of the bill as passed by the house and section 739 of the bill as reported in the senate , and as enacted in p.l .

110-161 .

section 845 , which precludes contravention of the privacy act .

included as section 741 of the bill as passed by the house and section 742 of the bill as reported in the senate , and as enacted in p.l .

110-161 .

the law also includes a provision on reviews by agency inspectors general of privacy and data protection policies and procedures .

the fy2008 budget proposed a new section 834 to provide a 3.0% pay ( annual and locality pay combined ) adjustment for federal civilian employees .

section 739 of h.r .

2829 as passed by the house , and section 740 of the bill as reported in the senate , and as enacted in p.l .

110-161 , provides a 3.5% pay adjustment for federal civilian employees , including employees in the department of homeland security and employees in the department of defense ( dod ) who are represented by a labor organization .

dod employees who are eligible to be represented by a labor organization , but are not so represented , will receive the pay adjustment unless pay for their positions is adjusted under 5 u.s.c .

§9902 .

since the inception of locality pay in 1994 , pay areas with the largest pay gaps receive the largest locality pay increases .

applying that principle , and under executive order 13454 issued by president bush on january 4 , 2008 , federal white - collar employees received net ( annual and locality ) pay adjustments of 4.49% in the washington , dc pay area and 2.99% in the "rest of the united states" pay area in january 2008 .

a new provision , included as section 743 of the bill as passed by the house , and as section 744 of p.l .

110-161 ( but not included in the bill as reported in the senate ) , requires the office of management and budget to submit a report on budget information relating to activities to restore the health of the great lakes ecosystem .

another new provision , included as section 746 of the bill as reported in the senate , and as enacted in p.l .

110-161 ( but not included in the bill as passed by the house ) , requires the home pages of departments and agencies to provide a direct link to their respective inspectors general ( ig ) , and requires the ig websites to post any public report or audit and to include a direct link through which employees can anonymously report waste , fraud , and abuse .

p.l .

110-161 also includes a new provision at section 747 that provides that none of the funds available under the act or any other act can be used to conduct a public - private competition or a direct conversion under omb circular a - 76 , or any successor directive , related to the human resources lines of business ( lob ) initiative until a reporting requirement is met .

funds cannot be used until 60 days after the director of omb submits a report to the senate and house committees on appropriations on the use of public - private competitions and direct conversions as part of the human resources lob .

the law describes the information to be included in the report and requires that a copy of the report be submitted to gao .

section 901 of the house - passed bill also would have prohibited the use of funds to implement executive order 13422 related to the authority of the president over executive agency rulemaking .

during markup of the bill by the senate appropriations committee , an amendment , offered by senator richard durbin and agreed to by voice vote , struck this provision from the senate version of the bill .

the provisions is not included in p.l .

110-161 .

although the bush administration coined the term "competitive sourcing" in 2001 , public - private competition began in 1966 , with the publication of office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 .

circular a - 76 provides policy and guidance for conducting competitions involving government employees and contractors .

for many years , omb continued to be the exclusive source of guidance on public - private competitions .

the late 1990s witnessed a notable change , with the advent of competitive sourcing legislation , and , in particular , the passage of bills containing competitive sourcing provisions .

section 739 ( a ) of the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 , ( p.l .

110-161 ) prohibits the use of funds for converting an agency activity involving 11 or more federal employees to contractor performance unless certain conditions are met .

public - private competitions that meet this size criterion will have to include a staffing plan known as a most efficient organization ( meo ) ; show that the cost of contractor performance would result in a savings of at least $10 million or 10% of the meo's personnel costs , whichever amount is lesser ; and not provide a contractor with an advantage by permitting the company to provide health and retirement benefits to the employees performing the government activity that are less than what federal employees receive .

the first two conditions appear designed to address two distinctions between standard competitions and streamlined competitions .

under circular a - 76 , agencies are required to develop an meo and apply the conversion differential ( that is , $10 million or 10% of the meo's personnel costs ) for standard competitions .

 ( an agency is required to use a standard competition when a public - private competition involves more than 65 full - time equivalents ( ftes ) . ) .

in streamlined competitions , an agency may develop an meo but is not required to do so , and the conversion differential is not calculated .

 ( an agency may use a streamlined or a standard competition when a public - private competition involves 65 or fewer ftes. ) .

the third condition may be seen as an effort to ensure that a contractor does not gain a cost advantage in competitions by paying less for benefits than the government does , thus lowering the cost of his or her proposal .

alternatively , others may see this condition as a restriction on the ability of a contractor to prepare a competitive proposal .

certain organizations and procurement activities , such as the department of defense and depot maintenance contracts , are exempt from section 739 ( a ) .

although circular a - 76 does not appear to prohibit conducting a public - private competition for work that is being performed by a contractor , some of the language in the circular seems to emphasize holding competitions for work being performed by federal employees .

for example , the circular's policy statement says , in part: "the longstanding policy of the federal government has been to rely on the private sector for needed commercial services.... identify all activities performed by government personnel as either commercial or inherently governmental... .

perform inherently governmental activities with government personnel.... use a streamlined or standard competition to determine if government personnel should perform a commercial activity. .

section 739 ( b ) notes that the circular does not prevent holding competitions for working being performed by contractors , and it also requires that circular a - 76 include procedures and policies for these types of competitions .

section 739 ( c ) allows a protest to be filed for any competition ( that is , streamlined as well as standard ) conducted under circular a - 76 , and for any decision made without benefit of an a - 76 competition to convert an agency function from employee performance to contractor performance .

this section also permits an individual selected by a majority of the affected employees to represent the employees in a protest involving an a - 76 competition or a decision to outsource work without a competition .

the ato retains the authority to file a protest on behalf of the employees .

section 739 ( c ) permits the ato or the individual selected by the employees to represent them to intervene in a civil action brought before the u.s. court of federal claims or a u.s. district court by an interested party from the private sector .

additionally , this section permits protests and civil actions that challenge the selection of a provider ( that is , government employees or a contractor ) at the conclusion of a competition .

currently , an ato is not required to file a protest: he or she "shall file a protest in connection with ... [a] public - private competition unless the [agency tender] official determines that there is no reasonable basis for the protest. .

some have been concerned that agency employees' interests may not be adequately represented since an ato determines unilaterally whether there is a basis for a protest .

hence , supporters of this view might argue that another individual , such as a union representative , would be a better choice for representing the affected employees .

in response , the private sector might argue that allowing the ato to file a protest is sufficient protection for agency employees .

additionally , contractors might note that their employees cannot band together and select someone to represent them in a protest .

the final substantive provision in this section prohibits the use of funds made available by this act for certain purposes .

that is , none of the funds appropriated by this act can be used by omb for directing or requiring an agency to take any action related to a public - private competition , or a direct conversion of a government activity from one sector to another .

similarly , none of the funds can be used by another agency to take an action that was directed or required by omb .

this section applies to fy2008 and succeeding fiscal years .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward communist cuba has consisted largely of efforts to isolate the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including prohibitions on u.s. financial transactions — the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) — that are administered by the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

restrictions on travel have been a key and often contentious component of u.s. efforts to isolate the cuban government .

the regulations do not ban travel itself , but place restrictions on any financial transactions related to travel to cuba .

pursuant to the cacr , certain categories of travelers may travel to cuba under a general license , which means that there is no need to obtain special permission from ofac .

in addition , a variety of travelers may be eligible to apply for specific licenses , which are reviewed and granted by ofac on a case by case basis .

this includes travelers engaging in family visits ; educational , religious or humanitarian activities ; or activities related to the marketing , sale , delivery or servicing of authorized exports to cuba .

some u.s. commercial agricultural exports to cuba have been allowed since 2001 under the terms of the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 or tsra , but with numerous restrictions and licensing requirements .

exporters are denied access to u.s. private commercial financing or credit , and all transactions must be conducted in cash in advance or with financing from third countries .

u.s. exports to cuba since 2001 have been valued at over $1.9 billion , the overwhelming majority in agricultural products .

u.s. exports to cuba rose from $146 million in 2002 to a high of $404 million in 2004 , and then declined to $369 million in 2005 and $340 million in 2006 .

in the first 11 months of 2007 , u.s. exports amounted to $377 million , the majority in agricultural products .

in february 2005 , the administration tightened sanctions against cuba by further restricting how u.s. agricultural exporters may be paid for their sales .

ofac amended the cacr to clarify that the term "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural sales to cuba means that the payment is to be received prior to the shipment of the goods .

this differs from the practice of being paid before the actual delivery of the goods , a practice that had been utilized by most u.s. agricultural exporters to cuba since such sales were legalized in late 2001 .

u.s. agricultural exporters and some members of congress strongly objected on the grounds that the action constituted a new sanction that violated the intent of tsra , and could jeopardize millions of dollars in u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

ofac director robert werner maintained that the clarification "conforms to the common understanding of the term in international trade. .

since 2000 , either one or both houses have approved provisions in the annual treasury department appropriations bill that would ease u.s. economic sanctions on cuba ( especially on travel and on u.s. agricultural exports ) but none of these provisions have ever been enacted .

the administration regularly threatened to veto legislation if it included provision weakening sanctions on cuba .

in 2007 , both the house - passed and senate appropriations committee - reported versions of the fy2008 financial services and general government appropriations bill , h.r .

2829 , contained a provision that would have prevented treasury department funds from being used to implement the february 2005 regulation that requires the payment of cash in advance prior to the shipment of u.s. agricultural goods to cuba .

the house adopted the provision , contained in section 903 of the bill , during june 28 , 2007 floor consideration when it approved h.amdt .

467 ( moran , kansas ) by voice vote .

in the senate version , the provision was included in section 619 of the bill .

the senate version also contained a provision , in section 620 , that would have authorized travel to cuba under a general license for the marketing and sale of agricultural and medical goods .

the administration's statement of policy on the bill maintained that the president would veto the measure if it contained a provision weakening current restrictions against cuba .

ultimately , congress dropped these provisions easing cuba sanctions in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

