the u.s. commission on ocean policy and the pew oceans commission have made numerous recommendations for changing u.s. ocean policy and management .

to address the findings and recommendations of the ocean commissions and the president's response , congress may consider comprehensive bills encompassing a broad array of cross - cutting concerns , including federal organization and administrative structure , regional approaches to ecosystem management , and funding strategies .

on the other hand , congress may continue to act on specific issues , as it has for fisheries , ocean exploration , ocean mapping , marine debris , ocean acidification , and others .

congress has shown interest in ocean affairs in recent decades , examining components of the federal ocean programs , enacting legislation creating new ocean programs , and taking steps to define a national ocean policy .

the marine resources and engineering development act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-454 ) established a national council on marine resources and engineering development in the white house and initiated work by a presidential bipartisan commission on marine science , engineering , and resources .

dr. julius stratton , then recently retired president of the massachusetts institute of technology and , at the time , chairman of the board of the ford foundation , was appointed commission chairman by president lyndon johnson .

the commission , composed of 15 members , was often referred to as the stratton commission .

in 1969 , the commission completed its final report , our nation and the sea: a plan for national action , and its more than 120 formal recommendations provided what many considered to be the most comprehensive statement of federal policy for exploration and development of ocean resources .

the study was instrumental in defining the structure , if not all the substance , of what a national ocean policy could or should look like .

furthermore , new ocean - oriented programs were initiated and existing ones were strengthened in the years following the commission's report , through a number of laws enacted by congress .

recommendations of the stratton commission led directly , within the following decade , to forming the national sea grant college program , to creating the national advisory committee on oceans and atmosphere ( nacoa ) , and to reorganizing federal ocean programs under the newly established national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

subsequent legislation on estuarine reserves , national marine sanctuaries , marine mammal protection , coastal zone management , fishery conservation and management , ocean pollution , and seabed mining also reflected commission recommendations .

efforts sprang up within the federal government and among various interagency and federal advisory committees to flesh out how best to implement a truly comprehensive and forward - looking national ocean policy , most notably articulated in the 1978 department of commerce report u.s .

ocean policy in the 1970s: status and issues .

since 1980 , with concerns about limiting federal expenditures and streamlining government , there have been fewer ocean initiatives , and a number of ocean programs , particularly those of noaa , have been consolidated and reduced .

however , the programs begun in the 1970s generally have been reauthorized and have matured .

by the late 1980s , there appeared to be a broad consensus among those conversant in ocean affairs that a need existed to redefine or , at the very least , better define national ocean policy .

two stimuli for this renewed interest were the 1983 proclamation by president reagan establishing a 200-nautical - mile u.s .

exclusive economic zone ( eez ) and the 1988 extension of the u.s. territorial sea from 3 to 12 nautical miles , both of which came in the aftermath of the president's decision that the united states would not sign the u.n. convention on the law of the sea .

legislation creating an oceans commission and / or a national ocean council to review u.s. ocean policy was introduced and hearings were held in the 98 th , 99 th , 100 th , and 105 th congresses .

legislation did pass the house in october 1983 , september 1987 , and again in october 1988 , but was not acted on by the senate in any of those instances .

in the 105 th congress , legislation creating both a national ocean council and a commission on ocean policy passed the senate in november 1997 , and in 1998 the house passed a bill creating a commission on ocean policy .

however , congress adjourned in 1998 before differences between these two measures could be reconciled .

it was not until the 106 th congress in 2000 that legislation was enacted to establish a 16-member u.s. commission on ocean policy ( p.l .

106-256 ) .

the commission's charge was to make recommendations for a coordinated and comprehensive national ocean policy for a broad range of ocean issues .

the enactment rode a crest of interest generated largely by a national ocean conference convened by the white house in june 1998 , in monterey , ca , and attended by president clinton and vice president gore , against a background of media and public attention surrounding the declaration by the united nations of 1998 as the international year of the ocean .

momentum was added by the september 1999 release of a post - monterey conference report , ordered by the president and prepared by members of his cabinet , entitled turning to the sea: america ' s ocean future , in which recommendations were offered for a coordinated , disciplined , long - term federal ocean policy .

also in 2000 , partially in response to that rekindled interest and partially in response to congressional legislation having failed final passage in 1998 , the pew charitable trusts established the pew oceans commission , an independent group of 18 american experts in their respective fields .

the pew commission's charge was to conduct a national dialogue on the policies needed to restore and protect living marine resources in u.s. waters .

pew proceeded with their effort after failing to persuade key members of congress to introduce legislation to establish a public / private , nongovernmental oceans commission .

the 111 th congress will continue to consider whether and how to respond to the findings and recommendations of the pew oceans commission report , america ' s living oceans: charting a course for sea change , and the report of the u.s. commission on ocean policy , an ocean blueprint for the 21 st century .

over five years after the release of the u.s. commission on ocean policy's report and more than six years after the release of the pew oceans commission report , some progress on ocean policy reform has been made .

however , hundreds of recommendations suggested by the two commissions have not been addressed .

the 109 th congress reauthorized the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma ) ( p.l .

109-479 ) , incorporating provisions reflecting many recommendations made by both commissions .

these provisions address a broad array of topics , including dedicated access privileges , overfishing , and fish stock rebuilding as well as issues of concern to specific fisheries and regions .

after its passage , the joint ocean commission initiative highlighted provisions related to enhancing the role of science , establishing sustainable harvest levels , authorizing the use of market - based approaches , and setting a clear deadline for ending overfishing .

the administration also emphasized provisions authorizing market - based limited access privilege programs , as well as language strengthening fisheries enforcement , developing ecosystem pilot programs , establishing community - based restoration programs , and creating a regionally - based registry for recreational fishermen .

the 109 th congress also considered bills on specific ocean topics , including ocean exploration ; ocean and coastal observing systems ; marine debris research , prevention , and reduction ; and ocean and coastal mapping integration .

related issues considered whether to ( 1 ) provide additional funds for ocean - related research ; ( 2 ) replace a fragmented administrative structure with a more coherent federal organization ; or ( 3 ) adopt new approaches for managing marine resources , such as setting aside large reserves from some or all uses .

only one bill was enacted , the marine debris research , prevention , and reduction act ( p.l .

109-449 ) .

this legislation established a program within noaa and the u.s. coast guard to help identify , determine sources of , assess , reduce , and prevent marine debris and its damage to the marine environment and navigation safety , in coordination with non - federal entities .

a variety of legislation has been introduced during the 111 th congress and bills related to specific topics have been enacted .

the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 ) included several ocean - related bills that were considered during previous congresses .

title xii includes sections that address ocean exploration , ocean and coastal mapping , ocean and coastal integrated observation , ocean acidification research and monitoring , and coastal and estuarine land conservation .

early in the 111 th congress , h.r .

21 , the oceans , conservation , education , and national strategy for the 21 st century act , and a similar bill , s. 858 , the national oceans protection act of 2009 , were introduced .

h.r .

21 , first introduced in the 108 th congress , would implement many recommendations of the pew and u.s. commission reports , by establishing a comprehensive national ocean policy for the management of u.s. coasts , oceans , and great lakes .

the legislation would: establish a national ocean policy with emphasis on conservation of marine ecosystems ; authorize noaa ; strengthen and formalize regional coordination by promoting a regional governance structure ; and create an ocean and great lakes trust fund .

on june 18 , 2009 , the house natural resources subcommittee in insular affairs , oceans , and wildlife held a hearing on h.r .

21 .

supporters of these bills have pointed to the need to improve ocean conservation because of damage to marine ecosystems caused by pollution , habitat destruction , invasive species , and overfishing .

they believe that a defined ocean policy , better coordination among agencies , and more investment are needed to reflect the importance of oceans to our economy and well - being .

however , others are concerned that h.r .

21 would increase the ocean - related bureaucracy by establishing numerous layers of additional laws , regulations , advisors , committees , and partnerships .

at a hearing during the 110 th congress , a coalition of alaska fishing industry groups expressed concerns that h.r .

21 would duplicate efforts , lead to more bureaucracy , conflict with other legal mandates , and result in confusion and litigation .

they would rather see greater focus on funding and implementation of current laws , such as the msfcma .

it remains an open question whether the 111 th congress will act on this comprehensive approach to ocean policy or concentrate on specific subjects or issues .

on november 4 , 2009 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee's subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing concerning the future of ocean governance that focused on ioptf activities .

in addition to comprehensive ocean approaches , over 70 bills related to ocean and great lakes management , climate change , fisheries , coastal conservation , marine animals , marine sanctuaries , research , education , and transportation have been introduced .

for example , on september 24 , 2009 , the ocean , coastal , and watershed education act ( h.r .

3644 ) was introduced , and on january 19 , 2010 , it was passed by the house .

this bill would direct noaa to further develop regional education and watershed programs and to establish a competitive national grant program to advance environmental literacy .

administration action , or inaction , is likely to continue to receive congressional oversight during the 111 th congress .

