the united states is the top oil consumer in the world , consuming some 20.7 million barrels of oil per day ( mbd ) in 2006 , according to department of energy statistics , with net oil imports accounting for 12.3 mbd or almost 60% of the total .

western hemisphere countries supplied the united states with about 46% of total crude oil and petroleum product imports and almost 50% of u.s. crude oil imports in 2007 .

three countries in the hemisphere — canada , mexico , and venezuela — account for the lion's share of u.s. crude oil imports from the region while other latin american and caribbean countries account for the balance .

other significant oil producers in the region include ecuador , brazil , colombia , trinidad and tobago , and argentina .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

in terms of proven oil reserves , the western hemisphere has some 321 billion barrels , about 24% of reserves worldwide .

canada leads the pack with almost 179 billion barrels , with over 95% of its oil extracted from alberta's tar sands , which is replacing output from aging conventional fields .

venezuela is second in the hemisphere with 87 billion barrels of proven oil reserves .

this figure does not , however , include as much as 270 billion barrels of extra - heavy and bitumen deposits from the orinoco belt in central venezuela , though proven oil reserves will likely amount to no more than 20% of this amount once the deposits are certified as recoverable .

other countries with significant oil reserves include the united states , with about 21 billion barrels , brazil and mexico , with about 12 billion barrels each , and ecuador , with almost 5 billion barrels of reserves .

cuba also potentially has almost 5 billion barrels of reserves in the deep waters of the gulf of mexico , but these are still not proven .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

western hemisphere nations , including the united states , produced about 17.2 million barrels of oil per day ( mpd ) in 2007 , amounting to almost 24% of worldwide production .

the top producers were the united states ( 5.1 mpd ) , mexico ( 3.1 mpd ) , venezuela ( almost 2.4 mpd ) , and canada ( 2.6 mpd ) .

oil production in a number of countries declined in 2007 , including in venezuela , where the government has asserted majority control over projects with foreign oil company participation , and in mexico , where production and reserves have been falling for the last several years , largely because of depletion of the cantarell oil field in the shallow waters of the gulf of mexico .

in several other countries , however , such as canada and brazil , oil production has been increasing .

the outlook appears good for brazil to increase its oil reserves and production substantially .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

the united states is the top consumer of natural gas in the world , with about 23.1 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) consumed in 2007 , and net gas imports of about 3.8 tcf or almost 16% of total u.s. natural gas consumption .

canada accounted for the almost all of the 3.8 tcf in natural gas imported by pipeline in 2007 , while a small amount was imported from mexico .

trinidad & tobago accounted for 0.5 tcf in u.s. liquified natural gas ( lng ) imports in 2007 , about 58% of total u.s. lng imports , while other lng suppliers included egypt , nigeria , and algeria .

in terms of proven natural gas reserves , the western hemisphere has 545 tcf , or almost 9% of total world reserves .

the united states has the largest share of proven natural gas reserves in the hemisphere , with 211 tcf or 39% of the hemisphere's total , followed by venezuela , with reserves of 166 tcf , canada with 58 tcf , bolivia with almost 27 tcf , and trinidad and tobago with almost 19 tcf .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the western hemisphere produces more than 80% of the world's biofuels , led by brazil producing ethanol from sugar and the united states producing ethanol from corn .

in 2006 , the united states was the largest producer of ethanol , with almost 4.9 billion gallons , followed closely by brazil with 4.5 billion gallons ; together , the two countries produced 69% of ethanol in the world .

brazil became the largest source for u.s. ethanol imports in 2006 , supplying 434 million gallons .

several caribbean and central american countries — costa rica , el salvador , jamaica , and trinidad and tobago — exported smaller amounts of ethanol to the united states that together totaled about 220 million gallons in 2006 .

several other countries in the region produce ethanol , but largely for their domestic markets , while several countries have expanded investment in biodiesel production , including colombia , which has focused on palm oil , and brazil .

high oil prices have spurred the rise of resource nationalism in several latin american countries , which has raised concerns about access to energy resources and political interference with the level of energy production and investment in the region .

such nationalism often develops as a response to conditions of poverty , and appears to be strongest in countries where people believe that they are not benefitting from the exploitation of their countries' natural resources .

yet many analysts assert that such nationalism is a logical outcome of higher energy prices and closely follows the actions taken by energy - producing countries around the world that want to capture more of the profit from their natural resources .

the populist government of hugo chávez in oil - rich venezuela has asserted firmer state control over the state - run oil company , petróleos de venezuela ( pdvsa ) , steering more of its proceeds to fund the government's infrastructure projects and social programs and asserting government control over foreign investment in the petroleum sector in venezuela .

the government of evo morales in bolivia has fulfilled his campaign pledge of nationalizing the significant natural gas sector , calling for foreign companies to be "partners , not owners" of the country's gas resources .

ecuador has moved to capture more of the windfall profits from foreign oil companies operating in the country , and in may 2006 terminated the contract of occidental petroleum after a long dispute over whether the company had broken laws in selling some of its oil - drilling rights in ecuador to a canadian firm .

in peru , which is poised to become a significant exporter of natural gas , the 2006 electoral victory of former president alan garcía over ollanta humala , an admirer of hugo chávez , eased international concerns about the future development of peru's energy sector .

in mexico , the main energy issue is how to deal with declining oil reserves and insufficient funds for maintenance and exploration , and whether mexico will open its state - controlled oil production to private and foreign investment .

because of rising resource nationalism , foreign oil companies in a number of latin american countries are having to pay more to do business in terms of increased taxes and royalties .

some observers fear that this could slow foreign investment in the region's energy sectors , which is already hindered by political and social instability in some countries .

others contend that foreign companies will continue to invest where there is a likelihood of profit .

some energy - producing countries in the region , such as brazil and colombia , continue to follow a capitalist model for energy investment that allows foreign companies to own and operate energy concessions .

nevertheless , across the region , there is continuing underinvestment in energy infrastructure , with some analysts maintaining that many countries are at risk for widespread electricity shortages .

in the case of colombia , the situation has been exacerbated by a long civil conflict that makes resource exploitation difficult and costly .

there has been some concern about the potential for heightened competition for latin american energy resources from countries like china and india , which are seeking new sources for their growing energy needs .

the chinese government has been acquiring interests in exploration and production abroad , including in latin america .

china and venezuela have signed a series of energy - related agreements since 2005 , including joint ventures for oil and gas exploration in venezuela and to increase venezuela's supply of oil to china .

the state - run china petrochemical corporation ( sinopec ) signed an agreement in april 2006 with brazil's petrobras to build a natural gas pipeline linking the northeast and southeast of brazil .

china is also exploring energy deals in ecuador , bolivia , peru , and colombia , as well as offshore projects in argentina and cuba .

india has recently begun to increase its energy assets in latin america by pursuing joint ventures with established public and private companies operating in the region .

for example , ongc videsh ( ovl ) , a state - owned indian energy company , recently bought a 15% stake in a brazilian oil field and a 30% stake in a partnership for oil and gas exploration in cuba .

the same company is discussing a possible $1 billion investment in a venezuelan oil field .

in 2006 , sinopec and ongc issued a successful joint bid for a 50% stake in the omimex oil company of colombia , a subsidiary of the u.s. - based omimex resources energy company .

while oil and gas producers such as venezuela , mexico , argentina , bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and trinidad and tobago are net energy exporters , most other latin american and caribbean nations are net energy importers .

with the exception of trinidad and tobago , most caribbean and central american nations are highly dependent on energy imports .

according to the department of energy , oil dependency is a major problem among caribbean island nations , where oil accounts for more than 90% of total energy consumed .

many of these nations that are dependent on oil imports experienced dramatic increases in their oil bills after oil price hikes began in 2005 and prompted such initiatives as venezuela's preferential oil programs ; the mesoamerican energy integration program involving mexico , colombia , the dominican republic , and the countries of central america ; and u.s. - brazilian cooperation on biofuels .

policy analysts have made several recommendations to further hemispheric energy cooperation .

among these are broad calls for the u.s. government to make energy a high priority in its hemispheric relations , to take into account the energy capacities and goals of hemispheric nations when developing u.s. energy policies , and to understand that u.s. energy security will be lacking if other countries in the hemisphere are lacking energy security .

many policy analysts also look to the potential role that foreign low - cost sugarcane producers can play in u.s. energy security if the producers can export sugar - based fuel ethanol to the united states without facing stiff tariffs .

the council of the americas , a u.s. - based business organization representing over 200 u.s. companies invested in latin america , issued a report in 2005 making specific recommendations regarding hemispheric cooperation on energy .

in the report , the council maintains that the proper development of the hemisphere's abundant energy resources could be an engine for economic development in the region and also contribute to advancing hemispheric energy security .

the council called for the united states to make a priority of increasing hemispheric partnerships in latin america .

it also recommended that , in order to increase energy investment in the region , that latin american nations improve their investment climates by committing to energy sector stability , transparency , and an appropriate role for state - owned energy companies .

the report called for trilateral energy coordination among the three nafta countries as well as an increase in mexican energy exploration and production .

it also called for energy diversification utilizing renewable resources in order to lessen the impact of supply shortages in the americas .

the council also recommended that multilateral organizations such as the idb to make energy infrastructure development a priority throughout the region .

concerns about the effect of latin america's political environment on energy production in the region also prompted the u.s. southern command to issue a study in 2006 focusing on long - term oil production in several latin american countries .

the report warns against the dangers of reemerging state control in the energy sectors of several latin american countries — especially venezuela and ecuador — that will likely thwart investment , increase inefficiencies , and hamper efforts to increase supplies and production .

in mexico , the report notes that the current regulatory environment and laws prohibiting foreign investment in the energy sector have dampened prospects for increasing oil reserves .

the report asserts that pending any favorable changes to the investment climate , prospects for long - term energy production in venezuela , ecuador , and mexico are at risk , while countries that have opened their energy sectors to foreign investment , like trinidad and tobago , will see increased reserves and production .

an april 2007 study by the inter - american development bank , a blueprint for green energy in the americas , reports that latin american and caribbean countries have shown great interest and promise in the development of biofuels that could contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gases from transport as well as the economic development of rural sectors in the region .

beyond brazil , which has been the leader in ethanol development and production , the study also highlighted several other countries with great potential for biofuels development: guatemala and jamaica , with ethanol production from sugar ; colombia , with biodiesel production from palm oil ; and chile , with second - generation ethanol production from woodchips .

the study also suggests ways the idb could support the development of biofuels production in the region , including support for a biofuels development fund , the development of regulatory frameworks , and research and development .

the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) also published a book in april 2007 , energy cooperation in the western hemisphere , benefits and impediments , that examines the current state of energy cooperation among the hemisphere's oil and gas producers and the opportunities for greater cooperation .

the study concludes that hemispheric energy cooperation would benefit from , among other things , greater harmonization of regulatory frameworks ; improved infrastructure ( such as new pipelines and lng facilities ) ; greater attention to the environmental effects of energy operations ; the avoidance of populist measures that provide widespread subsidization of energy consumption ; and recognition by the united states that its own energy independence is not viable without taking into account the needs of other countries in the hemisphere .

over the past several years , there has been ongoing congressional interest in energy security issues .

some of that interest has focused on how to ensure that countries in the western hemisphere , which currently supply about half of u.s. imports of crude oil and petroleum products , remain reliable sources of energy for the united states .

another area of interest has been to promote cooperation among latin american countries , which are divided between net energy exporting and importing nations , to ensure that enough clean , affordable , and reliable energy sources are exploited to support regional growth and development .

members have expressed support for developing a cohesive regional energy security framework , and also have expressed concerns about the effects of political instability , resource nationalism , and the increasing interest in the hemisphere's energy resources by such countries as china and india .

committees in both houses held several hearings in 2006 focusing on western hemisphere energy security issues , while in march 2006 , senator richard lugar introduced s. 2435 , the energy diplomacy and security act of 2006 , which included provisions to increase hemispheric cooperation on energy ( see legislative section below for details ) .

several themes emerged from the congressional hearings .

several members expressed concerns that recent events in latin america — particularly in bolivia and venezuela — have demonstrated how political events can undermine the reliability of energy producing countries .

at a may 16 , 2006 hearing , representative darrell issa , chairman of the house energy and resources subcommittee , said that the united states was at risk of being "boxed in by iran , venezuela , russia , nigeria , and bolivia...[such that] we cannot effectively counter the use of energy as a weapon. .

representative stephen f. lynch expressed concerns about the possibility that president chávez might take "retaliatory oil - related actions...[against the united states] stemming from his opposition to u.s .

policy. .

while bush administration officials tried to allay these congressional concerns , other witnesses , including david goldwyn , a private energy analyst , pointed out several key threats to u.s. interests that have emerged in latin america .

he described how companies and their shareholders are seeing their asset values cut in half as a result of resource nationalism , oil and gas production is leveling off or declining , and u.s. influence in the region is declining ( as venezuela's power has increased ) .

another theme that emerged was the need for improved investment climates in the region in order to increase investment in energy sectors .

at a march 2 , 2006 hearing of the house western hemisphere subcommittee , eric farnsworth of the council of the americas , asserted that countries in the region need to improve their investment climates in order to attract foreign investment and boost their competitiveness , echoing the recommendations of the council's october 2005 report described above .

department of energy assistant secretary for policy and international affairs karen harbert warned about the negative effects of unpredictable and non - transparent legal and regulatory frameworks , resource nationalism , and a lack of investment in exploration and maintenance on regional energy markets .

at a june 22 , 2006 hearing by the senate foreign relations committee , luis giusti , former chairman of pdvsa and currently an adviser with the center for strategic and international studies , asserted that unless investment climates across latin america improve dramatically , foreign investment will continue to move to other regional energy markets .

a third theme that emerged from the hearings focused on identifying obstacles and generating possible solutions to improve hemispheric cooperation on energy - related issues .

at a june 22 , 2006 hearing of the senate foreign relations committee , senator richard lugar asserted that his proposed energy diplomacy and security act would stimulate energy partnerships among energy producers and consumers .

senator ken salazar testified that our shared interests with countries in the western hemisphere "should be obvious , but too often they are obscured by politicized rhetoric , mis - perceptions , and old grievances. .

another witness suggested that u.s. energy diplomacy , which thus far has been focused on engaging canada and mexico , should be expanded , focusing on finding common ground with energy producing and consuming nations across the region .

two legislative initiatives in the 110 th congress would increase hemispheric cooperation on energy .

although global in scope , s. 193 ( lugar ) , the energy diplomacy and security act of 2007 , has provisions calling for the establishment of a western hemisphere energy crisis response mechanism and a regional - based ministerial forum known as the hemisphere energy cooperation forum that would be involved in responding to temporary energy supply disruption , fostering long - term supply security , and promoting energy access for undeveloped areas .

the bill also calls for the establishment of a hemisphere energy industry group to increase public - private partnerships , foster private investment , and enable countries to devise energy agendas that are compatible with industry capacity and cognizant of industry goals .

the senate foreign relations favorably reported the bill on april 12 , 2007 without amendment ( s.rept .

110-54 ) .

another initiative , s. 1007 ( lugar ) , the united states - brazil energy cooperation pact of 2007 , calls for the same cooperation groups in s. 193 and also directs the secretary of state to work with brazil and other western hemisphere countries to develop partnerships to accelerate the development of biofuels production , research , and infrastructure .

the bill was introduced march 28 , 2007 , and referred to the senate foreign relations committee .

in addition to legislation calling for greater hemispheric cooperation on energy security issues , there has been some debate within congress concerning whether or not to lift existing taxes and tariffs on foreign ethanol imports .

the united states currently allows duty - free access on sugar - based ethanol imports from many countries through the caribbean basin initiative , central american free trade agreement , and the andean trade preferences act , among others .

brazil is currently the world's largest consumer and producer of ethanol from sugarcane .

some brazilian ethanol is processed at plants in the caribbean for duty - free entry into the united states , but exports arriving directly from brazil are currently subject to a 54-cent - per - gallon tax , plus a 2.5% tariff .

some members of congress favor an elimination of taxes on inexpensive imported ethanol in order to help displace gasoline consumption and contend with rising fuel prices , while other members who support the u.s. ethanol industry oppose such action .

