the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 ( fisa ) , p.l .

95-511 , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 et seq. , as amended , provides a statutory framework for the u.s. government to engage in electronic surveillance and physical searches to obtain foreign intelligence information .

it also provides a statutory structure for the installation and use of pen registers and trap and trace devices for use in federal investigations to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a u.s. person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities .

such an investigation of a u.s. person may not be conducted solely on the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution .

in addition , fisa provides statutory authority for the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) or his designee to seek a u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) order authorizing the production of any tangible things ( including books , records , papers , documents , and other items ) for an investigation to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a u.s. person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities .

again , such an investigation of a u.s. person may not conducted solely on the basis of first amendment - protected activities .

a production order for tangible things may be accompanied by a nondisclosure order .

under section 501 ( d ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 ( d ) , no person shall disclose to any other person that the fbi has sought or obtained tangible things pursuant to an order under this section , other than to those persons to whom disclosure is necessary to comply with such order , an attorney to obtain legal advice or assistance with respect to the production of things in response to the order , or other persons as permitted by the director of the fbi or the designee of the director .

a person to whom a disclosure is made is also subject to the nondisclosure requirements .

any person making or intending to make a disclosure to a person to whom disclosure is necessary to comply with the order or to whom disclosure is permitted by the director of the fbi or his designee must , at the request of the director or his designee , identify the person to whom disclosure is to be or has been made .

with limited exceptions , electronic surveillance and physical searches may be conducted under fisa pursuant to court orders issued by a judge of the fisc , and pen registers and trap and trace devices may be installed and used pursuant to the order of a fisc judge or a u.s. magistrate judge authorized to act in that judge's behalf .

in all instances in which the production of any tangible thing is required under fisa , an order from a fisc judge or a u.s. magistrate judge authorized to act in the judge's behalf must be obtained .

appeals from the denial of applications for fisc orders approving electronic surveillance , physical search , or production of tangible things may be made by the u.s. government to the u.s. foreign intelligence court of review ( court of review ) .

if the denial of an application is upheld by the court of review , a petition for certiorari may be filed to the u.s. supreme court .

this report discusses the creation and structure of the foreign intelligence surveillance court and the foreign intelligence court of review and their respective jurisdictions .

section 103 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1803 , establishes the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court and the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court of review .

the fisc is composed of 11 u.s. district court judges publicly designated by the chief justice of the united states from seven circuits , at least three of whom must reside within 20 miles of the district of columbia .

the chief justice publicly designates one of the fisc judges to be presiding judge .

although there is a procedure for the publication of fisc opinions , such publication is extremely rare .

only one opinion has been published since the court's inception in 1978 , in re all matters submitted to the foreign intelligence surveillance court , 218 f. supp .

2d 611 ( u.s. foreign intell .

surveil .

ct. 2002 ) .

under foreign intelligence surveillance court rule 5 ( c ) , [o]n request by a judge , the presiding judge , after consulting with other judges of the court , may direct that an opinion be published .

before publications , the opinion must be reviewed by the executive branch and redacted , as necessary , to ensure that properly classified information is appropriately protected pursuant to executive order 12958 as amended by executive order 13292 ( or its successor ) .

three of the fisc judges who reside within 20 miles of the district of columbia , or , if all of those judges are unavailable , other fisc judges designated by the presiding judge of the fisc , comprise a petition review pool that has jurisdiction to review petitions filed pursuant to subsection 501 ( f ) ( 1 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 ( f ) ( 1 ) , to challenge a production order for tangible things in a foreign intelligence , international terrorism , or clandestine intelligence activities investigation under section 501 of fisa , or a nondisclosure order imposed in connection with such a production order .

the court of review is composed of three judges publicly designated by the chief justice from the united states district courts or courts of appeals .

the chief justice also publicly designates one of the three judges as the presiding judge of the court .

only one opinion has been published by the court of review , in re sealed case , 310 f.3d 717 ( u.s. foreign intell .

surveil .

ct. rev .

2002 ) , which is the first opinion the court has issued .

each fisc and court of review judge serves for a maximum of seven years and is not eligible for redesignation .

the government may seek review of a denial of an application for a court order under fisa authorizing electronic surveillance , physical search , or production of any tangible thing before the court of review .

if the denial is upheld by the court of review , the government may seek u.s. supreme court review of the decision by a petition for certiorari .

in addition , the court of review has jurisdiction over petitions for review of a decision under section 501 ( f ) ( 2 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 ( f ) ( 2 ) , to affirm , modify , or set aside a production order or nondisclosure order filed by the government or any person receiving such an order .

upon the request of the government , any order setting aside a nondisclosure order shall be stayed pending such review .

the court of review shall provide for the record a written statement of the reasons for its decision and , on petition by the government or any person receiving such order for writ of certiorari , the record shall be transmitted under seal to the supreme court of the united states , which shall have jurisdiction to review such decision .

the u.s. supreme court has jurisdiction , on a petition for certiorari , to review decisions of the court of review affirming a denial of an application for an order authorizing electronic surveillance , physical searches , production orders , or nondisclosure orders under fisa .

