following the terrorist attacks of 2001 , the federal government determined that it would need additional medical countermeasures ( eg , diagnostic tests , drugs , vaccines , and other treatments ) to respond to an attack using chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear ( cbrn ) agents .

the enactment of the project bioshield act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-276 ) was designed to be an important part of federal efforts to obtain new civilian medical countermeasures .

it provides countermeasure developers with a guaranteed government market for their products .

as congress continues oversight of federal efforts to protect the united states , the effectiveness and efficiency of the project bioshield implementation may draw legislative attention .

this report discusses actions taken by congress and the administration that have affected this program , describes the decision - making process for choosing countermeasures , describes the countermeasures for which the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has contracted , and discusses accounting discrepancies between the president's budget and hhs reporting of project bioshield awards .

the project bioshield act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-276 ) contains three major provisions .

one relaxes some procedures for bioterrorism - related procurement , hiring , and research grant awarding .

another permits the emergency use of countermeasures not approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

the third authorizes a 10-year program to encourage the development and production of new countermeasures for chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) agents .

this last provision is usually referred to as project bioshield and is the focus of this report .

in contrast to federal programs that directly fund research and development of biomedical countermeasures , project bioshield is a procurement program .

it acts as a guarantee that the federal government will buy successfully developed countermeasures for the strategic national stockpile ( sns ) .

it allows the government to enter into contracts to procure countermeasures while they still are in development , up to eight years before product delivery is expected .

the government guarantees that it will buy a certain quantity at a specified price , once the countermeasure meets specific requirements .

the government pays the agreed - upon amount only after these requirements are met and the product is delivered to the strategic national stockpile .

if the product does not meet the requirements within the specified time frame , the contract can be cancelled without any payment to the contractor .

thus , project bioshield is intended to reduce the developer's market risk ; that is , the possibility that no customer will buy the successfully developed product .

however , it does not reduce the development risk ; that is , the possibility that the countermeasure will fail during development .

the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) modified the project bioshield act to allow for milestone - based payments for up to half of the total award before countermeasure delivery .

the hhs has reported awarding $2.331 billion worth of project bioshield contracts ( table 3 ) .

these contracts address four material threats: bacillus anthracis ( the bacteria which cause anthrax ) , smallpox , botulinum toxin , and radiological and nuclear agents .

the distribution of contract awards has been uneven between these threats , with $1,429 million against bacillus anthracis ( 61% ) , $500 million against smallpox ( 21% ) , $364 million against botulinum toxin ( 16% ) and $38 million against radiological and nuclear weapons ( 2% ) .

while hhs has made additional requests for information from companies developing cbrn countermeasures , none have resulted in contract offers .

on december 17 , 2006 , hhs terminated an anthrax countermeasure contract for failure to meet a contract milestone .

this contract was the first , and largest to date , awarded using project bioshield funds .

this cancellation took place after the preparation of both the hhs' project bioshield annual report to congress and the president's fy2008 budget .

thus , neither of these documents reflect the recovery of these funds .

taking this cancellation into account , the hhs has obligated $1.454 billion to date ( table 3 ) .

government acquisitions often follow a pattern of gathering information about available products , contract solicitation , award of the contract , and finally product delivery .

figure 2 displays a time line of project bioshield acquisition activity .

a request for information ( rfi ) is a mechanism for the government to determine what products are available or that are under development that might fulfill a specified government need .

it can cover a broad area or be narrowly focused .

for example , in september 2006 , hhs issued an relatively broad rfi to help in "identifying and characterizing the current and projected status of the research and development programs related to cbrn medical countermeasures" ( cbrn general in figure 2 ) .

in contrast , an rfi issued in december 2003 focused on a specific type of treatment for a specific disease , anthrax therapeutics , based on antibodies ( figure 2 ) .

agencies can use the information in rfi responses to help shape policy and to help develop requirements for a contract solicitation .

however , rfis do not necessarily lead to contract solicitations .

four of the eight project bioshield rfis have not lead to contract solicitations .

these rfis were seeking countermeasures against cbrn in general , nerve agents , one of the two anthrax therapeutic rfis , and one of the two acute radiation syndrome rfis ( figure 2 ) .

rfis are also not required before issuing a contract solicitation .

four of the eight contract solicitations did not have an rfi .

these contracts were for ava based anthrax vaccine , botulinum antitoxin , and the radiation treatments zn - and ca - dtpa and potassium iodide ( ki ) ( figure 2 ) .

these contract solicitations were for specific products from specific companies and not subject to open competition .

contract solicitations are invitations for companies to submit proposals to provide goods or services to fulfill government needs .

project bioshield solicitations fall into two basic categories , sole source and requests for proposals ( rfp ) .

the sole source solicitations were for specific products from specific companies and not subject to open competition .

four of the eight contract solicitations were sole source .

these are the same four contracts which did not go through the rfi process discussed above , ava - based anthrax vaccine , botulinum antitoxin , and the radiation treatments zn - and ca - dtpa , and ki ( figure 2 ) .

four of the eight contract solicitations were rfps .

each rfp specified certain characteristics required by the government and multiple companies could submit proposals .

the government could then choose the proposal or proposals that best fit its requirements needs or decide that none of the proposals met the minimum requirements .

the contract solicitations which went through the rfp process were those seeking an rpa - based anthrax vaccine , an mva - based smallpox vaccine , and treatments for acute radiation syndrome ( figure 2 ) .

three of the four rfps have resulted in contract awards to date , rpa - based anthrax vaccine , anthrax therapeutics , and mva - based smallpox vaccine .

the anthrax therapeutics rfp resulted in contracts with two companies for two different products .

the government may decide that none of the companies responding to an rfp have products that meet the government's minimum requirements .

this appears to be the case with the acute radiation syndrome rfp , which was terminated without an award on march 7 , 2007 .

hhs has awarded ten project bioshield contracts to six different companies .

of these contracts , four have been completed ( two for ava - based anthrax vaccine , one for the radiation treatments zn - dtpa and ca - dtpa , and one of the two for the radiation treatment ki ) , four remain open ( one of the two for the radiation treatment ki , two for anthrax therapeutics , and one for smallpox vaccine ) , and one was terminated ( rpa - based anthrax vaccine ) .

all of the completed contracts resulted from sole source contracting rather than an open bidding rfp process .

these completed contracts were for products which required no further development time .

it is not clear why hhs chose to acquire these products through the project bioshield process rather than using the standard process for acquiring similar off - the - shelf products for the strategic national stockpile .

of the ten contracts awarded by hhs , five were for products that required further development: rpa - based anthrax vaccine , smallpox vaccine , botulinum antitoxin , and the two anthrax therapeutics .

none of these contracts have yet resulted in deliveries to the strategic national stockpile .

the rpa anthrax vaccine contract was cancelled and development continues on the remaining four products with open contracts .

the project bioshield special reserve fund , established by the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2004 , is managed by dhs .

in fy2006 , the dhs management of this appropriations account passed internally from the federal emergency management agency to the preparedness directorate .

however , the contracts obligating the appropriated funds are executed through the hhs ophemc .

table 4 shows the accounting from the president's annual budget documents .

in fy2004 , $885 million from the advance appropriation became available for obligation .

according to the dhs section of the budget , all available budget authority was obligated in fy2004 ; no budget authority was carried into the following fiscal year .

in fy2005 , another $2.508 billion became available for obligation .

the budget documents state that $189 million of this was obligated in fy2005 , leaving $2.324 billion to be carried over into fy2006 .

for fy2006 , the budget states that $856 million was obligated , leaving $1.468 billion to be carried over into fy2007 .

dhs anticipates obligations of $1.045 billion in fy2007 , leaving only $423 million available for obligation in fy2008 .

the next part of the advance appropriation does not become available for obligation until fy2009 ( see table 2 ) .

these figures conflict with totals calculated from the countermeasure awards reported by hhs ( table 3 ) .

table 5 lists all of the contracts that hhs has announced for this account along with their dates of award and fiscal year subtotals .

according to hhs , the only obligation from this account in fy2004 was $50 million to support the botulinum antitoxin program .

in contrast , the president's fy2006 budget documents state that $885 million was obligated in fy2004 .

additionally , it describes this obligation as falling under two object classifications ; with $190 million for "other services" ( object classification 25.2 ) and $695 million for "other purchases of goods and services from government accounts" ( object classification 25.3 ) .

it is not clear what these amounts represent .

the $50 million hhs obligated for the botulinum antitoxin program support could fall under the "other services" category , since it was not an acquisition per se , but the amount of this contract does not correlate to the amount categorized as "other services. .

another possibility is that president's budget accounted for the rpa vaccine contract ( awarded in november 2004 ) in fy2004 rather than fy2005 .

this interpretation is supported by the fy2007 budget reporting that only $189 million was obligated in fy2005 .

however , the total of the $878 million rpa obligation and the $50 million botulinum antitoxin program obligation is greater than the budget authority made available in fy2004 ( $885 million ) .

this interpretation also would not account for the division of the funds into the two object classifications .

furthermore , the fy2007 dhs preparedness directorate biodefense countermeasures congressional justification materials list acquiring the rpa vaccine as one of its fy2005 accomplishments .

the source of the fy2004 account discrepancy of $835 million is not apparent .

in fy2005 , hhs reported awarding three contracts for a total of $1.008 billion .

the fy2007 budget states that the actual amount obligated in fy2005 was $189 million .

the dhs fy2007 congressional justification documents state that its fy2005 accomplishments include the rpa , ki , and ava contracts .

these would equal the $1.008 billion calculated from the hhs figures .

it is not apparent to what the $189 million stated in the budget correlates .

like the preceding two years , the stated obligations for fy2006 are different according to hhs and the president's budget .

for fy2006 , hhs reported awarding six contracts , with obligations totaling $824 million .

this is $32 million less than the $856 million stated as "actual obligations" in fy2006 in the president's fy2008 budget .

combining all of the differences in reporting through fy2006 , the president's budgets state that $48 million more have been obligated than the hhs documents report .

effective management and congressional oversight of project bioshield require specific and clear knowledge of the funds remaining available .

for the administration to most effectively plan and prioritize future acquisitions , it must know the amount of funds remaining available .

for congress , knowing the amount of funds remaining can be important in assessing program management , the implementation pace , and general program effectiveness .

due to conflicting statements from executive branch agencies , the amount of funds remaining available for obligation for this program is not clear .

according to hhs , as of june 2007 , it has obligated $2.331 billion from this account .

this figure does not include the $878 million that should be recovered in fy2007 from the cancellation of the rpa anthrax vaccine contract .

taking this recovery into account , $1.889 billion would be available for obligation in fy2007-fy2008 and $4.064 billion would be available until the end of the program in fy2013 .

as stated above , using the president's budget figures to calculate obligations would reduce these numbers by $48 million .

project bioshield plays a key role in the federal government's response to the threat of chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear terrorism .

it created a process for the government to agree to purchase countermeasures while they still are in development .

in addition to increasing the holdings of the strategic national stockpile , it was hoped that this government market guarantee would encourage companies to continue to develop promising countermeasures that they might have otherwise abandoned , and induce other companies to begin countermeasure development .

it remains unclear how well project bioshield is meeting these goals .

many stakeholders , industry leaders , and policymakers have criticized the rate at which dhs completes material threat determinations .

to address these concerns , legislation has been introduced in the previous and current congresses .

in the 110 th congress , the project bioshield material threats act of 2007 ( h.r .

1089 , langevin ) and the department of homeland security authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( h.r .

1684 , thompson ) would require an assessment , and an mtd if appropriate , for all currently known cbrn agents likely to pose a significant national security threat .

these assessments would be required to be completed by december 31 , 2007 .

by assessing all known threats and issuing those mtds necessary , the full spectrum of material threats may be considered when developing a countermeasure acquisition strategy .

such a comprehensive acquisition strategy may allow for more efficient prioritization and balance of countermeasures , providing optimized protection from cbrn attacks using finite funds in the shortest time .

since hhs has not issued contracts for the all of the agents that already have mtds , an increase in this number may not increase the rate of countermeasure awards .

however , hhs has predicted that no additional mtds would be issued unless "technology advances or if our understanding of the potential threats changes. .

appropriators set limits on how much could be obligated during specified periods of time .

the pace by which hhs awards countermeasure contracts roughly corresponds to these limits .

by this criterion , this program is on track to fulfill its goals ; hhs cannot obligate the money faster than it becomes available .

stakeholders , industry leaders and policymakers have criticized hhs for some of the countermeasures it has chosen .

in decisions as complicated and weighty as these , any choice is likely to be criticized .

given the failure of the largest contract to date , some critics may conclude that project bioshield has fallen short of its goals , since the majority of the money that has been obligated , though not the majority of contracts , has not yet resulted in products in the stockpile .

however , one of the unique features of project bioshield contracts is that the government may contract for products that require up to eight years more of development .

it was designed to allow the government to promise to buy something , but only pay for it on delivery .

thus the company , rather than the government , bears the majority of the development risk , i.e .

that the product will never be deliverable .

one industry group estimates that more than half of all pharmaceuticals will fail during the last eight years of development .

thus , it may be expected that at least some project bioshield contracts will be cancelled .

the government bears some development risk in the form of opportunity costs since the money available for obligation is finite , i.e. , money obligated to a countermeasure that will ultimately fail in development cannot be simultaneously obligated to another needed countermeasure .

it is possible that the establishment of the biodefense advance research and development authority ( barda ) in hhs will reduce the likelihood that future project bioshield contracts will fail during the advanced development phase .

established by the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) , one of barda's roles is to support the advanced research and development of promising countermeasures .

in theory , funding this part of the development process through such a dedicated mechanism could allow countermeasures to further mature through the development process longer before competing for a project bioshield contract .

this could reduce the risk that a countermeasure will fail while under a project bioshield contract .

p.l .

109-417 included authorization for approximately $1 billion to support this type of activity for fy2007 through fy2008 .

although , congress did not appropriate money for barda in fy2007 , the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l .

110-28 ) transferred $99 million from national institutes of health accounts to fund barda .

even if barda becomes operational in fy2007 , it will take some time to determine what projects to fund , provide funding , and receive returns on this investment .

it remains to be seen how hhs' decision to combine barda with the hhs office responsible for executing project bioshield ( office of public health emergency medical countermeasures ) will affect the execution of both programs .

additional criticism of the project bioshield procurement process may stem from the perceived opacity of its decision - making process .

hhs is moving to address some of these issues by publishing its phemce strategy for chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear threats , inviting public comment , and reaching out to the public and companies that might develop needed countermeasures through stakeholder meetings .

some critics also suggest that the project bioshield process has been poorly managed overall .

such suggestions are reinforced by the annual accounting discrepancies between hhs and dhs .

it remains to be seen whether these concerns will be allayed through the management changes being implemented subsequent to: the establishment of the public health and emergency medical countermeasures enterprise ( phemce ) and publication of its strategy ; the enactment of the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) ; and the issuance of hspd - 18 .

