the modern relationship between the united states and the united kingdom ( uk ) was forged during the second world war .

it was cemented during the cold war , as both countries worked together bilaterally and within nato to counter the threat of the soviet union .

the united states and the uk are two of the five permanent members of the united nations security council , and both are founding members of nato .

in the early 1990s , the uk was an important u.s. ally in the first gulf war , and the two countries later worked together in stabilization and peacekeeping operations in the balkans .

the uk was the leading u.s. ally in the 2003 invasion of iraq and subsequent stabilization operations , and it was the largest non - u.s. contributor to the nato - led mission in afghanistan .

the uk remains an important u.s. partner in ongoing global security challenges , such as combatting international terrorism , countering the islamic state terrorist group , and opposing russia's annexation of crimea and actions destabilizing ukraine , including by supporting strong sanctions in response to these actions .

the uk is also the sixth - largest economy in the world and a major financial center .

the united states and the uk share an extensive and mutually beneficial trade and economic relationship , and each is the other's largest foreign investor .

u.s. and uk officials , from the cabinet level down , consult frequently and extensively on many global issues .

american and british diplomats report often turning to each other first when seeking to build support for their respective positions in multilateral institutions or during times of crisis , as in the immediate aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks on the united states .

british input is often cited as an element in shaping u.s. foreign policy debates .

some observers assert that a common language and cultural similarities , as well as the habits of cooperation that have developed over the years , contribute to the ease with which u.s. and uk policymakers interact with each other .

the term special relationship has often been used to describe the high degree of mutual trust between the two countries in cooperating on diplomatic and political issues .

the special relationship also encompasses close intelligence - sharing arrangements and unique cooperation in nuclear and defense matters .

the government of the uk is led by prime minister theresa may of the conservative party .

she became prime minister in july 2016 , after david cameron resigned in the wake of leading the unsuccessful campaign for the uk to remain in the european union ( eu ) .

cameron's departure came after having been reelected in may 2015 with an absolute majority for the conservatives .

as the longest - serving home secretary in modern times , may oversaw the uk's counterterrorism , policing , crime , and immigration policies from 2010 to 2016 .

a member of parliament ( mp ) since 1997 , she is the uk's second female prime minister .

may remained prime minister after the uk election of june 8 , 2017 , resulted in a hung parliament , an outcome in which no single party won a majority of seats in the 650-seat house of commons .

with 318 seats , the conservative party came in first place but lost the majority it had after winning 331 seats in the 2015 election .

the labour party came in second place , outperforming most expectations by winning 262 seats , a gain of 30 .

this result was not what prime minister may had in mind in april 2017 when she reversed her earlier assertions and unexpectedly announced a snap election shortly after opening the two - year window for negotiating the uk's exit from the eu ( commonly termed brexit ) .

at that time , polls showed a 20-point conservative lead over the labour party , and may expected both to solidify her political mandate for the negotiations with an expanded majority and gain two years in the electoral calendar in which to manage the withdrawal process ( by pushing the next general election back from 2020 to 2022 ) .

polls showed the lead shrinking as the vote neared , however .

prime minister may sought to portray her leadership as the only choice for preserving stability and delivering brexit , but some observers criticized her campaign as dull and uninspiring .

many observers also interpreted the result as a reflection of voter unease about brexit and the government's approach to the negotiations , pointing especially to higher turnout among young voters ( who largely oppose brexit ) .

the labour party was relatively effective in focusing on concerns about proposed conservative social and economic policies , to the extent that some voters seemingly overcame previous doubts about labour party leader jeremy corbyn , often derided as radically left - wing .

prime minister may was able to form a conservative minority government after concluding a deal for support from the democratic unionist party ( dup ) , the largest unionist political party in northern ireland , which holds 10 seats in parliament .

the arrangement is not a formal coalition but rather a "confidence and supply" arrangement that allows the dup certain concessions in return for its support in passing the budget and backing the government in any no - confidence votes .

legislation typically is supported on a case - by - case basis , potentially granting the dup a pivotal role in determining the fate of certain bills .

the dup is one of the uk's most socially conservative parties , and it campaigned strongly in favor of brexit .

 ( nearly 56% of voters in northern ireland supported remaining in the eu. ) .

since 2007 , the dup has led northern ireland's devolved regional government in a power - sharing arrangement with irish nationalist party sinn fein , and it remains engaged with sinn fein in talks to reestablish the devolved government following regional elections in march 2017 .

the conservatives granted the dup more budgetary resources for northern ireland as a key part of the two parties' parliamentary support deal , and the dup remains a significant factor in brexit negotiations related to northern ireland .

other notable outcomes from the june 2017 election included the following: after gaining 50 seats in the 2015 election , the scottish national party ( snp ) suffered the loss of 21 seats .

the result dealt a blow to the aspirations of some snp leaders for a second vote on scottish independence following the 2014 referendum , which favored staying in the uk .

after positioning themselves as the most pro - remain party in the brexit debate , the liberal democrats made modest gains , from 8 seats to 12 .

the conservatives' losses occurred despite making inroads in scotland and gaining vote share from the collapse of the populist , anti - eu uk independence party ( ukip ) .

labour also benefitted from an unexpected return of ukip voters in some parts of england .

on march 29 , 2017 , prime minister may invoked article 50 of the treaty on european union , formally giving notice of the uk's intention to leave the eu and opening a two - year window for conducting withdrawal negotiations .

the uk named as its lead negotiator david davis , holding the newly created position of secretary of state for exiting the european union .

the european commission ( the eu's executive institution ) serves as the eu's negotiator , with michel barnier , a former eu commissioner for financial services and former french foreign minister , leading talks for the eu .

the eu's negotiating guidelines adopted at the leaders' summit in brussels in april 2017 presented a two - phase approach to the talks .

the first phase would deal with the terms of a withdrawal agreement , focusing initially on three priority topics: the status and rights of eu citizens living in the uk and uk citizens living in the eu , a financial settlement addressing remaining uk obligations to the eu , and arrangements for the border between northern ireland and the republic of ireland .

given sufficient progress on these topics , the second phase would discuss possible transitional arrangements and the framework for future relations between the uk and the eu .

this issue of "sequencing" became an early point of tension in the negotiations , as the eu resisted opening negotiations on its future economic and trade relationship with the uk until at least some of the main terms of withdrawal had been agreed .

throughout 2017 , continued discord in the uk about the desired shape of brexit fueled criticism from eu officials and outside observers that a lack of clarity and unity on the british side had hindered the progress of withdrawal negotiations .

the uk government pushed back against such charges , noting that it has produced a series of position papers detailing its approach to numerous items on the negotiating agenda .

after seven months and six rounds of discussions , the two sides reached an agreement in principle covering main aspects of the three priority topics and released a joint report on december 8 , 2017 , that describes their common understanding and joint commitments .

with some specific aspects yet to be finalized , the report notes that "nothing is agreed until everything is agreed," and that joint commitments "shall be reflected in the withdrawal agreement in full detail. .

on december 15 , 2017 , the european council determined that sufficient progress had been made on the three priority topics to open the second phase of negotiations , dealing with the transition period and framework for future relations .

eu leaders stated that the second phase would proceed as long as the commitments made in phase one are fully respected , and they called for continued progress on unresolved issues related to withdrawal arrangements and for the negotiators to begin drafting the withdrawal agreement .

the european commission released the text of its draft withdrawal agreement ( totaling 118 pages ) on february 28 , 2018 .

some observers noted that the document represented a maximalist presentation of the eu's positions and that numerous provisions would be rejected by the uk government .

many economists have expressed concerns that brexit could cause an economic shock that leaves the uk facing weaker economic growth , higher inflation , job losses , and depreciation of the pound ( which has already happened ) , with potentially significant negative consequences for the u.s. and global economies .

advocates of brexit have maintained that such economic fears are greatly exaggerated and that , free from eu regulations , a "global britain" will be able to forge new trade relationships with dynamic , emerging economies while remaining a preeminent international banking and financial center .

the uk economy has been relatively resilient thus far , with growth of 1.8% in 2017 and an expected 1.5% in 2018 , outperforming many expectations .

unemployment has remained low , at 4.4% in 2017 .

in any case , observers have noted considerable unease among some of the many multinational corporations that have chosen the uk as their eu headquarters ; these corporations face a period of uncertainty about the uk's trade and economic arrangements and the corresponding legal and regulatory frameworks .

the uncertainty and potential risks of brexit have led some such large companies to make plans , or to consider making plans , for moving their eu base , along with attendant jobs and capital , elsewhere .

of particular consequence , with half of the world's financial firms basing their european headquarters in london and employing 1 million people , is the loss of the uk's eu "passporting" rights , whereby a financial company incorporated in one member state can carry out activities in all other member states without establishing a separate entity or obtaining a separate authorization .

the signature initiative of the conservative - led coalition government that took office in 2010 was a far - reaching austerity program aiming to reduce the country's budget deficit .

their victory in the 2015 election allowed the conservative party to continue implementing this program as the centerpiece of their domestic economic policy .

between 1993 and 2008 , the british economy enjoyed an unprecedented period of sustained growth .

however , the country was severely impacted by the global financial crisis and entered a deep recession in 2008 , and a prolonged slump lasted until 2012 .

during the years of economic expansion , the uk developed a large structural budget deficit as spending outpaced tax revenues and growth .

the financial crisis and recession exacerbated this situation: the government budget deficit grew from 5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2008 to nearly 11% in 2009 .

public sector debt has increased from approximately 52% of gdp in 2008 to approximately 88% .

in response to these trends , the coalition government began a program of budget austerity entailing large spending cuts in areas such as governmental department expenditures and a range of social welfare benefits .

it also increased the value added tax ( vat ) , capital gains tax , and national insurance contributions .

the austerity strategy has gradually reduced the budget deficit , to 4.3% of gdp in 2015 and 2.9% in 2017 .

supporters have praised the austerity strategy as necessary to put the uk back on the path of financial sustainability .

opponents have argued that the government's approach is ideologically driven , unduly targets the poor and the disabled , and affects society in ways that are unequal and unfair .

critics also have charged that the austerity measures have been too aggressive , hurt the economy's growth prospects , and eroded public services .

the uk's most recent budget moderately loosened fiscal policy , with more spending to support the nhs and to address some issues in education , the housing market , and social welfare programs .

the uk is likely to remain a strong u.s. partner , and brexit is unlikely to cause a dramatic makeover in most aspects of the u.s. - uk relationship .

analysts believe that close u.s. - uk cooperation will continue for the foreseeable future in areas such as counterterrorism , intelligence , economic issues , and the future of nato , as well as on numerous global and regional security challenges .

nato remains the preeminent transatlantic security institution , and uk leaders have indicated their continued commitment as a leading country in nato .

the uk also is expected to remain a key u.s. partner in operations to combat the islamic state in iraq and syria .

uk officials have emphasized that brexit does not entail a turn toward isolationism and that the uk intends to remain a global leader in international diplomacy , security issues , trade and finance , and development aid .

at the same time , brexit could have a substantial impact on certain u.s. strategic interests , especially in relation to europe more broadly and with respect to possible implications for future developments in the eu .

with the uk commonly regarded as the strongest u.s. partner in the eu , a partner that commonly shares u.s. views , and an essential voice in efforts to develop stronger eu foreign and defense policies , some u.s. officials have conveyed concerns that the uk's withdrawal could make the eu a less capable and less reliable partner on security and defense issues .

as the uk is a leading voice for robust eu sanctions against russia due to its actions in crimea and eastern ukraine , some observers suggest the departure of the uk could shift the debate in the eu about the duration and severity of the sanctions ( the measures must be renewed every six months ) .

some analysts have suggested that brexit could allow the eu to move ahead more easily with developing shared capabilities and undertaking military integration projects under the eu common security and defense policy ( csdp ) .

in the past , the uk has irritated some of its eu partners by essentially vetoing initiatives to develop a stronger csdp , arguing that such efforts duplicate and compete with nato .

in 2011 , for example , the uk blocked a proposal to consolidate the command structure for eu military missions under a single permanent operational headquarters .

in recent years , u.s. officials generally have supported eu initiatives aimed at increasing european defense capabilities , but they continue to urge that such efforts remain complementary to nato and do not duplicate or compete with nato activities .

more broadly , u.s. officials have long urged the eu to move beyond what is often perceived as a predominantly inward focus on treaties and institutions , in order to concentrate more effort and resources toward addressing a wide range of shared external challenges ( such as terrorism and instability to europe's south and east ) .

some observers note that brexit pushes europe back toward another prolonged bout of internal preoccupation , consuming a considerable degree of uk and eu time and personnel resources in the process .

