continued revelations involving alleged disclosures of classified information to the news media or to others who are not entitled to receive it have renewed congress's interest with regard to the possible need for legislation to provide for criminal punishment for the "leaks" of classified information .

opponents of any such legislation express concern regarding the possible consequences to freedom of the press and other first amendment values .

the current laws for protecting classified information have been criticized as a patchwork of sometimes abstruse and antiquated provisions that are not consistent and do not cover all the information the government legitimately needs to protect .

certain information is protected regardless of whether it belongs to the government or is subject to normal classification .

information related to "the national defense" is protected even though no harm to the national security is intended or is likely to be caused through its disclosure .

however , nonmilitary information with the potential to cause serious damage to the national security is only protected from willful disclosure with the requisite intent or knowledge regarding the potential harm .

for example , under 50 u.s.c .

§ 783 , the communication of classified information by a government employee is expressly punishable only if the discloser knows or has reason to believe the recipient is an agent or representative of a foreign government , but not , for example , if the recipient is an agent of an international terrorist organization .

to close some perceived gaps , the 106 th congress passed a measure to criminalize all leaks of classified information ; however , president clinton vetoed the measure .

the 108 th congress considered passing an identical provision as part of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2001 , but instead directed the attorney general and heads of other departments to undertake a review of the current protections against the unauthorized disclosure of classified information , and to issue a report recommending legislative or administrative actions by may 1 , 2002 .

in its response to congress , the department of justice concluded that existing statutes and regulations are sufficient to prosecute disclosures of information that might harm the national security .

this report describes the current state of the law with regard to the unauthorized disclosure of classified information , including criminal and civil penalties that can be imposed on violators , as well as some of the disciplinary actions and administrative procedures available to federal agencies with respect to their employees , as such measures have been addressed by federal courts .

the report also describes the background of legislative efforts to amend the laws , including the measure passed in 2000 and president clinton's stated reasons for vetoing it .

finally , the report considers possible constitutional issues — in particular , issues related to the first amendment — that may arise if congress considers new legislation to punish leaks or if the attorney general seeks to apply current law to punish newspapers that publish leaked classified information .

the classification by government agencies of documents deemed sensitive has evolved from a series of executive orders .

congress has , for the most part , let the executive branch make decisions regarding the type of information to be subject to protective measures .

the current criminal statutory framework providing penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of classified government materials traces its roots to the espionage act of 1917 , which made it a crime to disclose defense information during wartime .

the national security act of 1947 directed the director of the cia to protect "intelligence sources and methods. .

the atomic energy act of 1954 provided for secrecy of information related to nuclear energy and weapons .

the invention secrecy act of 1951 gave the government the authority to declare a patent application secret if disclosure of an invention might expose the country to harm .

the current laws for protecting classified information have been criticized as a patchwork of provisions that are not consistent and do not cover all the information the government legitimately needs to protect .

certain information is protected regardless of whether it belongs to the government or is subject to normal classification .

technical and scientific information , for example , can be restricted regardless of source .

information related to "the national defense" is protected even though no harm to the national security is intended or is likely to be caused through its disclosure .

however , nonmilitary information with the potential to cause serious damage to the national security is only protected from willful disclosure with the specific intent to harm the national interest , or with the knowledge that such harm could occur .

in 2000 , and again in 2002 , congress sought to create 18 u.s.c .

§ 798a , subsection ( a ) of which would have read: whoever , being an officer or employee of the united states , a former or retired officer or employee of the united states , any other person with authorized access to classified information , or any other person formerly with authorized access to classified information , knowingly and willfully discloses , or attempts to disclose , any classified information acquired as a result of such person's authorized access to classified information to a person ( other than an officer or employee of the united states ) who is not authorized access to such classified information , knowing that the person is not authorized access to such classified information , shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 3 years , or both .

the new provision would have penalized the disclosure of any material designated as classified for any reason related to national security , regardless of whether the violator intended that the information be delivered to and used by foreign agents ( in contrast to 50 u.s.c .

§ 783 ) .

it would have been the first law to penalize disclosure of information to entities other than foreign governments or their equivalent solely because it is classified , without a more specific definition of the type of information covered .

in short , the provision would have made it a crime to disclose or attempt to disclose classified information to any person who does not have authorized access to such information , with exceptions covering disclosures to article iii courts , or to the senate or house committees or members , and for authorized disclosures to persons acting on behalf of a foreign power ( including an international organization ) .

the provision would have amended the espionage laws in title 18 by expanding the scope of information they cover .

the proposed language was intended to make it easier for the government to prosecute unauthorized disclosures of classified information , or "leaks" of information that might not amount to a violation of current statutes .

the language was intended to ease the government's burden of proof in such cases by eliminating the need "to prove that damage to the national security has or will result from the unauthorized disclosure," substituting a requirement to show that the unauthorized disclosure was of information that "is or has been properly classified" under a statute or executive order .

the 106 th congress passed the measure , but president clinton vetoed it , calling it "well - intentioned" as an effort to deal with a legitimate concerns about the damage caused by unauthorized disclosures , but "badly flawed" in that it was "overbroad" and posed a risk of "unnecessarily chill[ing] legitimate activities that are at the heart of a democracy. .

the president explained his view that [a] desire to avoid the risk that their good faith choice of words — their exercise of judgment — could become the subject of a criminal referral for prosecution might discourage government officials from engaging even in appropriate public discussion , press briefings , or other legitimate official activities .

similarly , the legislation may unduly restrain the ability of former government officials to teach , write , or engage in any activity aimed at building public understanding of complex issues .

incurring such risks is unnecessary and inappropriate in a society built on freedom of expression and the consent of the governed and is particularly inadvisable in a context in which the range of classified materials is so extensive .

in such circumstances , this criminal provision would , in my view , create an undue chilling effect .

the 108 th congress considered passing an identical provision as part of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2001 , but instead directed the attorney general and heads of other departments to undertake a review of the current protections against the unauthorized disclosure of classified information , and to issue a report recommending legislative or administrative actions .

an identical measure was introduced late in the 109 th congress , but was not reported out of committee .

the attorney general , in his report to the 108 th congress , concluded that [a]lthough there is no single statute that provides criminal penalties for all types of unauthorized disclosures of classified information , unauthorized disclosures of classified information fall within the scope of various current statutory criminal prohibitions .

it must be acknowledged that there is no comprehensive statute that provides criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of classified information irrespective of the type of information or recipient involved .

given the nature of unauthorized disclosures of classified information that have occurred , however , i conclude that current statutes provide a legal basis to prosecute those who engage in unauthorized disclosures , if they can be identified .

it may be that carefully drafted legislation specifically tailored to unauthorized disclosures of classified information generally , rather than to espionage , could enhance our investigative efforts .

the extent to which such a provision would yield any practical additional benefits to the government in terms of improving our ability to identify those who engage in unauthorized disclosures of classified information or deterring such activity is unclear , however .

the publication of information pertaining to the national defense may serve the public interest by providing citizens with information necessary to shed light on the workings of government , but some observe a consensus that the public release of at least some defense information poses a significant enough threat to the security of the nation that the public interest is better served by keeping it secret .

the constitution protects the public right to access government information and to express opinions regarding the functioning of the government , among other things , but it also charges the government with "providing for the common defense. .

policymakers are faced with the task of balancing these interests .

the first amendment to the u.s. constitution provides: "congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press...." despite this absolute language , the supreme court has held that "[t]he government may ... regulate the content of constitutionally protected speech in order to promote a compelling interest if it chooses the least restrictive means to further the articulated interest. .

under the present legal framework , the publication of national security information by non - government personnel may be prosecuted under various provisions , but only if the information meets the definition set forth by statute and the disclosure is made with the requisite knowledge or intent with regard to the nature of the damage it could cause .

the first amendment limits congress's ability to prohibit the publication of information of value to the public , especially with regard to pre - publication injunctions against non - government employees .

that the publication of some information has the potential to damage u.s. national security interests is rarely denied , but an agreement on how to protect such information without harming the public's right to know what its government is doing may remain elusive .

