created by an act of congress in 1998 , the denali commission is unique among the four federally chartered regional development authorities and commissions .

it is the only federally chartered regional development commission targeted at a single state ( alaska ) .

as outlined by its congressional charter , the commission's mission included providing job training and other economic development assistance to distressed rural areas in the state .

the act also charged the commission with providing for rural power generation and transmission facilities , modern communication systems , water and sewer systems , and other infrastructure needs of remote areas in the state .

the seven - member commission comprises a federal co - chair appointed by the secretary of commerce , a state co - chair appointed by the governor of alaska , and one representative each from the alaskan municipal league , the university of alaska , the alaska federation of natives , the executive president of the alaska state afl - cio , and the president of the associated general contractors of alaska .

the federal co - chair of the commission is selected from among persons placed in nomination by the speaker of the house and the president pro tempore of the senate , a unique characteristic of the process used to select the federal co - chair of a regional commission .

the act also mandated that the commission develop a proposed annual work plan for the state , including soliciting proposals from local governments and other entities and organizations .

the commission must submit to the secretary of commerce , the commission's federal co - chair , and the office of management and budget a report that outlines the proposed work plan and identifies infrastructure development and job training funding priorities in the areas covered by the work plan .

in addition , the act allowed for public input and comment on the work plan .

it required the secretary of commerce to publish the work plan in the federal register and to allow for a 30-day public comment period .

within 30 days after the public comment period , the federal co - chair of the commission may approve , disapprove , or partially approve the work plan .

when disapproving or partially approving a work plan , the federal co - chair must specify the reasons for disapproval and include recommendations for revisions that would result in its approval .

if a work plan is not approved or only partially approved , the plan must be submitted to the commission for review and revision , if applicable .

as noted earlier , the commission is charged with promoting rural development , including promoting infrastructure improvements in rural areas , such as improvements in power generation and transmission facilities , telecommunications , and water and sewer facilities .

the commission is also charged with providing job training and repairing or replacing , as appropriate , bulk fuel tanks .

the commission defines a "rural area" as any community that lacks adequate public infrastructure ; is so remote as to impose additional cost on persons and businesses importing and exporting products , traveling to , and communicating with , urban centers ; or is a one - industry village or community located near a natural resource with a small population and a low - wage labor pool .

the act did not identify specific criteria to be used in determining eligibility for assistance ; instead it left that task for the commission .

it did include language that requires the commission to provide job training and other economic development services to residents of distressed rural communities and noted that many of these areas have unemployment rates in excess of 50% .

on may 5 , 2005 , the commission identified community distress criteria for 2005 and listed communities meeting the criteria .

the commission identified the following thresholds for designation as a rural distressed community: per capita income that does not exceed 67% of the national average ; poverty rate in excess of 150% of the national average ; and three - year unemployment rate of 150% of the national average .

a community also may qualify as distressed if its poverty rate is twice the national average and it meets one of the other two criteria relating to unemployment or per capita income .

concerned about the availability and timeliness of census data in determining the distress status of some communities , the commission , in may 2005 , identified an alternative method of identifying distressed communities .

the alternative method , labeled the "surrogate standard," uses community level data that are available annually from the alaska department of labor and workforce development , research and analysis ( adlwdra ) .

in order for a community to qualify under the surrogate standards as a distressed community , it must meet the following criteria: the average market income may not exceed $14,872 ; at least 70% of the residents 16 years or older may not have earned more than $14,872 in 2003 ; and fewer than 30% of the residents of the community 16 years or older were employed during all quarters of 2005 .

the commission also confers distressed status on non - distressed communities that meet surrogate standard criteria when a plus or minus 3% formula is applied to the criteria .

a community must meet two of three criteria to be classified as distressed: the average market income is less than $15,318 ; at least 67% of the residents of a community 16 years or older may not have earned more than $15,318 ; and fewer than 33% of residents of the community 16 years or older were employed during all four quarters of 2003 .

table 10 lists communities by classification as distressed counties .

a community may successfully appeal its non - distress designation if it can demonstrate that it meets a set of surrogate standard criteria when a plus / minus 3% formula is applied to the criteria .

table 11 lists communities that do not meet the 2006 surrogate standard criteria for distressed communities , but do meet the criteria when a plus / minus 3% formula is applied .

to successfully appeal , a community must meet two of the three surrogate standard criteria to be classified as distressed under the plus / minus 3% formula change: criterion 1: average market income from unemployment insurance , covered employment , and fishing is less than $15,318 , rather than $14,872 ( $14,872 x 1.03 = $15,318 ) .

criterion 2: more than 67% of residents earn less than $14,872 , rather than more than 70% of residents ( 70% — 3% = 67% ) .

criterion 3: fewer than 33% of residents worked all four quarters of 2003 , rather than fewer than 30% of residents ( 30% + 3% = 33% ) .

the only single - state federal regional development authority has seen a steady increase in its annual allocation during the five - year period from 2001 to 2005 .

its annual allocation is comparable to that of the arc .

for fy2006 , however , the congress appropriated $49.5 million for denali commission activities , which was $17 million less than appropriated for fy2005 .

for fy2007 , the administration requested $2.5 million in support of the denali commission .

the house approved $7.5 for commission activities , while the senate appropriations committee has recommended a funding level of $50 million .

