bolivia has experienced a period of political volatility , with the country having had six presidents since 2001 .

evo morales , an indigenous leader and head of bolivia's coca growers' union , and his party , the leftist movement toward socialism ( mas ) , won a convincing victory in the december 18 , 2005 , presidential election with 54% of the votes .

early in his term , president morales moved to decriminalize coca cultivation and nationalized the country's natural gas industry .

his efforts to reform the bolivian constitution have , until recently , been stymied by a strong opposition movement led by the leaders ( prefects ) of bolivia's wealthy eastern provinces who are seeking greater regional autonomy .

in december 2007 , the constituent assembly elected in mid - 2006 passed a draft constitution without the presence of opposition delegates .

in late august 2008 , president morales , buoyed by the strong support he received in a national recall referendum held on august 10 , 2008 , proposed to convoke a referendum on the draft constitution in december 2008 .

he later agreed to seek congressional approval for that referendum .

several opposition prefects were angered by morales' proposal , and launched protests and blockades , which turned violent in mid - september .

on october 20 , 2008 , after multiparty negotiations on the draft constitution's text , the bolivian congress approved legislation convoking a constitutional referendum on january 25 , 2009 .

the new constitution was approved by a 61% to 39% vote following a peaceful election .

four eastern provinces , however , all voted against the constitution suggesting a strong possibility of continued opposition and discord .

u.s. - bolivian relations have been strained by the morales government's drug policy and its increasing ties with venezuela .

bilateral relations hit their lowest point in recent memory on september 10 , 2008 , when president morales accused the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia of supporting opposition forces and expelled him from the country .

the u.s. government responded by expelling bolivia's u.s .

ambassador .

on september 16 , 2008 , president bush designated bolivia as a country that had failed to live up to its obligations under international narcotics agreements .

that decision was closely followed by a bush administration proposal to suspend bolivia's trade preferences under the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) .

on november 1 , 2008 , bolivian president morales announced an indefinite suspension of u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) operations in bolivia after accusing some dea agents of espionage .

concerns regarding bolivia in the 110 th congress focused largely on counternarcotics and trade issues .

bolivia received an estimated $99.5 million in u.s. foreign aid in fy2008 , including roughly $47 million in counternarcotics assistance , significantly lower than in previous years .

an enacted continuing resolution h.r .

2638 / p.l .

110-329 will provide funding for u.s. programs in bolivia at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

in october 2008 , congress enacted legislation to extend atpa trade preferences for bolivia until june 30 , 2009 ( p.l .

110-436 ) .

however , on november 25 , 2008 , president bush announced his decision to suspend bolivia's atpa trade preferences effective december 15 , 2008 , citing bolivia's failure to cooperate with the united states on counternarcotics efforts .

on january 1 , 2007 , luis inácio "lula" da silva , of the leftist workers' party ( pt ) , was inaugurated for a second four - year term as president of brazil .

lula was re - elected in the second round of voting with fairly broad popular support .

his immediate tasks were to boost brazil's lagging economic growth and address the issues of crime and violence .

despite president lula's personal popularity , many predicted that intra - party rivalries within his fragile governing coalition would make it hard for him to push his agenda through brazil's notoriously fractured legislature .

two years into his second term , president lula still enjoys high approval ratings ( 70% in december 2008 ) and is benefitting from a resurgent economy ( gdp growth estimated to reach 5% again in 2008 ) .

ongoing corruption investigations involving president lula's pt party have not diminished the strength of his second term in office , and some are urging him to seek a third presidential term , a move that would require a constitutional amendment .

some have criticized president lula for thus far being unwilling or unable to use his significant political capital to gain legislative approval for a more robust political and economic reform agenda .

they maintain that action on much - needed structural reforms will be necessary to bolster brazil's economic growth during the anticipated global economic downturn .

during the first lula term , brazil's relations with the united states were generally positive , although president lula prioritized strengthening relations with neighboring countries and expanding ties with nontraditional partners , including india and china .

brazil - u.s. cooperation has increased during president lula's second term , particularly on energy issues .

president bush visited brazil on march 9 , 2007 , and president lula visited camp david on march 31 , 2007 .

those presidential visits culminated in the signing of u.s. - brazil memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to promote greater ethanol production and use throughout latin america .

some predict that , given its recent deep - water discoveries , brazil could eventually become a major oil supplier to the united states .

the 110 th congress maintained significant interest in brazil .

on october 9 , 2007 , the house passed h.res .

651 ( engel ) , recognizing the warm friendship and expanding relationship that exists between the united states and brazil and the importance of the u.s. - brazil biofuels cooperation .

on september 9 , 2008 , the house passed h.res .

1254 ( engel ) , supporting the values and goals of the "joint action plan between the government of the federative republic of brazil and the government of the united states of america to eliminate racial and ethnic discrimination and promote equality. .

the western hemisphere energy compact act of 2008 ( h.r .

7183 , engel ) , introduced on september 27 , 2008 , would direct the secretary of state to work with the government of brazil and other governments in the western hemisphere to strengthen energy security by accelerating the development of biofuels production , research , and infrastructure .

congressional interest in brazil during the 110 th congress also focused on the doha round of the world trade organization ( wto ) negotiations , brazil's role as a stabilizing force in latin america , and a number of other issues including , counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts , trafficking in persons , protection of the amazon , and hiv / aids prevention .

in the last decade , colombia — a key u.s. ally in south america — has made significant progress in reasserting government control over much of its territory , combating drug trafficking and terrorist activities by illegally armed groups , and reducing poverty .

since the development of plan colombia in 1999 , the colombian government , with substantial u.s. support , has stepped up its counternarcotics and security efforts .

congress has provided more than $6 billion to support colombia from fy2000 through fy2008 .

proponents of the current u.s. policy towards colombia point to the inroads that have been made in improving security conditions and in weakening the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) .

critics argue that , despite these security improvements , u.s. policy has not rigorously promoted human rights , provided for sustainable economic alternatives for drug crop farmers , or reduced the amount of drugs available in the united states .

president alvaro uribe , re - elected in may 2006 , has made headway in addressing colombia's 40- year plus conflict with the country's leftist guerrillas , as well as the rightist paramilitary groups that have been active since the 1980s .

uribe enjoys wide popular support , which has not been significantly affected by an ongoing scandal concerning past government ties to illegal paramilitary groups .

uribe's popularity soared after colombia's march 2008 raid of a farc camp in ecuador resulted in the killing of a top guerrilla commander and the seizure of his computer files .

it spiked again following the colombian military's successful july 2 , 2008 rescue of 15 hostages long held by the farc .

those hostages included three u.s. defense contractors and a former colombian presidential candidate .

while some colombians are calling for president uribe to seek a third presidential term , others have been disillusioned by his handling of a series of illegal investment schemes exposed in late 2008 or have concerns about his attempt to remain in power .

the 110 th congress considered a number of issues addressing u.s. policy towards colombia that focused on funding levels for plan colombia , u.s. hostages , trade , and human rights .

the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) raised the level of u.s. funding provided for economic and social aid closer to that provided for security - related programs .

in july 2008 , both the house and senate passed resolutions expressing gratitude to the colombian government for successfully rescuing the three u.s. hostages being held by the farc ( h.con.res .

389 / s.res .

627 ) .

the house also passed an amendment ( h.amdt .

112 to h.r .

5959 ) expressing the importance of continuing to provide u.s. assistance to colombia .

an enacted continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-329 ) provides funding at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

while acknowledging the progress that the uribe government has made in improving security conditions in colombia , some members of congress have expressed concerns about labor activist killings and the parapolitical scandal .

these issues received increased attention as the bush administration called for congress to approve implementing legislation for the colombia free trade agreement ( cfta ) .

as noted in the earlier section on the cfta , on april 10 , 2008 , the house , citing insufficient communication between the president and congress , voted to change the trade promotion authority procedures putting consideration of the agreement on hold .

as a candidate , president barack obama raised questions about the cfta .

also see sections above on "andean counterdrug program" and "u.s. - colombia free trade agreement. .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely of isolating the communist nation through economic sanctions , which the bush administration has tightened significantly .

a second policy component has consisted of support measures for the cuban people , including private humanitarian donations and u.s. - sponsored radio and television broadcasting to cuba .

as in past years , the main issue for u.s. policy toward cuba in the 110 th congress was how to best support political and economic change in one of the world's remaining communist nations .

unlike past years , however , congress examined policy toward cuba in the context of fidel castro's departure from heading the government because of poor health .

raúl castro , who had served as provision head of government since july 2006 , was selected on february 24 , 2008 by cuba's legislature to continue in that role officially .

since fidel stepped down from power in 2006 , cuba's political succession from fidel to raúl castro has been characterized by a remarkable degree of stability .

since march 2008 , the government has implemented a number of economic changes that from the outside might not seem significant , but are substantial policy changes for a government that has heretofore followed a centralized communist economic model .

these have included lifting restrictions on the sales of consumer products such as computers , microwaves , and dvd and video players ; lifting restrictions on the sale and use of cell phones ; de - centralizing the agriculture sector in order to boost productivity ; and revamping salary structures in order to award workers who work hard with more compensation .

in addition , in march 2008 , the government lifted a ban on cubans staying at tourist hotels .

few cubans will be able to afford the cost of staying in such hotels , but the move is symbolically significant and ends the practice of what critics had dubbed "tourism apartheid. .

while additional economic changes under raúl castro are likely over the next year , few expect there will be any change to the government's tight control over the political system , which is backed up by a strong security apparatus .

in the first session of the 110 th congress , congress fully funded the administration's fy2008 request for $45.7 million for cuba democracy programs in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

in other first session action , on july 27 , 2007 , the house rejected h.amdt .

707 to h.r .

2419 , the 2007 farm bill , that would have facilitated the export of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

in the second session , the senate approved s.res .

573 on may 21 , 2008 , which recognized the struggle of the cuban people .

in both sessions , there were cuba provisions in several house and senate appropriations measures ( h.r .

2829 , h.r .

3161 , s. 1859 , h.r .

7323 , and s. 3260 ) that would have eased restrictions on travel and on u.s. agricultural sales to cuba , but none of these provisions were included in enacted measures .

numerous other legislative initiatives on cuba were introduced in the 110 th congress , but were not considered .

several of these initiatives would have eased sanctions: h.r .

177 ( educational travel ) ; h.r .

216 ( cuban baseball players ) ; h.r .

217 and h.r .

624 ( overall sanctions ) ; h.r .

654 , s. 554 , and s. 721 ( travel ) ; h.r .

757 ( family travel and remittances ) ; h.r .

1026 ( sale of u.s. agricultural products ) ; h.r .

2819 / s. 1673 ( sale of u.s. agricultural and medical products and travel ) ; and s. 1268 , s. 2953 , h.r .

3182 , and h.r .

3435 ( development of cuba's offshore oil ) .

s. 554 would have terminated u.s. - government sponsored television broadcasting to cuba .

several initiatives would have tightened sanctions: h.r .

525 ( related to u.s. fugitives in cuba ) , and h.r .

1679 / s. 876 and s. 2503 ( related to cuba's offshore oil development ) .

two initiatives , h.r .

1306 and s. 749 , would have amended a provision of law restricting the registration or enforcement of certain cuban trademarks ; five initiatives — h.r .

217 , h.r .

624 , h.r .

2819 , s. 1673 , and s. 1806 — would have repealed the trademark sanction .

h.r .

5627 and s. 2777 would have awarded the congressional gold medal to cuban political prisoner dr. oscar elias biscet .

h.res .

995 would have commemorated the 1996 shootdown of two u.s. civilian planes by cuba .

s. 3288 had a provision that would have funded u.s. work to establish anti - drug cooperation with cuba .

in the aftermath of hurricanes gustav and ike , several initiatives would have temporarily eased some u.s. economic sanctions on cuba: h.r .

6913 , h.r .

6962 , and s.amdt .

5581 to s. 3001 .

ecuador , a small , oil - producing country in the andean region of south america , has experienced a decade of severe political and economic instability .

on january 15 , 2007 , rafael correa , a left - leaning , u.s. - trained economist , was inaugurated to a four - year term , becoming the country's eighth president in ten years .

correa defeated alvaro noboa , a wealthy banana magnate , in a run - off election held in late november 2006 , with 57% of the vote as compared to noboa's 43% .

president correa has fulfilled his campaign pledge to call a constituent assembly to reform the country's constitution .

the assembly , which had a majority of delegates elected from correa's party , drafted a new constitution that was approved by 64% of voters in a referendum held in late september 2008 .

new presidential , legislative , and municipal elections are scheduled for april 26 , 2009 .

some observers are concerned that the new constitution concentrates too much power in the ecuadorian presidency .

ecuador's relations with the united states have traditionally been close , although recent events have strained bilateral relations .

negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement were suspended indefinitely in may 2006 following ecuador's decision to expel a u.s. oil company , occidental , from the country without compensation for an alleged breach of contract .

president correa opposes completing negotiations of a free trade agreement with the united states u.s. officials also have expressed concerns about president correa's populist tendencies , ties with hugo chávez of venezuela , and trade and energy policies .

despite those concerns , congress enacted legislation in october 2008 ( p.l .

110-436 ) to extend u.s. trade preferences for ecuador under the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) through june 2009 .

another major focus of u.s. interest in ecuador is on counternarcotics cooperation .

president correa has confirmed that his government will not renew the lease on the u.s. air base at manta , which is used for u.s. aerial counter - drug monitoring operations , when it expires in 2009 .

he has expressed reservations about any ecuadorian involvement in plan colombia and publicly opposed the colombian army's incursions into ecuadorian territory , including colombia's unauthorized march 2008 raid of a revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) camp in ecuador .

the united states provided ecuador with some $32 million in assistance to ecuador in fy2008 , while the fy2009 request for ecuador was for $32.5 million .

president alvaro colóm , of the center - left national union of hope ( une ) party , was sworn in for a four - year term on january 14 , 2008 .

he defeated the right - wing candidate , otto pérez molina of the patriot party ( pp ) , in run - off elections held november 4 , 2007 after no single candidate secured a majority of votes in the first round held on september 9 .

the election was deemed free and fair , with a significant increase in voting in rural areas , although the election campaigns were the most violent since 1985 .

no party won a majority in the 158-member national assembly .

in his first year in office , colóm successfully built coalitions to support his agenda , most notably passing a budget on the first reading that increased social development spending by an historic 32.6 % .

corruption investigations on both sides of the aisle sent the legislature into a serious crisis .

the legislative leader resigned , was suspended from une , and is now being prosecuted after being implicated in the transfer of legislature funds to a private firm .

the banking regulatory commission has accused opposition leader and former general pérez molina of involvement in siphoning of state funds .

pérez had already declared his intention to run for president in 2011 .

during his first year in office , colóm cited as achievements a $79.8 million rural development council for projects in the country's poorest 44 municipalities ; and a major drug interception and arrest of 36 alleged traffickers .

he also implemented a $200 million investment program supporting producers of basic grains , rural infrastructure , land reform , and housing projects .

perhaps the largest problem was a worsening of violence , much of it attributed to increased drug trafficking by mexican cartels through guatemala .

despite a reduction in the murder rate in colóm's first few months in office , by year's end the rate had increased by 8.3 % , and the attorney general noted an "alarming increase" in kidnappings .

in december 2008 and early january 2009 , colóm renewed efforts to address the violence , completely overhauling the military leadership and shuffling security - related positions in his cabinet .

critics voiced concern over the lack of a comprehensive policy to address gang - related issues and lack of progress in purging the police of corrupt officers .

addressing concerns that his economic policy was weak , colóm announced in may 2008 a 10-point program addressing the economic crisis generated by rising food prices .

the program's goals are to negotiate with the private sector to address inflation ; boost production by providing cooperatives and small producers with access to credit , and achieve economic stability .

given guatemala's widespread poverty , the food crisis hit the country particularly hard .

according to the un world food program , poverty increased from 2006 to 2007 , a three point rise resulting in 54% of the population living in poverty , and a five point rise resulting in 20.2% living in extreme poverty .

spending pressures for social programs helped colóm got a minor tax reform through congress in 2008 .

but further efforts to increase taxes in 2009 are expected to face opposition from the private sector and in congress .

under former president oscar berger's leadership ( 2004-2008 ) , the guatemalan economy experienced the highest growth rates since 1998 , up to an estimated 5.6% in 2007 .

this growth was attributed to increased remittances , high prices for guatemalan exports such as sugar and cardamom , and increased trade and investment .

guatemala's economic growth , remittances , and exports are all expected to diminish in 2009 as a result of the u.s. financial crisis .

in 2007 , the berger government secured passage of a law against organized crime and legislative approval for the united nations international commission against impunity in guatemala ( cicig ) to be established .

it also took a significant step in the implementation of reforms agreed upon in the 1996 peace accords by expanding voting to rural areas , thus incorporating millions of indigenous people into the political decision - making process .

amnesty international praised colóm's commitments to improve respect for human rights in guatemala , including ordering the opening of military archives related to past human rights violations , and his administration for cooperating with cicig .

the organization added that the human rights situation remains grave , however , as the country's weak judicial institutions prosecute only 2% of all crimes committed , human rights defenders continue to be attacked , and indigenous people continue to be marginalized economically and in other ways .

relations between the united states and guatemala traditionally have been close , but there has been friction at times over human rights and civil / military issues .

the mutual fight against narcotrafficking and the importance of trade relations are top bilateral issues .

congressional concerns regarding guatemala also focus on human rights , democracy , and u.s. immigration policy .

guatemala received $51.3 million of u.s. assistance in fy2007 , and received an estimated $62.9 million in fy2008 .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) stipulated that funding from the development assistance and global health and child survival accounts be made available for guatemala at no less than the amount allocated in fy2007 .

significantly , the act's joint explanatory statement recommended providing $500,000 in foreign military financing ( fmf ) pending department of state certification that certain human rights conditions had been met .

this was the first time guatemala had been eligible to receive fmf funding since 1990 .

requested funding for fy2009 is $62.3 million .

the fy2009 continuing resolution signed into law in september 2008 ( p.l .

110-329 ) continues funding at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009. international adoptions from guatemala have been a source of concern in bilateral relations .

guatemala implemented a new adoption law to comply with the hague convention on the protection of children and cooperation in respect of inter - country adoption , intended to prevent human trafficking .

effective january 1 , 2008 , the law transferred responsibility for adoptions from private agencies and attorneys to the usually slow guatemalan courts and a newly created national adoptions council , bringing u.s. adoptions almost to a standstill .

prior to the new process , guatemala was the biggest source for u.s. adoptions after china .

u.s. implementation of the hague convention began in april 2008 .

the united states is not processing new adoptions from guatemala because it still lacks the regulations and infrastructure needed to comply with all of the convention's requirements .

the new law permits the completion of adoption cases pending as of december 31 , 2007 , subject to an often lengthy review to ensure they are legal .

in other bilateral relations , guatemala and belize agreed in december 2008 to refer their border disputes for arbitration to the international court of justice , whose findings , however , will be dependent on a referendum in both countries .

president rené préval began his five - year term in may 2006 .

in his first year and a half , préval began to establish some stability .

he outlined the two main missions for his government as being to build institutions and to establish favorable conditions for private investment in order to create jobs .

in november 2007 , his administration published its poverty reduction strategy , a key step in meeting imf requirements for debt relief .

international donors pledged more than $1.5 billion in economic assistance to haiti .

with the support of the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , security conditions had improved and reform of the country's police force had begun .

president bush praised préval for his efforts to improve economic conditions and establish the rule of law in haiti .

préval pledged to cooperate with u.s. counternarcotics efforts .

haiti's fragile stability is repeatedly shaken , however , if not by political problems , then by climatic ones .

in april 2008 , a worsening food crisis led to violent protests and the removal of haiti's prime minister .

un officials said political opponents and armed gangs infiltrated the protests and fired at un peacekeepers in an effort to weaken the government .

without a prime minister , haiti could not sign certain agreements with foreign donors or implement programs to address the crisis for over four months .

parliament , having rejected préval's first two choices for prime minister , finally confirmed michele pierre - louis , a highly - regarded educator and economist who has worked on behalf of haitian poor and youths , in september .

they were spurred to act in part so that the government could respond to natural disasters: in late august and september , four major storms directly hit or passed close to haiti , causing widespread devastation .

the main priorities for u.s. policy regarding haiti during the 110 th congress were how to strengthen fragile democratic processes , continue to improve security , and promote economic development .

other concerns – likely to continue in the 111 th congress - - included the cost and effectiveness of u.s. aid ; protecting human rights ; combating narcotics , arms , and human trafficking ; addressing haitian migration ; and alleviating poverty .

some members expressed concern about the bush administration's october 2006 decision to lift partially the 15-year - old arms embargo against haiti in order to allow arms and equipment to be provided to haitian security units .

since haiti's priorities are many , and deeply intertwined , the haitian government and the international donor community are implementing an assistance strategy that attempts to address these many needs simultaneously .

the challenge is to accomplish short - term projects that will boost public and investor confidence , while also pursuing long - term development plans to improve living conditions for haiti's vast poor population .

the challenge is always made more daunting by developments such as rising food and gasoline prices world - wide , political crises , and natural disasters .

u.s. assistance for haiti in fy2007 totaled $225 million , and the estimated foreign assistance in fy2008 , not including emergency food and humanitarian aid , is $234.2 million .

among other provisions affecting aid to haiti , the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) stipulated that not less than $201.5 million in economic and military assistance be provided .

the administration's fy2008 request for haiti included $83 million to combat hiv / aids and $25.5 million for an integrated conflict mitigation program to target urban crime .

the bush administration contributed $45 million in emergency food aid in response to the april food crisis humanitarian assistance in response to the 2008 hurricanes was just under $31 million in fy2008 funds , and another $2.7 million in fy2009 funds .

the request for fy2009 is $245.9 million , including $92 million for hiv / aids ; $84 million in economic support funds ; $35.5 million in p.l .

480 food aid ; $17.4 million for child survival and health ; $15 million for international narcotics control and law enforcement ; and $0.22 million for international military education and training .

there was bipartisan support in the 110 th congress for support to haiti under the préval government .

responding to the food crisis and préval's earlier calls for increased u.s. investment in haiti , congress passed the second haitian hemispheric opportunity through partnership encouragement ( hope ) act as part of the 2008 farm bill in june 2008 ( title xv , p.l .

110-246 ) .

the law expands trade preferences for u.s. imports of haitian apparel first provided in the 2006 version of the hope act ( p.l .

109-432 , title v ) .

in april 2008 , the house unanimously passed an amendment to the jubilee act ( h.amdt .

993 to h.r .

2634 ) recommending immediate cancellation of haiti's outstanding debts to multilateral institutions , which constitute much of haiti's $1.7 billion foreign debt .

the united states and mexico have a close and complex bilateral relationship , with extensive economic linkages as neighbors and partners under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

bilateral relations are generally friendly , although the u.s. enactment of border fence legislation in 2006 caused some tension in the relationship .

drug trafficking issues are prominent in relations since mexico is the leading transit country for cocaine , a leading supplier of methamphetamine and heroin , and the leading foreign supplier of marijuana to the united states .

shortly after taking office in december 2006 , president felipe calderón of the conservative national action party ( pan ) launched operations against drug cartels in nine mexican states .

since early 2008 , he has sent thousands of soldiers and federal police to drug trafficking "hot - spots. .

calderón has increased extraditions to the united states , and has demonstrated an unprecedented willingness to reach out for counternarcotics assistance from the united states while also calling for increased u.s. efforts on arms trafficking and a reduction in the u.s. demand for illicit drugs .

the rivalries and turf wars among mexico's drug cartels fueled an increase in violence within the country , particularly along the southwest border region that the united states shares with mexico .

in an effort to control the most lucrative drug smuggling routes in mexico , rival drug cartels are launching attacks on each other , the mexican military , and police personnel .

this heightened violence is posing a serious challenge to mexico's security forces .

in october 2007 , the united states and mexico announced the mérida initiative to combat drug trafficking , gangs , and organized crime in mexico and central america .

the administration subsequently requested $500 million in fy2008 supplemental assistance and $450 million in its regular fy2009 budget request for mexico as part of a $1.4 billion multi - year aid package for the initiative .

in late june 2008 legislative action on mérida initiative in h.r .

2642 ( p.l .

110-252 ) , congress provided $400 million supplemental assistance in fy2008 and fy2009 for mexico , with not less than $73.5 million for judicial reform , institution - building , anti - corruption , and rule of law activities .

the measure provides $352 million in fy2008 supplemental assistance within the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and economic support funds ( esf ) accounts , and $48 million in fy2009 supplemental assistance within the incle account .

the measure has human rights conditions softer than compared to earlier house and senate versions , in large part because of mexico's objections that some of the conditions would violate its national sovereignty .

in the final version , human rights conditions require that 15% of incle and fmf assistance be withheld until the secretary of state reports in writing that mexico is taking action in four human rights areas .

the secretary of state , after consultation with mexican authorities , is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act of 1961 with regard to vetting to ensure that those receiving assistance have not been involved in human rights violations .

in other action , on june 10 , 2008 , the house approved authorization legislation for the mérida initiative , h.r .

6028 , that would authorize $1.6 billion over three years , fy2008-fy2010 , for both mexico and central america , $200 million more than originally proposed by president bush .

of that amount , $1.1 billion would be authorized for mexico , and $73.5 million for activities of the u.s. bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) to reduce the flow of illegal weapons from the united states to mexico .

among the bill's various conditions on providing the assistance , the measure requires that vetting procedures are in place to ensure that members or units of military or law enforcement agencies that may receive assistance have not been involved in human rights violations .

migration , border security , and trade issues also have dominated the bilateral relationship in recent years .

comprehensive immigration reform was debated early in the 110 th congress , but the issue was put aside following a failed cloture motion in the senate on the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 ( s. 1348 ) .

in september 2006 , congress approved the secure fence act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-367 ) to authorize the construction of a border fence and other barriers along 700 miles of the u.s. - mexico border .

since 1994 , nafta institutions have been functioning , trade between the countries has tripled , and allegations of violations of labor and environmental laws have been considered by the trilateral institutions .

the bush administration argues that nafta has had modest positive impacts on all three member countries , but mexican farmers have strongly criticized the effects of nafta .

notable bilateral trade disputes relate to trucking , tuna , sweeteners and anti - dumping measures .

in his first two years in office , president calderón secured approval of several major reforms , including fiscal and pension reforms in 2007 , and judicial and energy reforms in 2008 .

an unexpected challenge for calderón is the effect of the recent global financial crisis on the mexican economy , which already has led to a decline in the stock market and the value of the peso .

the credibility of president daniel ortega , inaugurated in january 2007 , is diminishing both within nicaragua and abroad , as questions arise about the lack of transparency in government finances , and actions that critics view as increasingly authoritarian .

charges of widespread fraud in november 2008 municipal elections have led to the suspension of significant international assistance .

the sandinista leader's previous presidency ( 1985-1991 ) was marked by a civil conflict with u.s. - backed "contras," authoritarian tendencies , and charges of corruption .

ortega , who had lost the last three presidential elections , won only 37.9% of the vote in the 2006 elections .

but a nicaraguan law — which ortega helped spearhead through the congress — allowed him to avoid a run - off vote because he was more than 5% ahead of the next closest candidate , eduardo montealegre , then - head of the nicaraguan liberal alliance ( aln ) .

the united states , the european union , and the international monetary fund ( imf ) have suspended international financial support because of the ortega government's "closure of democratic space. .

the sandinista - dominated electoral council ( cse ) revoked the legal status of two major opposition parties , the dissident sandinista reformist movement ( mrs ) and the center - right conservative party , which had been expected to do well in november 2008 municipal elections .

the opposition claims the sandinistas won 44 of their 105 municipalities fraudulently .

the government has refused to conduct a recount and swore in the new officials .

the cse's postponement of local elections on the atlantic coast , and further charges of fraud when they were held in january 2009 , led to riots .

ortega also established citizens power councils , despite the national assembly having voted against them .

the councils administer government anti - poverty programs , but are overseen by ortega's wife , rosario murillo and controlled by the sandinista party .

critics say they are another example of a lack of transparency and authoritarian practices .

it appears the sandinistas have renewed a governing pact with the liberal constitutional party ( plc ) .

on january 16 , 2009 , the supreme court overturned the money laundering conviction of plc leader and former president arnoldo aleman , who transparency international calls one of the ten most corrupt leaders of all time .

within two hours the national assembly – which had been paralyzed by the electoral conflict for over two months – reconvened and reelected a sandinista legislator as president of the assembly for another two years .

this effectively gives the sandinistas control over all four branches ( executive , legislative , judicial , and electoral ) of government .

the top u.s. foreign policy priorities in nicaragua are to strengthen democracy and governance , promote economic growth , and improve security .

in 2005 , the bush administration signed a five - year , $175 million agreement with nicaragua under the millennium challenge account ( mca ) to promote rural development .

at first , ortega walked a fine line , balancing strong anti - u.s. rhetoric with cooperation on issues of concern to the united states , such as the pursuit of free - trade policies ( including participation in cafta - dr ) , counter - narcotics efforts , and resolution of property claims .

in december 2008 , however , the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) suspended $64 million in new mca funds in response to the ortega administration's actions surrounding municipal elections , which the mcc board said "were not consistent with mcc requirements...that promote political freedom and respect for civil liberties and the rule of law. .

the board will consider whether nicaragua has implemented measures to address those concerns when it determines its next steps in march 2009 .

similarly , ortega's administration signed a poverty reduction strategy with the imf , providing for a three - year loan program .

now , however , the imf is withholding $39 million from nicaragua because the government failed to approve an "anti - fraud" energy law to regulate aid from venezuela , including funds generated by the re - sale of venezuelan oil bought on preferential terms , which amounts to hundreds of millions of dollars a year .

the imf said it will not sign a new agreement with nicaragua until the legislature passes legislation recognizing the debts owed to venezuela and regulating the use of the funds .

otherwise , donors and critics say , the venezuelan aid is basically a slush fund outside the national budget which the sandinistas can use for patronage , and which could leave future governments with an enormous debt .

the imf also expressed concern over the government's making loans to companies using government social security funds .

u.s. aid to nicaragua has fluctuated over the last several years , from $50 million in fy2006 , to $36.9 million in fy2007 , an estimated $28.6 million for fy2008 , and a requested $38 million for fy2009 .

the fy2009 continuing resolution signed into law in september 2008 ( p.l .

110-329 ) continues funding at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

there are areas of disagreement between the two countries .

u.s. officials have expressed concern over increasing ties between iran and nicaragua .

iran has pledged to invest in nicaragua's ports , agricultural sector , and energy network , as well as constructing houses for low - income nicaraguans , with venezuela co - financing many of these infrastructure projects .

nicaragua has joined mexico and other central american countries in criticizing u.s. inaction on comprehensive immigration reform .

other points of tension may occur if ortega continues to strengthen relations with venezuela or follow through with recent threats to re - nationalize components of the economy .

with four successive elected civilian governments , the central american nation of panama has made notable political and economic progress since the 1989 u.s. military intervention that ousted the regime of general manuel noriega from power .

the current president , martín torrijos of the democratic revolutionary party ( prd ) , was elected in may 2004 and inaugurated to a five - year term in september 2004 .

torrijos , the son of former populist leader general omar torrijos , won a decisive electoral victory with almost 48% of the vote in a four - man race .

torrijos' electoral alliance also won a majority of seats in the unicameral legislative assembly .

the most significant challenges facing the torrijos government have included dealing with the funding deficits of the country's social security fund ; developing plans for the expansion of the panama canal ; and combating unemployment and poverty .

in april 2006 , the government unveiled its ambitious plans to build a third lane and new set of locks that will double the canal's capacity .

in an october 2006 referendum on the issue , 78% of voters supported the expansion project , which officially began in september 2007 .

the new set of locks is estimated to be completed by 2014 .

panama's service - based economy has been booming in recent years , but income distribution remains highly skewed , with large disparities between the rich and poor .

because panama's constitution does not allow for presidential re - election , jockeying began in early 2008 for the may 2009 presidential election .

leading candidates include former government minister ricardo martinelli of the centrist democratic change ( cd ) party and former housing minister balbina herrera of the ruling prd .

the united states has close relations with panama , stemming in large part from the extensive linkages developed when the canal was under u.s. control and panama hosted major u.s. military installations .

the current relationship is characterized by extensive counternarcotics cooperation , assistance to help panama assure the security of the canal , and negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement ( fta ) .

the united states is providing an estimated $7.7 million in foreign aid fy2008 , and panama is expected to receive at least $2.9 million in fy2008 supplemental assistance under the mérida initiative .

for fy2009 , the administration requested $11.6 million in bilateral foreign aid , and panama would also receive a portion of mérida initiative for central america in fy2009 .

in june 2007 , the united states and panama signed a bilateral fta , which included enforceable labor and environmental provisions that had been agreed upon in a bipartisan deal between u.s. congressional leaders and the bush administration in may 2007 .

panama's legislative assembly overwhelmingly approved the agreement in july 2007 .

the u.s. congress had been likely to consider implementing legislation in the fall of 2007 , but the september 1 , 2007 election of pedro miguel gonzález to head panama's legislature for one year delayed consideration .

gonzález is wanted in the united states for his alleged role in the murder of a u.s. serviceman in panama in 1992 .

his term expired september 1 , 2008 , and gonzález did not stand for re - election .

the bush administration had wanted congress to consider ftas in the order that they were negotiated , which put the controversial fta with colombia ahead of panama .

the administration did not submitted implementing legislation to congress for the panama fta , and the 110 th congress did not taken up implementing legislation on its own , leaving any potential action for the next administration and the 111 th congress ( also see " u.s. - panama trade promotion agreement " above. ) .

president alan garcía was elected to a second , non - consecutive presidential term in june 2006 , defeating populist ollanta humala 53% to 47% .

since taking office for his five - year term , garcía has embraced a free trade agreement with the united states , appointed a fiscally conservative finance minister , and assured the international financial community that he is running the country as a moderate rather than as the leftist he had been in his early career .

garcía's earlier presidency ( 1985-1990 ) was marked by hyper - inflation and a violent guerrilla insurgency .

president garcía has continued the pro - market economic policies of his predecessor , alejandro toledo , who presided over one of the highest economic growth rates in latin america throughout his term .

peru's economy grew about 8% in 2007 .

rising inflation and reduced demand for peruvian products will temper economic growth to what the economic intelligence unit calls a "still robust 4.6%" in 2009 , adding that peru's sound public finances and cushion of foreign reserves can help offset damage from the global financial crisis .

garcía is seeking to use trade to reduce poverty in peru , which is concentrated in rural and jungle areas and among the indigenous population .

seven years of fast economic growth has reduced the percentage of peruvians living in poverty by about 3% .

weak institutional capacity hinders the implementation of poverty reduction programs , however , so that the economic growth has not improved living conditions for the half of the population still living in poverty .

the resulting popular frustration has led to growing social unrest .

human rights groups charge that the government is violating civil liberties by prohibiting legitimate protests .

garcia's administration pushed laws through congress that imposed strict regulations on non - governmental organizations' work in peru ; criminalized social protests ; and classified strikes as "extortion. .

local and international groups have also charged that garcia's trade agenda threatens the environment and the livelihoods of indigenous people , especially in the amazon region .

peru's government maintains that it is committed to holding government officials accountable for past abuses of power .

human rights lawyers have questioned the independence of the recently appointed heads of the supreme court and lima high court , however , noting that they have expressed views or taken action favorable to former president alberto fujimori ( 1990-2000 ) or his associates .

fujimori was extradited from chile on charges of corruption and human rights violations and his trial began in december 2007 .

if convicted , he faces 30 years in prison and a fine of $33 million .

that could cause garcía to lose the support of the fujimorista bloc in the peruvian congress , which he relies on to pass legislation .

fujimori's daughter keiko , who won a congressional seat in 2006 with more votes than any other candidate , launched a new party assumed to be a vehicle for a 2011 presidential bid and the release of her father .

corruption scandals have further eroded public confidence in the government .

in october 2008 , garcia dismissed 7 of the 17 members of his cabinet in the wake of a bribery scandal .

issues in u.s. - peruvian relations include democracy , human rights , environmental protection , and counternarcotics cooperation .

trade is currently at the forefront of the bilateral agenda .

a u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement ( ptpa ) was signed in april 2006 , ratified by both legislatures , and signed into u.s. law in december 2007 ( p.l .

110-138 ) .

garcia created an environment ministry in may 2008 to carry out environmental impact assessments of the agreement .

in october 2008 congress extended the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( p.l .

109-432 ) , continuing peru's trade preferences until december 31 , 2009 , while peru worked on intellectual property and environmental legislation needed before the superseding ptpa could go into effect .

on january 16 , 2008 , former president george w. bush issued a proclamation to implement the ptpa as of february 1 , 2009 .

the chairmen of the house ways and means committee and trade subcommittee expressed disappointment , saying that peru's legislation included "provisions inconsistent with their commitments," and that the u.s. trade representative should have resolved those issues prior to certification .

they added that they expect that the obama administration "will improve enforcement of trade agreements , including the use of the dispute settlement mechanism in the peru and other ftas. .

in june 2008 , peru and the united states signed a two - year , $35.6 million millennium challenge threshold program that supports peru's efforts to reduce corruption in public administration and improve immunization coverage .

in october 2008 , peru and the united states signed a debt - for - nature swap that reduces peru's debt to the united states by more than $25 million over the next seven years .

in exchange , peru promises to use those funds to support grants to protect its tropical forests .

peru is a major illicit drug - producing and transit country .

in april 2007 , president garcía announced a tough anti - drug policy , reaffirming his government's commitment to coca eradication , despite protests by coca growers .

the united states provided $136.2 million in foreign assistance to peru in fy2007 and an estimated $90.3 million in fy2008 .

the fy2008 request for peru was for $93.2 million , including $66.8 million in counternarcotics and economic support funds , with the most significant cuts occurring in counternarcotics funds traditionally provided through the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) .

the joint explanatory statement to the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) recommended providing counternarcotics funds at the level of the president's request .

the request for fy2009 ( not including peace corps funds ) is $103 million , including $37 million for the andean counterdrug program , and $53 million for development assistance ; the $13 million increase is mostly for increased alternative development programs , and support for the peru trade promotion agreement .

the fy2009 continuing resolution signed into law in september 2008 ( p.l .

110-329 ) continues funding at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

under the populist rule of president hugo chávez , first elected in 1998 and most recently reelected to a six - year term in december 2006 , venezuela has undergone enormous political changes , with a new constitution and unicameral legislature , and a new name for the country , the bolivarian republic of venezuela .

u.s. officials and human rights organizations have expressed concerns about the deterioration of democratic institutions and threats to freedom of expression under president chávez , who has survived several attempts to remove him from power .

the government has benefitted from the rise in world oil prices , which has sparked an economic boom and allowed chávez to increase expenditures on social programs associated with his populist agenda .

after he was reelected , chávez announced new measures to move the country toward socialism .

his may 2007 closure of a popular venezuelan television station ( rctv ) that was critical of the government sparked protests .

president chávez was dealt a setback in december 2007 when his proposed constitutional amendment package , which included the removal of presidential term limits , was defeated by a close margin in a national referendum .

state and local elections held in november 2008 were a mixed picture of support for the government .

while chávez supporters won the governorships of 17 out of 22 contested states , the opposition won contests in three of the most populous states as well as mayoral races in the largest cities of caracas and maracaibo .

a controversial constitutional referendum scheduled for february 15 , 2009 would abolish term limits .

the united states traditionally has had close relations with venezuela , the fourth major supplier of foreign oil to the united states , but there has been friction with the chávez government .

u.s. officials have expressed concerns about human rights , venezuela's military arms purchases , its relations with cuba and iran , and its efforts to export its brand of populism to other latin american countries .

declining cooperation on anti - drug and anti - terrorism efforts has also been a concern .

from , 2005-2008 , president bush annually designated venezuela as a country that had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics agreements , and since 2006 , the department of state has prohibited the sale of defense articles and services to venezuela because of lack of cooperation on anti - terrorism efforts .

on september 11 , 2008 , bilateral relations worsened when president chávez expelled the u.s .

ambassador to venezuela .

in the 110 th congress , congressional concerns regarding venezuela focused on the state of democracy and human rights , energy issues , terrorism issues , and the overall status of bilateral relations and u.s. policy .

the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere held an oversight hearing on venezuela on july 17 , 2008 focusing on u.s. policy and developments in venezuela .

in terms of legislative action in the 110 th congress , the senate and house approved resolutions on venezuela .

the senate approved s.res .

211 ( lugar ) on may 24 , 2007 , which expressed profound concerns regarding freedom of expression and venezuela's decision not to renew the license of rctv .

the house approved by voice vote h.res .

435 ( klein ) on november 5 , 2007 , which expressed "concern over the emerging national security implications of the iranian regime's efforts to expand its influence in latin america. .

among other provisions , the resolution noted venezuela's support for iran in the international atomic energy agency , plans for a $2 million iranian - venezuelan fund for investments in third countries , and the establishment of direct civilian airline flights from iran to venezuela .

also in the 110 th congress , the house approved two measures related to venezuela that ultimately were not enacted into law .

first , on june 21 , 2007 , the house approved by voice vote h.amdt .

358 ( mack ) to h.r .

2764 , the fy2008 state department and foreign operations appropriations bill , which would have directed $10 million in international broadcasting operations funding for targeted broadcasting for venezuela .

the house subsequently approved h.r .

2764 on june 22 , 2007 .

the senate version of the bill , approved september 6 , 2007 , did not include such a provision .

the final enacted measure , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 , division j ) , did not specify such funding , but the joint explanatory statement on the bill expresses support for restoring shortwave and medium wave transmission to venezuela .

second , on july 23 , 2008 , the house passed h.r .

6545 ( cazayouz ) by a vote of 414-0 , 2 present , which would have required a national intelligence assessment on national and energy security issues .

this would have included an assessment of "the implications of the potential use of energy resources as leverage against the united states by venezuela , iran , or other potential adversaries of the united states as a result of increased energy prices. .

the senate did not take action on the measure .

