on december 8 , 2006 , the house passed legislation ( 212-184 ) to grant vietnam permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status as part of a more comprehensive trade bill ( h.r .

6406 ) .

pursuant to h.res .

1100 , the bill was then coupled with a tax - extension bill ( h.r .

6111 ) and sent to the senate .

the senate passed the combined bills ( 79-9 ) on december 8 .

on december 20 , 2006 , president bush signed the bill into law ( p.l .

109-432 ) and , per the law , proclaimed pntr for vietnam on december 29 , 2006 .

the legislation also codified a provision of the u.s. - vietnam bilateral agreement on vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) authorizing the reimposition of quotas on imports of textiles or wearing apparel , if vietnam subsidizes those industries in violation of wto rules .

on november 7 , 2006 , vietnam completed the multilateral component of its wto membership bid when the wto general council approved vietnam's accession package , the core of which is a combination of all the bilateral agreements that vietnam negotiated .

on november 28 , 2006 , vietnam's national assembly ratified the deal .

this move puts vietnam on track to join the wto on january 11 , 2007 .

the united states was a major player in vietnam's accession process .

on may 31 , 2006 , u.s. and vietnamese negotiators signed an agreement on the conditions for vietnam's accession ( entry ) into the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the agreement was just one in a number of steps that vietnam had to take to complete its quest to join the multilateral trade body .

however , the agreement with the united states was the last and , seemingly , the most difficult of the bilateral agreements that vietnam had to negotiate with twenty - eight wto members ( including the european union ( eu ) counting as one but representing twenty - five countries ) .

u.s. - vietnam diplomatic and economic relations remained essentially frozen for more than a decade after communist north vietnam's victory over u.s. - backed south vietnam in 1975 .

relations took major steps forward in the mid - 1990s , particularly in 1995 , when the two sides re - established formal diplomatic relations .

since then , the normalization process has accelerated and bilateral ties have expanded , particularly on the economic side of the relationship .

the most important step toward normalization since 1995 was the signing of a sweeping bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) , which was approved by congress and signed by president bush in 2001 ( p.l .

107-052 ) under the bta , the united states and vietnam extended mutual mfn ( ntr ) to one another , that went into effect on december 10 , 2001 .

in return , hanoi agreed to a range of trade liberalization measures and market - oriented reforms .

the climate in trade relations between hanoi and washington has sobered considerably since the heady days after the bta was signed , in part because of difficult bilateral negotiations over the terms of vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) and anti - dumping duties the united states has leveled against imports of vietnamese shrimp and catfish .

"normal trade relations" ( ntr ) , or "most - favored - nation" ( mfn ) , trade status is used to denote nondiscriminatory treatment of a trading partner compared to that of other countries .

in practice , duties on the imports from a country that has been granted ntr status are set at lower rates than those from countries that do not receive such treatment .

thus , imports from a non - ntr country can be at a large price disadvantage compared with imports from ntr - status countries .

vietnam applied to join the wto on january 1 , 1995 .

vietnam is scheduled to officially join the wto on january 11 , 2007 .

the following sections provide an overview of the process that vietnam went through in order to accede ( join ) .

vietnam's accession to the wto arguably has been the focal point for the general improvement and deepening of u.s. - vietnam relations that has occurred over the past three to five years .

this trend was symbolized in june 2005 , when president bush hosted vietnamese prime minister phan van khai at the white house — the first trip to the united states by a vietnamese head of state — and the two spoke of their desire to move bilateral relations to "a higher plane. .

president bush also publicly backed vietnam's bid to join the wto .

a variety of economic , strategic , and historical factors have motivated the two countries to improve relations and obtain vietnam's membership in the wto .

as the debate over pntr for vietnam and discussion of vietnam's accession to the wto proceeded , a number of issues were raised .

because pntr and wto accession are ostensibly about trade , some of the debate centered on trade - related issues .

probably the most controversial issue was vietnam's exports of wearing apparel .

but the debate also touched on non - trade , non - economic issues .

on june 13 , 2006 , companion bills — s. 3495 ( baucus ) and h.r .

5602 ( ramstad ) — authorizing permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) for vietnam were introduced in the senate and the house .

on november 13 , 2006 , under suspension of the rules , the house voted 228-161 ( roll no .

519 ) in favor of h.r .

5602 but short of the two - thirds vote necessary for passage .

on december 7 , 2006 , rep. bill thomas introduced h.r .

6406 that combined vietnam pntr authorization with other trade measures , including: reauthorization of the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program ; reauthorization of the andean trade preferences ( atpa ) program ; reauthorization of textile - related provisions of the african growth and opportunities act ( agoa ) ; authorization of trade preferences for haiti , and a temporary suspension of duties on 500 products .

on december 8 , 2006 , the house passed h.r .

6406 ( 212-184 ) .

pursuant to h.res .

1100 , the bill was then coupled with a tax - extension bill ( h.r .

6111 ) and sent to the senate .

on december 9 ( legislative day december 8 ) the senate passed the combined bills ( 79-9 ) .

on december 20 , 2006 , president bush signed the bill into law ( p.l .

109-432 ) and , per the law , on december 29 , 2006 , proclaimed pntr for vietnam .

in the meantime , on november 7 , 2006 , vietnam completed the multilateral component of its wto membership bid when the wto general council approved vietnam's accession package , the core of which is a combination of all the bilateral agreements that vietnam negotiated .

on november 28 , 2006 , vietnam's national assembly ratified the deal .

vietnam is scheduled to officially join the wto on january 11 , 2007 .

appendix a. u.s. imports of apparel , top 10 countries of origin ( millions of dollars ) appendix b. u.s. imports from vietnam of selected apparel items ( millions of dollars , except where indicated ) .

