australia has become a more active global actor in recent years , and its strategic position has become more important as the globe's geopolitical center of gravity shifts to asia and the indo - pacific region .

while developments in the middle east and europe will continue to demand the attention of the united states and others , the potential for conflict in the indo - pacific region positions australia in an increasingly strategic corner of the globe .

australia , a traditionally staunch u.s. ally , strengthened its long - standing alliance with the united states under the obama administration .

this was demonstrated by former - australian prime minister tony abbott's october 2014 decision to send eight super hornet fighter / bomber aircraft , 200 special forces and 400 support troops to the united arab emirates to join the coalition forming to try to halt the advance of islamic state ( is ) militants in iraq .

former secretary of state hillary clinton stated the "ties between our two nations are as close as any in the world," while then - foreign minister rudd stated , "no one can overestimate the importance of the sharing of common values" when discussing the alliance .

the united states and australia share strategic interests in the indo - pacific region and globally and have worked closely together to promote their goals and objectives .

australia's worldview has traditionally viewed the united states as a force for good in the world and in australia's indo - pacific region .

there has traditionally been strong bipartisan elite and popular support in australia for bilateral defense cooperation with the united states .

australia ( see figure 1 ) was first inhabited from 40,000 to 60,000 years ago .

the aboriginal people of australia are the world's oldest continuous culture .

today , aboriginal and torres strait islanders people account for up to 2.5% of australia's total population .

while the aboriginal population were hunter - gatherers , they developed a complex spiritual "dreamtime" culture focusing on creation myths , rituals , laws , and connections to ancestors and the australian landscape .

captain james cook claimed australia for britain in 1770 , and in 1788 the first european settlement , largely made up of convicts , was established at sydney , new south wales .

australia evolved into a pastoral settler society based on sheep and wool , with the increasing importance of minerals following the gold rush of 1851 .

although the majority of australians have british or irish ancestry , australia's immigrants also came from elsewhere in europe , particularly after world war ii .

today , australian immigration is increasingly from asia , with asians accounting for approximately 7% of the population .

despite the centrality of the "bush" or the "outback" to the national myth , australia has evolved into an urbanized society , with 11% living in rural areas .

australia is slightly smaller than the contiguous lower 48 united states and has a population of approximately 23 million .

australia has for some time been undergoing a national identity debate related to its relationships with asia , in which it is geographically situated , and with britain , the united states , and europe , with which it has deep cultural and historical linkages .

the shift in the geostrategic dynamics of asia and relative decline of u.s. power brought on by the rise of china is leading australia to explore multilateral as well as other bilateral security relationships .

a lowy institute paper by rory medcalf and raja mohan observed that middle powers in asia — including australia , india , japan , and others — are looking beyond traditional approaches to security and expanding security cooperation with each other .

some observers view this as a reaction to the rise of china and indo - pacific regional states' uncertainty over america's future role in the region .

the two authors argue that such middle power ties could "build regional resilience against the vagaries of u.s. - china relations" and "reinforce the multipolar quality of the emerging indo - pacific order" while "encouraging continued u.s. engagement without unduly provoking china. .

such developments also mark change in the regional security architecture which has been grounded in the post - war san francisco "hub - and - spoke" system of u.s. alliances .

this shift towards increasing reliance by middle powers in asia on each other could build on and complement these states' ties with the united states .

the search for new security mechanisms in asia appears , in the view of some analysts , to mark a declining faith that economic interdependence and existing regional institutions will succeed in preventing regional conflict in the future .

this sentiment is also reflected in a regional arms race .

australia contributed to the international coalition against terrorism ( icat ) and sent rotations of special forces troops plus regular troops to iraq and afghanistan .

this support stems from australia's desire to support the united states and from a shared perspective on islamist extremist violence .

terrorist attacks against australians in indonesia did much to shape australia's perceptions of islamist threats in the post - 9 / 11 environment .

in 2002 , bombs decimated two crowded nightclubs full of foreign tourists in bali , indonesia , killing more than 200 foreigners and indonesians , and injuring over 300 .

there were 88 australians among the dead and 7 americans .

indonesian officials attributed the bombing to the militant islamic network jemaah islamiya ( ji ) , which had links to al qaeda .

ji also carried out an attack against the australian embassy in jakarta in 2004 and a second attack in bali in 2005 .

some within ji at that time reportedly set as their goal the establishment of an islamic state that would encompass indonesia , malaysia , the southern philippines , and northern australia .

australian and indonesian counterterror cooperation improved as a result of cooperation on the investigation into the bali blasts .

ji leader abu bakar bashir ( now imprisoned ) has announced his allegiance to the islamic state .

it is not clear just how much influence this pledge will have on islamist militants in indonesia .

there is concern that dozens of australians , and others from southeast asia , who have gone to fight with the islamic state ( is ) in syria and iraq may lead to future threats to australia and australians abroad .

australia has approximately half a million muslims out of a total population of approximately 23 million .

australia has enacted new security laws including enhanced data retention capabilities and has increased funding for intelligence agencies and police to help prevent terrorist attacks .

australian intelligence officials reportedly know of 30 australians who were suspected of going to afghanistan to fight or train during the conflict there .

approximately two - thirds of the 25 who returned to australia are known or thought to have become involved in terrorist activities in australia .

it is also estimated that there are "about 150 australia based individuals who are directly related in some way" and an additional 60 australians operating with either al - qaeda or the islamic state in syria or iraq .

there is also concern that is fighters from indonesia and elsewhere in southeast asia may follow the pattern of previous militants who were radicalized through fighting in afghanistan before returning to the region and resuming militant jihadist activities .

a 2014 estimate had about 150 southeast asians fighting with or supporting the islamic state in syria and iraq out of is's estimated 10,000 foreign fighters .

australia , the sixth largest country in the world , has a diverse and often fragile environment that includes rainforests , farming and pastoral land , expansive deserts , and the great barrier reef .

about 6% of the land is arable .

australia is the driest inhabited continent .

environmental challenges include introduced species , water quality , drought , wildfire , flooding , poor soil conservation , coral bleaching , and overfishing .

australia is an urban society , and 80% of australians live within 100 kilometers of the coast .

sixty - eight percent of the 2,700 introduced plants are considered a problem for natural ecosystems as are many of the introduced animals .

much of australia's flora and fauna are unique to australia .

one environmental priority for the government is the land care program .

over the period 2014-2018 the australian government is to invest a$1 billion to deliver biodiversity and sustainable agriculture outcomes that benefit australia's community and environment .

the landcare program seeks to address problems such as loss of vegetation , soil degradation , the introduction of pest weeds and animals , changes in water quality and flows , and changes in fire regimes .

a study by the australian csiro and the bureau of meteorology projected that australia will warm faster than the rest of the world and be subject to temperature rises of up to 5.1 degrees c by 2090 .

the study also found that: there will be more extreme droughts , with the length of droughts increasing by between 5% and 20%... .

rising temperatures will result in a "greater number of days with severe fire danger" ... soil moisture will fall by up to 15% in southern australia in the winter months by 2090 .

australia pledged to reduce emissions by 26% - 28% below 2005 levels by 2030 as part of its intended nationally determined contribution ( indc ) commitment to the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) at the 21st conference of the parties ( cop21 ) in paris in 2015 .

australia also has a target of reducing co 2 emissions 5% below 2000 levels by 2020 .

australia's co 2 emissions declined 12% from 2005 to 2015 .

australia's greenhouse gas emissions have been increasing since march 2015 .

emissions increased 1.1% in the year preceding march 2017 .

some reports point to "a clear trend of increasing greenhouse gas emissions since the carbon tax was repealed in 2014 — a trend that runs counter to australia's international commitments. .

over the period 2015 to 2020 australia's emissions are projected to grow further .

australia has identified likely increasing electricity demand , increasing transport activity , population growth , growth in the liquefied natural gas ( lng ) industry , and increasing numbers of livestock as key drivers of emissions .

in 2016 estimates for the period 2014-2015 , 63% of australia's electricity generation was from coal and 14% was from renewables while energy productivity and energy consumption both rose by 1% .

australia's energy exports also increased by approximately 5% over the same period .

australian net energy exports equaled around two - thirds of domestic energy production during the period .

in one 2017 report , close to 50% of australia's great barrier reef's coral was killed over the past two summers .

it has been asserted that global average temperatures would have to be kept to no more than a 1.2-degree rise in order to protect current reef biodiversity .

under the australian labor party's climate change action plan , a labor government , should it take office , would seek to build an emissions trading scheme and set a pollution reduction target of net zero emissions by 2050 .

labor has also pledged to achieve 45% emissions reductions on 2005 levels by 2030 .

labor's climate change action plan has six key components: make australia a leading renewable energy economy by ensuring that at least 50% of the nation's electricity is sourced from renewable energy by 2030 .

cleaner power generation : transition from coal to renewable based electricity generation .

bui ld jobs and industry through creation of a strategic industries reserve fund .

cut pollution through an emissions trading scheme with caps and offsets .

c apture carbon on the l and through a carbon farming initiative , carbon storage on the land and deal with broad scale land clearing .

increased energy efficiency by doubling australia's energy productivity and implement new emissions standards for motor vehicles .

labor has criticized the liberal abbott and turnbull governments' policies toward renewable energy .

according to the labor party , the liberal government has done everything in its power to try and destroy australia's share in one of the world's fastest growing industries with devastating consequences for our country .

in the last two years more than two million renewable energy jobs were added to the global economy , but over the same period 2,900 jobs were lost in australia .

the labor party stresses the need for australia to position itself to leverage jobs and economic opportunities related to expanding renewable investment in the asia - pacific region .

australia has gone 26 years without a recession .

despite this record , australia's economy is slowing with year - on - year growth of 1.7% , the slowest since 2009 , estimated for 2017 .

australia's economy is "undergoing structural change as the mining investment boom , which peaked in 2012 , unwinds. .

mining , construction and finance have contributed much to australia's economic growth in recent years while manufacturing has been in decline .

much of australia's wealth is derived from the fact that australia has 19% of the world's total known mineral wealth with 0.3% of the world's population .

the housing market is another key sector of australia's economy .

efforts have been made to diversify the economy in the areas of education , tourism and health services .

australia's economy has to a large extent been dependent on world prices for natural resources , such as iron ore , coal and liquefied natural gas .

some view the australian dollar as a "liquid proxy" for china .

over the past decade australia - china trade has increased dramatically .

china became australia's largest trade partner in 2009 , taking over 30% of australian exports .

in november 2017 , australia , along with the other members of the trans pacific partnership tpp - 11 group , agreed to "core elements" as they continue to work towards a new free trade agreement .

president trump withdrew from the tpp agreement in january 2017 .

