after the new york times reported that the national security agency ( nsa ) was conducting a secret terrorist surveillance program ( tsp ) , a national debate emerged about whether the program was subject to the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) , whether the administration needed additional authority to continue the program , and how and whether congress should oversee the program .

the tsp involved surveillance without a warrant or court order under the fisa of international communications of persons within the united states , where one party to the communication is believed to be a member of al qaeda , affiliated with al qaeda , a member of an organization affiliated with al qaeda , or working in support of al qaeda .

the bush administration asserted constitutional and statutory support for its program .

the foreign intelligence surveillance act , p.l .

95-511 , title i , october 25 , 1978 , 92 stat .

1796 , codified at 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 et seq .

 , as amended , provides a statutory framework for the use of electronic surveillance , physical searches , pen registers and trap and trace devices to acquire foreign intelligence information .

it also provides statutory authority for the production of tangible things for an investigation to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a united states person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities .

while describing electronic surveillance under fisa as a valuable tool in combating terrorism , the bush administration argued that it lacked the speed and agility to deal with such terrorists or terrorist groups .

in a january 17 , 2007 , letter to chairman leahy and senator specter of the senate judiciary committee , attorney general gonzales advised them that , on january 10 , 2007 , a foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) judge "issued orders authorizing the government to target for collection international communications into or out of the united states where there is probable cause to believe that one of the communicants is a member or agent of al qaeda or an associated terrorist organization. .

the attorney general stated that , in light of these orders , which "will allow the necessary speed and agility," all surveillance previously occurring under the tsp will now be conducted subject to the approval of the fisc .

he indicated further that , under these circumstances , the president has determined not to reauthorize the tsp when the current authorization expires .

the attorney general also noted that the intelligence committees had been briefed on the highly classified details of the fisc orders and advised chairman leahy and senator specter that he had directed the acting assistant attorney general for the office of legal counsel and the assistant attorney general for national security to provide them a classified briefing on the details of the orders .

the nsa program has been challenged on legal and constitutional grounds .

on august 17 , 2006 , in one such lawsuit , american civil liberties union v. national security agency , case no .

06-cv - 10204 ( e.d .

mich. august 17 , 2006 ) , u.s. district court judge anna diggs taylor held the program unconstitutional on the ground that it violated the administrative procedures act , the separation of powers doctrine , the first and fourth amendments of the u.s. constitution , the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) , and title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act ( title iii ) , and permanently enjoined the terrorist surveillance program .

the decision has been appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit .

on october 4 , 2006 , the sixth circuit stayed judge taylor's august 17 , 2006 , judgment and permanent injunction pending appeal , american civil liberties union v. national security agency , docket nos .

06-2140 and 06-2095 ( 6 th cir .

oct. 4 , 2006 ) .

the docket sheets for both docket nos .

06-2140 and 06-2095 indicate that a letter from the attorneys for the appellants was filed on january 18 , 2007 , notifying the court "concerning a letter from the attorney general's office regarding orders issued by the foreign intelligence surveillance court. .

several bills were introduced in the 109 th congress to amend the foreign intelligence surveillance act and to address concerns raised with respect to the terrorist surveillance program .

one of these bills , the electronic surveillance modernization act , h.r .

5825 , 109 th congress , was introduced on july 18 , 2006 , and passed the house on september 28 , 2006 .

the measure was designed to provide increased flexibility in authorizing electronic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information , while requiring increased reporting and affording congress additional oversight over such activities .

the 110 th congress may choose to explore similar or different approaches to the issues related to the tsp , or may choose to forego legislative action in light of the new fisc orders and the anticipated termination of the tsp at the conclusion of its current authorization , while continuing congressional oversight of these issues .

this report summarizes the provisions of h.r .

5825 , as passed by the house of representatives in the 109 th congress , and discusses the impact of its provisions , were similar legislation to be enacted , on current law .

the sections of the bill are addressed in the order in which they appear in the bill .

sec .

2 of the bill amends several of the current definitions in the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) .

sec .

4 of h.r .

5825 amends section 103 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1803 , to add a new subsection 103 ( g ) providing that applications for an fisc order authorizing electronic surveillance under title 1 of fisa are only authorized if the president , in a written authorization , has empowered the attorney general to approve such applications .

under the proposed language , notwithstanding any other law , a judge to whom such an application is made may grant an order in conformity with section 105 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 , approving electronic surveillance of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power to obtain foreign intelligence information .

sec .

5 of h.r .

5825 amends some of the requirements for applications for court orders for electronic surveillance under section 104 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1804 .

as amended by sec .

5 of h.r .

5825 , such an application must contain , among other requirements: a summary description of the nature of the information sought and the type of communications or activities to be subjected to the electronic surveillance ; and a certification or certifications by the assistant to the president for national security affairs or an executive branch official or officials designated by the president to authorize electronic surveillance for foreign intelligence purposes ( a ) that the certifying official deems the information sought to be foreign intelligence information , ( b ) that a significant purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligence information , ( c ) that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investigative techniques , and ( d ) including a statement of the basis for the certification that the information sought is the type of foreign intelligence information designated and that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investigative techniques .

as amended by sec .

5 of the bill , such an application for a fisc order would also include a summary statement of the means by which the surveillance will be effected and a statement whether physical entry is required to effect the surveillance ; and a summary statement of the facts concerning all previous applications that have been made to any judge under this subchapter involving any of the persons , facilities , or places specified in the application , and the action taken on each previous application .

in addition , sec .

5 of h.r .

5825 would require the application to contain a statement of the period of time for which the electronic surveillance is required to be maintained , and , if the nature of the intelligence gathering is such that the approval of the use of electronic surveillance under this subchapter should not automatically terminate when the described type of information has first been obtained , a description of facts supporting the belief that additional information of the same type will be obtained thereafter .

current subsections 104 ( c ) through ( e ) would be redesignated subsections 104 ( b ) through ( d ) by sec .

5 ( 3 ) of h.r .

5825 .

current subsection 104 ( e ) , redesignated subsection 104 ( d ) by sec .

5 ( 3 ) of h.r .

5825 , directs the attorney general , upon request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation , the secretary of defense , the secretary of state , or the director of national intelligence , to personally review applications for a fisc order authorizing electronic surveillance under subsection 104 ( a ) of a target who acts in the united states as an officer or employee of a foreign power , or as a member of a of a foreign power as defined in subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) of this section ( that is , a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor ) .

sec .

5 ( 4 ) of h.r .

5825 would expand the list of those whose request may trigger such personal review by the attorney general to include the director of the central intelligence agency .

sec .

6 of h.r .

5825 amends section 105 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 , dealing with the requirements for issuance of a fisc order for electronic surveillance .

sec .

7 of the bill would amend subsection 106 ( i ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1806 ( i ) , which deals with the destruction of information unintentionally acquired by an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device .

the current provision covers such unintentional acquisition of the contents of any radio communication , under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and an warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes , where the sender and all intended recipients are located within the united states .

under the current provision , the contents must be destroyed upon recognition , unless the attorney general determines that the contents indicate a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person .

as amended by the bill , the provision covers such unintentionally acquired information from the contents of any communication , rather than being limited to the contents of radio communications .

the new provision would permit retention of such unintentionally acquired information if the attorney general determines that the contents contain significant foreign intelligence information or indicate a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person .

sec .

8 of h.r .

5825 makes several amendments to current congressional oversight provisions in section 108 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1808 , and in the national security act of 1947 , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 401 et seq .

section 108 ( a ) ( 1 ) requires the attorney general , on a semiannual basis , to fully inform the house permanent select committee on intelligence , the senate select committee on intelligence , and the senate judiciary committee concerning all electronic surveillance under title i of fisa .

subsection 108 ( a ) ( 1 ) further provides that nothing in title i of fisa shall be deemed to limit the authority and responsibility of the appropriate committees of each house of congress to obtain such information as they may need to carry out their respective functions and duties .

subsection 108 ( a ) ( 2 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1808 ( a ) ( 2 ) sets out specific requirements for the contents of such reports .

the amendment in sec .

8 of the bill would add an additional requirement that the report include the authority under which the electronic surveillance is conducted .

under current subsection 108 ( 1 ) ( b ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1808 ( 1 ) ( b ) , on or before one year after october 25 , 1978 , and on the same day each year for four years thereafter , the permanent select committee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence shall report respectively to the house of representatives and the senate , concerning the implementation of this chapter .

said reports shall include but not be limited to an analysis and recommendations concerning whether [fisa] should be ( 1 ) amended , ( 2 ) repealed , or ( 3 ) permitted to continue in effect without amendment .

this subsection would be repealed by the bill and replaced with a new subsection 108 ( 1 ) ( b ) , which would require the attorney general , on a semiannual basis , also to "fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate on electronic surveillance conducted without a court order. .

sec .

8 ( b ) ( 1 ) of h.r .

5825 amends the national security act of 1947 , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 401 et seq . , to redesignate subsection 501 ( f ) , 50 u.s.c .

§ 413 ( f ) , as subsection 501 ( g ) and to add a new subsection 501 ( f ) which would provide that the chair , in consultation with the respective ranking member , of each of the congressional intelligence committees , may inform , on a bipartisan basis , all members , or any individual members of such committee , and any essential committee staff , of a report submitted under subsection 501 ( a ) ( 1 ) or ( b ) , 50 u.s.c .

§§ 413 ( a ) ( 1 ) or ( b ) , as such chair considers necessary .

sec.8 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the bill amends section 502 of the national security act of 1947 , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 413a , which provides reporting requirements for intelligence activities , other than covert actions , which are the responsibility of , are engaged in by , or are carried out for or on behalf of , any department , agency , or entity of the u.s. government , including any significant anticipated intelligence activity and any significant intelligence failure .

sec .

8 ( b ) ( 2 ) of h.r .

5825 would add a new subsection 502 ( d ) , which would provide that the chair , in consultation with the respective ranking member , of each of the congressional intelligence committees , may inform , on a bipartisan basis , all members , or any individual members of such committee , and any essential committee staff , of a report submitted under subsection 502 ( a ) , 50 u.s.c .

§§ 413a ( a ) , as such chair considers necessary .

subsection 8 ( b ) ( 3 ) of h.r .

5825 would amend section 503 of the national security act of 1947 , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 413b , which deals with presidential approval and reporting of covert actions , to add a new subsection 503 ( g ) .

the new subsection would provide that the chair , in consultation with the respective ranking member , of each of the congressional intelligence committees , may inform , on a bipartisan basis , all members , or any individual members of such committee , and any essential committee staff , of a report submitted under subsection 503 ( b ) , ( c ) , or ( d ) , as such chair considers necessary .

this section of the bill limits liability for a set period of time for those who assist the government between september 11 , 2001 and 60 days after enactment of the bill , while acting in compliance with fisc orders or antiterrorism programs .

sec .

10 ( a ) states: ( a ) in general - notwithstanding any other provision of law , and in addition to the immunities , privileges , and defenses provided by any other provision of law , no action , claim , or proceeding shall lie or be maintained in any court , and no penalty , sanction , or other form of remedy or relief shall be imposed by any court or any other body , against any person for an activity arising from or relating to the provision to an element of the intelligence community of any information ( including records or other information pertaining to a customer ) , facilities , or assistance during the period of time beginning on september 11 , 2001 , and ending on the date that is 60 days after the date of the enactment of this act , in connection with any alleged communications intelligence program that the attorney general or a designee of the attorney general certifies , in a manner consistent with the protection of state secrets , is , was , or would be intended to protect the united states from a terrorist attack .

this section shall apply to all actions , claims , or proceedings pending on or after the effective date of this act .

subsection 10 ( b ) would make any action , claim , or proceeding described in subsection 10 ( a ) that is brought in a state court removable to federal court under 28 u.s.c .

§ 1441 as arising under the constitution and laws of the united states .

sec .

11 ( a ) of the bill requires , within two years of enactment of the measure , and annually thereafter until december 31 , 2009 , submission of a report to the house permanent select committee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence by the director of the national security agency , in consultation with the director of national intelligence and the attorney general , on the effectiveness and use of minimization procedures applied to information concerning united states persons acquired during the course of a communications activity conducted by the national security agency .

subsection 11 ( b ) provides that such reports must include a description of the implementation , during the course of communications intelligence activities conducted by the national security agency , of procedures established to minimize the acquisition , retention , and dissemination of nonpublicly available information concerning united states persons ; the number of significant violations , if any , of such minimization procedures during the 18 months following the effective date of this act ; and summary descriptions of such violations .

under subsection 11 ( c ) of the bill , information concerning united states persons should not be retained solely for the purpose of complying with the reporting requirements of this section .

sec .

14 of h.r .

5825 would add a new section 113 to the end of title i of fisa providing for authorization of electronic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information for up to 90 days without a court order based upon a presidential determination that an imminent threat exists of attack likely to cause death , serious injury , or substantial economic damage to the united states .

notification to the congressional leadership and the congressional intelligence committees and to the fisc would be required .

subsequent extensions for up to 90 days at a time based upon new certifications would be possible .

it would also make conforming amendments to the table of contents of fisa .

sec .

15 makes a number of technical and conforming amendments to fisa , all of which are related to changes discussed earlier .

section 105 ( a ) ( 4 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 ( a ) ( 4 ) is amended to replace "104 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( e ) " with "104 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( d ) " and to replace "104 ( d ) with "104 ( c ) ," both changes reflecting redesignation of the affected sections under sec .

6 ( 1 ) ( b ) of h.r .

5825 .

in section 106 ( j ) of fisa , in the matter preceding paragraph ( 1 ) , "105 ( d ) " would be replaced with "105 ( e ) ," reflecting changes made by sec .

6 ( 3 ) of h.r .

5825 .

finally , "105 ( f ) " would be replaced with "105 ( e ) " in section 108 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1808 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) , to make the latter consistent with redesignation of specific subsections in section 105 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 , by sec .

6 ( 3 ) of the bill .

