on any given day , more than 400,000 children are in foster care due to incidents of abuse , neglect , or other reasons that prevented them from remaining with their parents .

of these children and youth , some 6% received supplemental security income ( ssi ) under title xvi of the social security act or another social security benefit ( eg , survivors benefits ) under title ii of that act .

among the 28,000 youth who were discharged from foster care during fy2010 because of their age rather than because of placement in a permanent family ( i.e. , they "aged out" or were "emancipated" ) , some 9.5% ( 2,700 ) were receiving ssi or survivors benefits at the time of their exit from care .

the social security administration ( ssa ) may designate a government entity as the representative payee of a foster child if the child's custodial or non - custodial parents , guardians , relatives , stepparents , or a close friend are not available to serve in that role .

as the representative payee , the state ( like any other representative payee ) is required to manage the child's benefits and to use the benefits for the current maintenance ( food , clothing , shelter , medical care , and personal comfort items ) of the child .

nearly all states use ssi and / or other social security benefits to pay for foster care .

thirty - eight states and the district of columbia reported on their use of these benefits in state fy2006 , and these benefits totaled $156.6 million .

in recent years , some child welfare advocates have legally challenged the practice of using foster children's ssi and other social security benefits to reimburse states for the cost of providing their foster care .

the most prominent case , washington state department of social and health services v. guardianship estate of keffeler , reached the u.s. supreme court , which , in 2003 , upheld this practice .

nonetheless , the keffeler decision raised questions about the federal government's role in regulating the use of social security and ssi payments to fund foster care , and some advocates remain concerned about the use of these benefits .

this report begins with a discussion of the foster care system and the social security benefits available to eligible children , including those in foster care .

it then describes the role of representative payees and their responsibilities .

the report provides data on the use of social security benefits to reimburse states for child welfare , and includes a discussion of the keffeler decision .

finally , the report concludes with proposals supported by some advocates to change the current practice of using ssi and other social security benefits to fund foster care .

children in foster care are children for whom a state ( or tribe ) has been given formal responsibility for a child's care and placement by a court or by a voluntary placement agreement between the state and a child's parent or legal guardian .

foster care is the round - the - clock care of a child outside the child's home and is typically necessary because of neglect or physical abuse of the child by his or her parents or , less commonly , due to child behavioral issues that make the home unsafe for the child .

children who are removed from their homes may be placed in foster family homes , institutions , or group homes by the state child welfare agency .

this section discusses how state child welfare agencies use federal and state dollars to pay for children in care , and how child welfare agencies provide assistance to children likely to emancipate or "age - out" of foster care .

titles ii and xvi of the social security act provide two types of benefits for children , including those in foster care , who meet certain qualifications .

social security benefits ( formally called old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefits ) are authorized under title ii of the act .

social security benefits may be paid to the children of workers who have retired , become disabled , or died .

these benefits are paid out of the social security trust funds .

ssi benefits are authorized under title xvi of the social security act and are available for certain children with disabilities if their families have low incomes and minimal assets .

ssi benefits are paid out of general revenues .

most states supplement the monthly ssi benefit with state or territorial funds .

table 1 shows the number of children who receive ssi and other social security benefits , as well as the total amount of monthly federal and state supplementary benefits paid to these children .

in recent years , some child welfare advocates have legally challenged states' practice of using foster children's ssi and title ii benefits to reimburse the cost of providing foster care to those children .

the most prominent case , washington state department of social and health services v. guardianship estate of keffeler , reached the u.s. supreme court in 2002 .

the supreme court ruled unanimously ( in 2003 ) that the state of washington could , as the representative payee for a foster child receiving social security or ssi benefits , use the child's benefits to reimburse itself for the cost of that child's foster care .

this case reached the u.s. supreme court on the appeal of the state of washington , which was seeking to overturn the previous ruling of the washington state supreme court ( discussed below ) .

the keffeler decision affirmed the right of states ( under current law ) to both act as representative payees for children in foster care who are recipients of federal social security and ssi benefits and further to use those benefits to reimburse the cost of foster care .

state child welfare agencies and many child welfare advocates applauded the decision ; other advocates remain concerned that the practice of states using foster children's ssi or social security benefits to pay for foster care does not serve these children's best interests .

the decision of the supreme court in 2003 upholds states' use of ssi and social security benefits for reimbursement of current maintenance for children in foster care .

federally enforceable changes to this practice would require congressional action .

policy changes might include screening children in foster care to determine eligibility for ssi or title ii benefits , passing through some of the benefits to foster children who receive such benefits , making best effort attempts to find alternative representative payees , increasing the asset limit for youth who receive ssi , and enabling youth in foster care to apply for ssi benefits before aging out of care .

policymakers could consider whether to require states to automatically screen children in care .

as discussed above , all ( 44 ) states that responded to a 2011 survey reported that they routinely screen children in care for ssi benefits .

screening for benefits can be useful for state child welfare agencies if , in fact , states seek to use those funds for reimbursing the cost of providing foster care .

children in foster care may also gain from screenings because presumably , the child welfare agency would go on to help the child apply for benefits and appeal any decisions regarding the benefits .

for children who receive benefits , they would continue to receive the benefits even after leaving care ( assuming they are under the age of 18 ) , and upon reaching the age of 18 , ssa would automatically review their cases to determine if they meet the ssi disability standard for adults .

receipt of ssi can also be beneficial because most recipients are automatically eligible for certain other federal ( and state ) benefits , including medicaid .

bills in the past two congresses , the reconnecting youth to prevent homelessness act of 2011 ( s. 961 , 112 th congress ) and the foster children self - support act ( h.r .

6192 , 111 th congress ) , would require the state child welfare agency , as a condition of receiving federal foster care funding , to develop and implement procedures to screen all children in care ( regardless of their eligibility for title iv - e foster care ) for ssi benefits or other social security benefits under title ii and to assist such children in applying for the benefits .

the bills would direct the agency to ensure that the screenings occur for each child who remained in foster care for six to eight months ( and h.r .

6192 would also require screenings after "any material change" in the child's circumstances that could affect their eligibility for such benefits ) .

the agency would be responsible for appealing decisions about the benefits and applying to become the representative payee if no other suitable candidate was available ( the bills do not address how the state would make this determination , although they would require the government accountability office to study how the state implemented procedures to identify other candidates , among other related procedures ) .

requiring such screenings could impose a cost burden on states ( particularly for those that do not already routinely screen children in care ) and the federal government .

the costs for screening children who are not iv - e eligible would be borne entirely by the state .

because the screenings would be required under title iv - e , state child welfare agencies could seek open - ended federal reimbursement for any costs they incur for screening iv - e eligible children for ssi or other social security act benefits .

in either case , however , actual eligibility determinations would be made by the federal social security administration .

if the screenings resulted in more children applying for benefits , ssa may need to designate more staff for eligibility determinations .

congress could permit or require states that act as representative payees to "pass through" some or all of the ssi and title ii benefits to eligible foster children and those children could receive a portion of the benefits while in care and / or upon leaving care .

such a proposal might include a maximum amount of money available to eligible youth .

for example , a maximum level could be established at $2,000 because children receiving ssi are not permitted under current law to accumulate more than that amount .

a california law ( a.b .

1633 ) requires the state to consider the feasibility and cost - effectiveness of reserving an amount up to $2,000 to assist youth as they "age out" of foster care .

the law requires that counties serving as representative payees establish a no - cost , interest - bearing maintenance account , with the county maintaining an itemized current account of all income and expense items .

the counties must establish procedures for dispensing money from the account to pay for expenditures that are used by , and for the benefit of , the child , and for purposes determined by the county to be in the child's best interests .

procedures must also be established for disbursing any balance when the youth is released from care .

the reconnecting youth to prevent homelessness act of 2011 ( s. 961 , 112 th congress ) and foster children self - support act ( h.r .

6192 , 111 th congress ) would require states , for any foster child receiving an ssi or other social security act benefit ( under title ii ) , to develop a plan specific to the needs of that child and that would conserve benefits not necessary for the immediate needs of the child to enable the child to "achieve self - support after leaving foster care. .

the plan would be developed and implemented in collaboration with the child ( on an age - appropriate basis ) , and the child's social worker , representative payee , and attorney / guardian ad litem .

the benefits would be placed in an account that is similar to one required for children who receive ssi benefits if there are any past - due monthly benefits or in an account established by the state under the chafee foster care independence program .

the benefits would be reserved ( except for certain expenses ) for specific purposes when the child reaches age 18 or ceases to be under the responsibility of the state , whichever comes later .

any assets set aside could be accessible to the child for expenses related to maintaining housing , pursuing educational opportunities , purchasing a vehicle , and paying for employment - related costs , medical or health - related expenses , or expenses "reasonably expected" to assist the child in becoming self sufficient .

the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program provides an example of how federal legislation could make more social security and ssi benefits available to beneficiaries in foster care .

under current law , as amended by the child support provision of the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) , families that participate in tanf must assign their child support rights to the state .

child support payments collected by the state ( from non - custodial parents ) on behalf of these tanf families are used by the state and federal governments as partial reimbursement for the welfare benefits that are provided to the family in much the same way as social security and ssi benefits are used to reimburse state governments for child welfare spending .

with respect to tanf families , states may choose to pass through some of their share of child support payments collected on behalf of the families ( up to $100 per family per month or $200 per month if the family has two or more children ) to the family .

currently , 24 states provide some sort of pass through of child support payments for families receiving tanf .

this type of federal initiative , used for social security and ssi benefits , could result in children in foster care receiving part of those benefits instead of the benefits being kept by the states as reimbursement for foster care expenses .

however , such a program would result in costs to the states .

child support enforcement is a federal - state program , authorized under title iv - d of the social security act , which collects payments from non - custodial parents for the support of their children .

unlike tanf , the program requires states to use the payments only to reimburse the cost of providing foster care to children who receive the payments .

however , a proposal by the obama administration , discussed below , would require states to pass the benefits through to eligible children in foster care .

states are required under the title iv - e foster care program to , "where appropriate," take all steps necessary to ensure that the rights to any child support payments of a foster child who receives a title iv - e foster care maintenance payment are assigned to the state .

rules for the distribution of any child support collected on behalf of a child eligible for title iv - e foster care maintenance payments are included in title iv - d. any support payments received must first be used to reimburse the state for the cost of a foster care maintenance payment .

however , the state must also use that money to reimburse the federal government for its share of the foster care payment .

if the monthly child support payment exceeds the amount needed to reimburse the monthly foster care maintenance payment , then the additional funds are to be paid to the state child welfare agency , which must use the funds "in the manner it determines will serve the best interests of the child. .

the statute suggests that this might include "setting aside amounts for the child's future needs or making all or part of the amount available to the person responsible for meeting the child's daily needs to be used for the child's benefit. .

third , if any amounts collected exceed these first two required distributions , the remaining amount is again to be distributed to the state for reimbursement ( to the state and the federal government ) of any past foster care maintenance payments ( or temporary assistance for needy families support ) provided on the child's behalf .

the office of child support enforcement , within the department of health and human services' administration for children and families , reported that for fy2009 ( the most recent year data are available ) , $90.9 million in child support was collected on behalf of children in foster care who receive title iv - e foster care maintenance payments ( as well as children who formerly received title iv - e foster care maintenance payments ) .

separately , and for that same fiscal year , state child welfare agencies reported that they collected $69 million in child support payments on behalf of children who were receiving title iv - e foster care maintenance payments and that they returned $39 million of those child support collections to the federal government as reimbursement for title iv - e foster care maintenance payments .

under current law , states are required to return to the federal government a part of the child support collected on behalf of children who receive federal ( title iv - e ) supported foster care maintenance payments , and states may use the remaining funds collected to reimburse their part of the cost of those payments .

as part of the fy2013 budget , the obama administration seeks legislation to require that states use those child support payments in the best interest of the children for whom they are made rather than as general revenue for the state or to reimburse the federal government for a part of its cost of providing this support .

 ( this proposal was also included in the president's fy2012 budget. ) .

because this legislative proposal would end federal "cost recovery" of title iv - e foster care maintenance payments , it was estimated to increase the federal cost of foster care by $2 million in fy2013 — the first year proposed for implementation of this proposal — rising to roughly $34 million annually when the proposal is fully launched ( total estimated 10-year federal cost to the title iv - e program: $303 million ) .

the administration proposes to make this legislative change effective in conjunction with several other proposed changes in the child support enforcement program that are intended to ensure that a greater share of all child support payments made by noncustodial parents reach the children on whose behalf they are paid .

legislation to implement this specific proposal has not been enacted ( and is not pending ) .

some child advocates have proposed changes to the selection of representative payees because of the perceived automatic process by which child welfare agencies are named as the payees for foster care children .

first , they suggest that the current practice of providing advance notice in the selection of a representative payee for a child should be clarified because improved notice can assist ssa's efforts to name a payee other than the state .

social security regulations currently do not list the child or the child's attorney or guardian ad litem ( an attorney appointed by the judge on behalf of the child ) as recipients of the advance notice .

according to advocates , the notice should be sent to individual ( s ) who represent the child in judicial proceedings , as well as the child's parents , current and past foster care or relative caretakers , other parties in the juvenile proceedings , and the juvenile court judge .

the attorney or gal could help to identify others who might better serve the child's interest , inform the child welfare agency and court about the child's needs , and inform the child about the benefits , including the redetermination process for benefits upon reaching adulthood and the process for becoming his or her own payee ( and assist children in navigating these processes ) .

 ( h.r .

6192 in the 111 th congress and s. 961 in the 112 th congress would require ssa to send this notice to a foster child's attorney or guardian ad litem. ) .

second , alternative payees not listed in the ssa preference list could be considered as possible payees .

these alternative payees might include volunteer representative payee programs developed by non - profit organizations and local government agencies for adult beneficiaries requiring the service .

court appointed special advocates ( casa ) could also serve as payees .

casa volunteers are sworn in by local court systems to provide advocacy services on behalf of abused and neglected children .

these volunteers may be in the optimal position to report to the court the child's needs because they advocate for the child regardless of changes in their placement goal ( i.e. , family preservation , family reunification , or adoption ) or where the child is placed ( i.e. , kin and / or foster families ) .

california law requires counties to apply to become the representative payee if no other appropriate party is available to serve while the child is in foster care , although "appropriate party" includes only those individuals currently permitted by ssa .

similarly , the reconnecting youth to prevent homelessness act of 2011 ( s. 961 ) from the 112 th congress and the foster children self - support act ( h.r .

6192 ) from the 111th congress would require states to apply to become the foster child's representative payee "if there is no other suitable candidate available. .

although the california law does not provide any further requirement to the counties or the state about the procedures for notifying interested parties about the representative payee selection process , s. 961 and h.r .

6192 would require notification to a foster child's attorney or guardian ad litem .

proposals to expand the list of representative payees or to provide advance notice of selecting a representative payee to additional parties may burden ssa .

auditing individuals or non - profit organizations that serve as representative payees — rather than a large organization such as a state child welfare agency — could also strain the administrative capacity of the agency .

individuals who receive ssi may not accumulate more than $2,000 in resources .

this resource limit level has been fixed since 1989 , and is not indexed for inflation .

some child advocates argue that increasing the asset level for children receiving ssi would aid those youth as they leave foster care .

for children aging out of foster care , this additional support could be useful .

a study of young adults ages 23 and 24 who aged out of foster care in three states found that they generally earned far less than their peers — $12,064 compared to $20,349 , in 2008 dollars .

 ( they were also far less likely to have graduated from high school or to have completed one or more years of college than young adults in the general population. ) .

on average , parents give their children an estimated $38,000 — or about $2,200 a year ( in 2001 dollars ) — between the ages of 18 and 34 to supplement wages , pay for college tuition , and help with housing costs , among other types of financial assistance .

parents also provide support by allowing their adult children to live with them .

the study of former foster youth ages 23 and 24 in three states suggests that foster youth are less likely to receive this same level of material support from their families .

just slightly over one - third ( 35.5% ) of the foster care alumni received money from a family member in the past year ( although comparable data were not reported for youth generally ) .

compared to their peers generally , foster care alumni were less likely to live with their parents or relatives ( 21.1% vs. 32.8% ) .

as proposed , s. 961 from the 112 th congress and h.r .

6192 from the 111 th congress would exempt assets accumulated by a foster child ( under an approved plan ) from the ssi eligibility determination .

under current hhs guidance ( as of april 6 , 2010 ) the $10,000 resource limit related to title iv - e foster care eligibility is tied only to a determination of resources when a child enters foster care .

no redetermination of resources is necessary while a child is in care .

therefore , any accumulation of assets during the stay in foster care should not affect eligibility .

previously , both the initial and continuing eligibility for these payments was based on whether the children's original families would qualify for afdc , as it was in effect on july 16 , 1996 .

under those rules , children could not remain eligible for title iv - e services if they accumulated assets of more than $1,000 .

however , in 1999 ( p.l .

106-169 ) congress raised that resource limit to $10,000 .

in its report recommending this change , the house ways and means committee noted children in foster care have a special need for resources .

unlike children reared in families , these children often have little or no support from relatives… .

the committee believes children in foster care should be allowed to accumulate a much higher level of assets to prepare for the day when they must support themselves .

thus , we are increasing the asset limit to $10,000 .

by contrast , under the ssi program individuals are generally no longer eligible once they attain $2,000 in countable resources .

however , two current initiatives allow eligible recipients to accumulate assets above that limit .

these are the ssi initiative plans for achieving self support ( pass ) and individual development accounts ( idas ) .

either one of these might be modified to include provisions that target recipients in foster care .

a plan for achieving self - support ( pass ) is an individual plan for employment designed by an ssi beneficiary with the assistance of a state vocational rehabilitation agency , disability service organization or ticket to work employment network and approved by the ssa .

a pass must include a specific goal for employment , such as a specific job type desired or a plan for setting up a small business and must include a time line for achieving the employment goal .

the pass must also include a list and cost of any goods , such as assistive devices or job - specific tools , or services , such as schooling , that will be needed by the beneficiary to achieve his or her goal .

resources included in an approved pass are not counted against the ssi resource limits .

there is no limit to the amount of resources that can be excluded as part of a pass and these resources can include money set aside to pay for elements of the pass such as training or items purchased as part of the pass such as assistive technology devices .

individual development accounts ( idas ) are matched savings accounts that allow families and persons with low incomes to set aside money for education , the purchase of a home , or the creation of a business .

an individual may place money from his or her earnings into an ida and have that amount of money matched by the state with funds from the state's temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant or by certain state and local government agencies or non - profit organizations .

money saved in a qualified ida , including the state contribution and any interest earned , is not counted as a resource for the purposes of determining ssi eligibility .

there is no limit to the amount of money in an ida that can be excluded from the ssi resource calculation .

however , there are limits to the amounts states and other entities can contribute to idas .

