the nomination of a justice to the supreme court of the united states is one of the rare moments when all three branches of the federal government come together: the executive branch nominates , and the legislative branch considers the nomination , deciding whether the nominee will become a member of the high court .

presidents and senators have said that , short of declaring war , deciding who should be on the supreme court is the most important decision they will make while in office .

the constitution , in article ii , section 2 , divides the responsibility for selecting and confirming members of the supreme court between the president and the senate .

it says that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for...." the senate has traditionally deferred to the president on nominations to the cabinet , but they have shown less deference to a president's choice for the supreme court .

of the 160 nominations presidents made to the supreme court since 1789 , 36 were not confirmed .

of the hundreds of cabinet officials nominated over the same time period , just 15 failed of confirmation .

some nominations to the supreme court have won confirmation with little debate and no procedural complications , while others have been debated extensively , with significant resort to parliamentary procedures during consideration .

it appears that the senate has never felt strictly bound by past practice in considering these nominations , but that it has used procedures and forms of consideration that the body has at the time deemed appropriate to each individual case .

nothing in senate rules , procedures , or practice requires that the senate proceed to a final vote on a nomination , for example , although in most instances it has done so .

of the 160 nominations for the supreme court , 12 never reached the floor and 13 others never received a final vote , although they were debated on the floor .

the remaining 11 nominations that failed of confirmation reached a final vote , but were rejected by the senate .

this report examines the ways in which the senate has handled the 160 supreme court nominations the president has sent to the senate .

as the purpose of this report is to examine the forms taken by senate proceedings on these 160 nominations , it treats each nomination as a separate case .

it is not couched in terms of the smaller number of different individuals nominated or the ultimate outcome the confirmation process may have had for each individual .

supreme court confirmation debates , of course , do not occur in a vacuum .

they are a product of the president making the choice , the state of the senate at the time , the nominee and his or her views , and the prevailing mood of the country .

these elements , while critical to understanding specific cases , are not considered in this report ; discussions of them can be found in other reports on the supreme court .

this report focuses on the kinds of actions the senate has taken during consideration of supreme court nominees , how they have changed over time , and how they have affected the process of confirmation .

the emphasis of this report is on the 148 nominations on which some form of formal proceedings took place on the senate floor , not on the ways in which the nominations might have been handled in committee or other pre - floor stages .

the information presented was drawn from a comprehensive search of the executive journals of the senate , which are its official record of procedural actions taken in relation to executive business ( i.e. , nominations and treaties , which are the forms of business submitted to the senate by the president ) .

for recent congresses for which the journal was not yet available , information was taken from the congressional record and the nominations data base of the congressional legislative information system .

the following discussion first sketches the changing patterns of consideration that have been normal in successive historical periods since 1789 , noting their relation to changes in the procedural rules and practice of the senate .

for each period , it not only describes normal and exceptional practice , but also provides examples of proceedings that were either typical or notable .

the report then successively addresses three key characteristics of floor action on these nominations: the dispositions the senate made of them , the length of floor consideration , and the kinds of procedural action taken during consideration .

although the constitution mandates a role for the senate in the consideration of nominees to the supreme court , it does not include any specific method for doing so .

the process by which the senate has considered these nominations has typically included several stages , from receipt and committee referral through committee consideration and reporting , to scheduling for floor action , followed by floor debate and a final vote .

within this broad outline , the senate has answered the basic question — what should the procedure be for consideration of nominations ? — in different ways at different times .

a review of all supreme court nominations since 1789 yields two general conclusions about the procedures used .

first , the senate has not felt bound to consider each nomination in exactly the same way that the others before it were considered .

although some supreme court nominations , for example , never reached the senate floor ( and hence , did not receive a vote ) , the senate spent numerous days debating other nominations .

neither of those practices has been routine , but their use shows how the senate has reserved to itself the right to take the course of action that it believes best suits consideration of a particular nomination .

this stance becomes even more evident when the senate considers a well - known person for a supreme court seat .

the senate received , debated and confirmed the nomination of former president william howard taft to be chief justice on the same day , for example .

second , although the form of confirmation proceedings has varied , the senate's process has tended to become longer and more formal over time .

although members of the first supreme court were confirmed just two days after their nominations were received , the norm in modern times has tended toward weeks , if not months , between the receipt of the nomination and disposition by the senate .

early in the senate's history , it was not typical for supreme court nominations to be referred to committee at all ; by modern times , it was the norm for the senate committee on the judiciary to spend significant time reviewing nominees .

a study of the 160 nominations sent to the senate finds that the senate's floor consideration of supreme court nominations breaks down relatively naturally into five patterns over time .

senate floor proceedings on supreme court nominations might be distinguished in terms of a wide variety of different characteristics .

the present study focuses chiefly on three that are readily identifiable and often referred to the kind of vote ( or other action ) by which the senate disposed of the nominations ; the amount of time the senate spent considering them on the floor ; and the forms of procedural action that occurred during their consideration .

each of these represents a salient element of the procedural context in which a nomination is considered .

together , they may afford an indication of the amount of controversy , contention , or opposition that surrounds a nomination .

for example , if the senate approves a nomination by a voice vote after a single day of consideration , during which no procedural actions occur , one might reasonably conclude that it involved little opposition or controversy .

as the following discussion indicates , however , none of these three characteristics , in itself , can simply be equated with the level of controversy .

an obvious initial distinction among the 160 nominations concerns the ways the senate disposed of them .

in the broadest terms , the senate confirmed 124 and failed to confirm the remaining 36 .

this breakdown , however , conflates the 11 nominations that the senate affirmatively rejected with the 25 on which no final vote occurred .

further , the 25 without a final vote include 12 that never received floor consideration at all and 13 that were called up , but on which the senate never finished action .

the meaning and implications of each form of disposition may differ .

the 124 nominations confirmed make up 92% of the 135 on which the senate reached a final vote .

well over half the 124 confirmations ( 73 , or 59% of the 124 confirmed ) took place by voice vote , and the remaining 51 ( 41% of confirmations ) by roll call .

in earlier periods of american history , both voice and roll call votes occurred , but , as noted in the preceding section , in recent decades roll calls have become universal .

the closest vote by which a nomination was confirmed was that of matthews ( 1881-2 ) , by 24-23 ; other close votes to confirm include those for thomas ( 1991 ) , by 52-48 ; lamar ( 1888 ) , by 32-28 ; and clifford ( 1857 ) , by 26-23 .

the 11 supreme court nominations the senate has rejected make up the remaining 8% of those on which the senate reached a final vote .

all 11 of these rejections occurred on roll calls ; the senate has never rejected a nominee by voice vote .

as with confirmations , these 11 rejections occurred at points scattered throughout american history .

the earliest was rutledge for chief justice in 1795 ; the most recent , the nomination of robert bork in 1987 to be an associate justice .

bork's was also the nomination rejected by the widest margin ( 42-58 ) ; the closest was that of parker ( 1930 ) , who was rejected by 39-41 .

the median margin of defeat , however , has been nine votes .

only in one instance ( spencer , 1844-2 ) has a president resubmitted a nomination the senate had previously rejected , and then , not surprisingly , without success .

the senate conducted no final vote on 25 nominations .

table 1 lists these 25 nominations and notes some pertinent contextual features of each .

they make up 16% of the total number of high court nominations submitted , an indication of the extent to which the senate has not always considered itself obligated to proceed to a final up - or - down vote on every supreme court nomination presented to it .

these 25 nominations fall into two groups discussed separately in the following two subsections: ( 1 ) 13 on which the senate initiated floor action , but never completed it ; and ( 2 ) 12 that never reached the floor at all .

for purposes of this report , all formal proceedings in the full senate in relation to a nomination , once it was available for floor consideration , were counted as floor action .

for example , a nomination was treated as receiving floor action even if the senate never actually proceeded to its consideration , but did decline to grant unanimous consent to do so .

overall , by this standard , the senate has taken some floor action on nearly 93% of all nominations submitted , and proceeded to a final vote on 84% .

the 12 occasions on which the senate has failed to bring a nomination to the floor have also been scattered throughout history .

the circumstances of their occurrence have varied , as well .

five of the 12 were submitted quite late in a session , so that the senate may simply have lacked time to act .

six others were withdrawn before floor consideration could commence , including instances from paterson in 1793 ( first nomination ) to miers in 2005 .

the last of the 12 ( stanbery , 1866 ) became moot because congress reduced the size of the court , thereby abolishing the vacancy .

this distribution of conditions for the lack of floor action suggests that the senate has exhibited little tendency to leave supreme court nominations without a final vote simply out of reluctance to act , or to use inaction as an indirect means of denying confirmation .

four of the five nominations late in a session , and two of the six withdrawn , were later resubmitted ( usually at the following session ) , and the senate proceeded to a final vote on each of the resubmitted nominations .

the other four withdrawn nominations were never resubmitted .

overall , therefore , only two of these 12 nominations continued to be available to the senate and yet never received floor action .

these included one of the late - session nominations and the one that became moot .

these observations show that the simple absence of floor consideration cannot be taken to imply that the senate found the nomination less than acceptable .

of the five nominations in this group that were later resubmitted , the senate confirmed four , rejecting only one .

in addition , at least some of the withdrawals evidently occurred for reasons unrelated to senate sentiment about the nomination .

paterson ( 1793-1 ) , for example , who was among those later resubmitted and confirmed , was initially withdrawn only because he was constitutionally ineligible to sit on the court at that point , as he had previously been elected to a senate term that had not yet expired , and during which the salary of the justices had been increased .

the nomination of roberts ( 2005-1 ) was withdrawn because the president decided to nominate him instead for the post of chief justice , which became available subsequent to his original submission of the roberts' nomination .

among nominations not resubmitted , thornberry's ( 1968 ) was withdrawn simply because the vacancy he was to fill was eliminated by the failure of a concurrent nomination of a sitting justice to be chief justice .

the late nomination of micou ( 1853 ) presents a more ambiguous case , but the immediate reason it was not resubmitted was that the lame duck president who originally submitted it had left office .

on other nominations in this group , circumstances suggest that the senate's inaction did reflect the presence of opposition .

most clearly , the congressional action to abolish stanbery's vacancy ( 1866 ) appears to reveal emphatic objection to his nomination .

also , after hornblower's initial nomination received no action late in a session ( 1893-1 ) , the senate rejected his renomination outright ( 1893-2 ) .

in the case of spencer , as discussed earlier , the senate had already rejected the nomination once before president tyler later resubmitted and withdrew it on the same day ( 1844 ) .

there also appears reason to conclude that the withdrawals of both cushing ( 1874 ) and miers ( 2005 ) represent responses to expressed opposition .

the 13 nominations that received floor action , but no final vote , reflect a different distribution of circumstances .

consideration of one of the 13 ( read , 1845 ) appears simply to have begun too late in a session to be completed , but the senate appears to have laid aside each of the other 12 as a consequence of unfavorable action on some procedural motion .

the specific actions taken in these cases , noted in table 1 and described in more detail in the section on " procedural complexity ," were seldom ones that conclusively precluded further consideration .

instead , the senate seems simply to have taken these actions as demonstrating a lack of sufficient support for confirmation .

the president , correspondingly , subsequently withdrew six of these nominations .

the frequency of these proceedings may indicate the extent to which the senate , in the presence of opposition to a supreme court nomination , has been willing to give it consideration and yet decline to proceed to an "up - or - down" vote .

in recent times , the senate has not often resorted to this form of proceeding .

nine of the 13 instances occurred in the decade from 1844 to 1853 , and only two took place after the civil war .

the earliest instance occurred in 1828 , when the senate set aside the crittenden nomination until after a reorganization of the judiciary ( by which point the nominating president would have left office ) .

the most recent case was the fortas nomination for chief justice , which president johnson withdrew in 1968 after supporters mustered only 45 votes for cloture on the motion to proceed to consider the nomination .

the left - hand group of columns in table 2 summarizes the preceding discussion of how the senate has disposed of supreme court nominations , showing that the senate has confirmed more than three - quarters of all nominations submitted to it , and more than nine of every ten on which it voted .

indeed , as the middle group of columns shows , the senate has confirmed almost half of all supreme court nominations ever submitted to it without even requiring a roll call vote .

roll calls , on the other hand , have by no means been uncommon , occurring on four of every nine final votes , including every one since 1967 .

neither the type nor the outcome of a vote , in itself , can be taken as affording a clear indication of the extent of the opposition a nomination may have generated .

in particular , although a voice vote may reasonably be viewed as failing to indicate the presence of opposition , it could be rash to presume that it demonstrates an absence of opposition .

conversely , although a roll call vote may reflect the presence of extensive opposition , it may also occur when no such level of opposition is present .

in the years since 1968 , for example , eight of the 19 roll calls have registered fewer than four "no" votes .

more broadly , as table 2 shows , half of all roll call votes on supreme court nominations throughout history have involved fewer than 10 votes in opposition .

taking the appearance of at least 10 "nay" votes as a rough threshold for the presence of significant opposition permits a more meaningful judgment of the significance of these data on the disposition of nominations .

by this standard , 26 of the 51 roll calls by which nominations were confirmed revealed "significant" opposition .

combining these 26 nominations with the 11 that were rejected , it may be said that just 37 of the senate's 135 votes on confirmation indicated the presence of "significant" opposition .

by incorporating nominations that received no final vote into this approach , a unified account may be given of what different outcomes on these nominations mean .

the earlier discussion of nominations that received floor action but no final vote suggested that this outcome typically reflected the presence of opposition .

the discussion of nominations that received no floor action , on the other hand , concluded that this outcome has come about , on different occasions , both when significant opposition was present and not .

accordingly , this disposition cannot , in itself , be taken as an indicator of either circumstance .

the results of these considerations are summarized in the right - hand columns of table 2 .

the 13 nominations on which floor action failed to result in a final vote are counted as cases of "significant" opposition , but the 12 that never reached the floor are treated as permitting no definite conclusion about opposition .

this classification yields a total of 50 nominations with dispositions that imply "significant" opposition .

from this perspective , accordingly , it can be held that just about two - thirds of the 148 supreme court nominations reaching the senate floor have met no more than scattered opposition .

another salient characteristic in terms of which supreme court nominations vary is the length of consideration they receive on the floor .

as with forms of disposition , of course , length of consideration can be established only for those nominations on which consideration occurs .

accordingly , the data discussed in this section again reflect only the 148 nominations that reached the floor .

the length of consideration of supreme court nominations is identified in table 3 in terms of the number of calendar days on which senate floor action took place on the nomination .

in general , each day ( post - committee if reffered ) was counted on which any formal procedural action in relation to a nomination occurred , even if the nomination itself was not formally under consideration on that day .

for example , a day was counted on which a motion to proceed to consider a nomination was offered or debated , even if the motion was defeated , or was not adopted until the following day .

otherwise , for example , all senate floor action on the fortas nomination for chief justice ( 1968 ) , which occurred in its entirety pending a motion to proceed to consider the nomination , would not be counted .

similarly , in relation to the 1828 crittenden nomination , days on which the senate debated the resolution to postpone action are counted as days of floor action on the nomination .

on the other hand , days were not counted on which senators made individual speeches in relation to a nomination , but the senate did not formally have it under consideration on the floor , as happened extensively , for example , on the rehnquist nomination for associate justice ( 1971 ) .

the data presented , accordingly , are more precisely described as presenting the length of "floor action" than of formal "consideration" or of "debate. .

in compiling these data , however , a few actions were treated as exceptions to the standard just identified .

especially during the first half of the 19 th century , for example , the senate commonly referred newly received nominations to committee through action taken on the floor .

in more recent times , the senate has sometimes reached a unanimous consent agreement setting terms for consideration of a nomination in advance of any actual consideration .

when either such action was the only one taken in relation to a nomination on a given day , the day was not counted as a day of consideration .

a contrary practice would tend to overstate the length of consideration of these nominations relative to others to which the senate actually devoted similar time , but on which similar actions occurred not on a preceding day , but on the same day as other steps .

 table 3 shows that , historically , the senate has found a single day sufficient for floor action on more than two - thirds of all the nominations submitted ( although this form of action has ceased to be the norm in the years since 1967 ) .

for nominations receiving longer consideration , numbers decline quickly as length of consideration rises , so that 10% of those reaching the floor remained there for more than three days .

the more extended consideration given to this relative handful of nominations may rest on a variety of causes .

assessment of their nature is likely to begin from the well understood circumstance that opponents of a matter in the senate may engage in extended debate as a means of delaying or blocking final action .

accordingly , it might be natural to take the length of floor action as an indicator of the intensity of opposition to a nomination , and specifically of the determination with which opponents attempted to delay its confirmation .

such a supposition might be supported by the observation that none of the six nominations receiving more than five days' consideration was confirmed .

other considerations , however , also may be pertinent .

it may be significant , for example , that four of the 15 nominations considered for more than three days were for chief justice ; it may plausibly be supposed that the senate has generally tended to find these nominations as necessitating more sustained consideration .

more broadly , the senate may well have been likely to devote more time to nominations that were considered particularly important , for example , to the balance or future course of the court .

in addition , the data in table 3 also suggest a trend toward longer consideration in more recent times .

although extended consideration was not unheard of even in very early years ( eg , wolcott , 1811 , and crittenden , 1828 ) , seven of the 10 nominations receiving more than four days' consideration occurred in 1968 or later , beginning with the fortas nomination for chief justice .

this trend may be associated either with generally observable developments in the way the senate handles its business or with increases in controversy specifically over nominations to the court .

these considerations suggest that the occurrence of extended consideration on supreme court nominations cannot , in itself , be taken as a definitive indicator of strong opposition .

not only may extended consideration occur for other reasons , but it is also not necessarily the case that even determined opponents have always expressed their position by attempting to protract proceedings .

on the other hand , lengthy consideration may reasonably be viewed as a sign of the possibility that opposition may have been present .

correspondingly , although the completion of consideration on a single day cannot be taken to demonstrate an absence of opposition , it may appropriately be viewed , more cautiously , as failing to afford evidence that significant opposition was present .

senate floor proceedings on supreme court nominations , like those on other matters , are distinguishable not only in terms of the means of disposition and the length of time consumed , but also by the procedural actions that may occur in the course of consideration .

as with these other characteristics of floor action , procedural actions can be identified only for the 148 nominations that reached the floor .

table 4 lists various forms of procedural action that have occurred in the course of senate floor consideration on these nominations and how often each has appeared .

it shows that no single procedure was used on more than about one in seven of the supreme court nominations reaching the floor , but also that a half - dozen different procedures were used at least half that often .

no single procedure either stands out as especially characteristic of proceedings on these nominations or clearly identifies any distinctive subgroup among them .

instead , floor proceedings on supreme court nominations are more readily categorized , in this respect , simply in terms of whether or not any procedural actions at all occurred beyond those required in the course of consideration itself .

throughout history , floor action on supreme court nominations has most often remained procedurally simple in this sense .

proceedings on 78 of the 148 nominations were procedurally simple in the sense of involving no optional procedural actions .

the remaining 70 nominations ( 47% of the total ) may be identified , in this minimal sense , as "procedurally complex. .

procedurally complex nominations might be further distinguished in several ways , such as by the number of procedural actions that occurred in the course of floor action or the extent to which procedural actions were applied to other procedural actions ( eg , a motion to table a motion to postpone ) .

a more readily applicable criterion for this purpose , however , is whether any of the procedural actions taken resulted in a roll call vote .

again as table 4 shows , procedural roll calls occurred on 26 of the 70 nominations on which any optional procedures were used ( 18% of the total 148 nominations on which floor action occurred ) .

this further distinction affords a rough indicator of the intensity with which procedural action was pursued .

for some kinds of optional procedure used in relation to supreme court nominations , the principal effect would have been to expedite rather than delay consideration .

these included chiefly ( 1 ) actions , taken either by motion or unanimous consent , to proceed to consider a nomination on the same day reported ; and ( 2 ) consent agreements assuring a final vote ( either by limiting debate or setting a time certain ) that were reached before consideration began or on its first day .

in order to examine the potential use of optional procedures as means of pursuing opposition to supreme court nominations , it is appropriate to exclude these forms of action from consideration .

the second column of table 4 presents a count of optional procedures that could potentially have been used for purposes of delay or opposition .

using this criterion , 90 of the total 148 nominations reaching the floor ( 61% ) may be said to have been subject to no optional procedures that could have had the effect of delaying or terminating consideration .

this percentage is comparable to the 62% of nominations reaching the floor that faced no significant opposition and the 68% that received action on only a single day .

as with those other characteristics of consideration , it would not be appropriate to take the absence of procedural complexity as demonstrating the absence of opposition .

it could reasonably be said , nevertheless , that when nominations involve no procedural complexity , no positive inference may be drawn from the procedural features of consideration that opposition or contention was present .

conversely , the occurrence of procedural complexity , or even of procedural roll calls , cannot be regarded as sufficient in itself to demonstrate the presence of opposition or contention , but may reasonably be taken as cause to think that such opposition may have been present .

the occurrence of optional procedural actions is also related to the occasions , previously detailed in table 1 , on which nominations reached the floor but failed to reach a final vote on confirmation .

in 12 of the 13 cases of incomplete consideration listed in table 1 , some optional procedural action was the last one that occurred , and had the effect of terminating consideration .

in order to indicate some potential effects of optional procedural actions , the last column of table 4 reproduces this information in summary form .

these 12 instances show that the effect of a procedural action in any individual case depends only in part on the prescribed effect of the action .

it is also affected , in some cases , by the procedural context in which the action is undertaken , and in particular on whether it is integral to or divergent from the routine practice of the time .

procedural context changes from case to case , normal practice also has changed over the course of senate history , and in some cases , the prescribed effect of procedural actions has changed as well .

accordingly , the potential significance of optional procedural actions may be clarified by reference to some of the points initially developed in the section on " historical trends in floor consideration . .

for this purpose , it is useful to look separately at actions that affect how the senate has taken up nominations and those that can occur in the course of consideration .

in both cases , however , the periods during which distinctive patterns of optional procedural action characteristically appear differ from those discussed in earlier sections , which were defined by changes in the normal terms of consideration .

each of the following sections , accordingly , is couched in terms of its own appropriate periodization .

the senate has always taken up nominations under procedures that govern action in executive session , which are in some respects separate from those regulating legislative action .

it has usually done so by going into executive session to consider the nomination , but occasionally by granting unanimous consent to consider the nomination "as in" executive session , without actually leaving legislative session for the purpose .

as described earlier , in the section on " historical trends in floor consideration ," it appears that the normal practice of the senate for most of its history ( from 1789 until roughly 1967 ) was to take up each nomination automatically when it was reached in the course of considering executive business .

in order to be eligible for consideration under this procedure , a nomination apparently had to have become available for floor action at least one day previously .

initially , nominations became available when received from the president ; after 1835 , when nominations to the supreme court began routinely to be referred to committee , they normally became available for consideration when reported .

after about 1922 , it appears , this proceeding was formalized as a call of the calendar of nominations .

sometimes , however , by unanimous consent , the senate has taken up a nomination on the same day reported or submitted .

as previously noted , in fact , this proceeding was used for nearly half of all nominations reaching the floor ( 18 of 41 ) from 1868 to 1922 .

no departure from these routine forms of proceeding occurred before 1835 , when the nominations of taney and barbour , though eligible for the normal procedures , were called up instead by a roll call vote on a motion to proceed to consider .

complications of a similar kind were faced by badger in 1853 , when the senate was unable to reach a vote on a motion to proceed , and by black in 1861 , when the senate defeated a motion to proceed on a roll call vote .

during roughly this same period , however ( 1844-1874 ) , motions to proceed to consider were also offered on seven other nominations that were eligible for normal consideration , but the senate adopted these motions in short order and by voice vote .

in the cases of both badger and black , the senate also attempted to bring the nomination to the floor through a special order providing that it proceed to consideration on a specified later day .

the senate ultimately adopted a special order of this kind for badger by voice vote , but never accepted one for black .

on five supreme court nominations thereafter , through 1930 , the senate used unanimous consent to establish special orders of this kind .

these special orders represent forerunners of the contemporary practice of reaching agreements in advance , by unanimous consent , to take a matter up .

in these earlier times , however , special orders seem to have been used for these nominations only in unusual circumstances , to overcome difficulties in bringing a matter to the floor , and their effect was to put off its consideration until after the point at which it would normally have come up .

another form of action that indicated an attempt to delay consideration appeared on four scattered occasions before 1967 when an attempt to call a nomination up on the same day it was reported or submitted was prevented by objection .

a more definite , though still only temporary , form of delay was imposed on five nominations during this period ( all after 1880 ) , each of which was passed over for consideration at least once , upon demand of a senator , when reached in its normal order .

from 1968 on , the call of the calendar of nominations fell into disuse for the consideration of supreme court nominations , and a different set of practices for initiating floor action on these nominations has become standard .

all but one of the 21 nominations that have reached the floor since that time did so pursuant to a request for unanimous consent that the senate proceed to consider it .

for eleven nominations , this consent agreement provided for immediate consideration ; for the remaining nine , it provided , like the earlier special orders , for consideration to begin at some future date .

in addition , some of these consent agreements provided for the senate not only to take up the nomination , but to go into executive session for the purpose , and some also limited debate or set a time certain for a final vote .

whether or not they included these additional provisions , however , these agreements represent a routine proceeding for taking up the nomination and fail to suggest any potential difficulties in bringing it to the floor .

the only nomination in this recent period to experience difficulty at the point of calling up has been that of fortas in 1968 , on which a motion to proceed to consider was found necessary and could not be brought to a vote .

senate rules do not establish separate procedures for the consideration of nominations and of legislation to the same extent that they do for calling up business of the two kinds .

the most evident differences in forms of proceeding between the two kinds of matter may be that nominations , of course , cannot be amended .

otherwise , most of the same procedural mechanisms used for legislative business are also available on nominations .

the only optional procedures used during consideration of supreme court nominations in these years were motions to postpone temporarily , to commit with instructions , and to lay on the table .

the use of any of these motions was uncommon , occurring on only five of the 31 nominations reaching the floor before 1835 .

motions to postpone temporarily , however , were used as early as 1795 , motions to commit with instructions by 1811 , and motions to table by 1826 .

during this period , a motion to postpone or table was sometimes offered at the point when the senate was just proceeding to consider a nomination , so that the motions might in these instances have been treated as part of the proceedings for calling up nominations .

in order to present a consolidated view of the use of each motion , however , the present discussion views all of them as having been offered in the course of consideration .

occasionally , as well , action with effect similar to one of these motions also was proposed by resolution .

for example , the senate several times entertained a resolution that it postpone or table a nomination until enactment of legislation reorganizing the circuit courts ( which could have the effect of eliminating the nominee's vacancy ) , or one that directed a committee to investigate a nominee further , but did not formally recommit the nomination .

table 4 includes these proceedings in the count of corresponding motions .

in most instances during this period , when motions to postpone , commit , or table were offered , the senate adopted them by voice vote .

at that time , adoption of a motion to table evidently did not have the effect of a final negative disposition , as it does today , but only of putting off action for the time being .

the normal effect of adopting any of these motions , accordingly , was only to delay further action by taking the nomination off the floor temporarily .

the only exception to this pattern occurred in 1828 , when adoption ( by roll call ) of the resolution postponing the crittenden nomination until after a circuit court reorganization effectively terminated consideration of the nomination .

during the decade between 1835 and 1845 , by contrast with earlier years , only five of the 16 supreme court nominations that reached the floor were considered without the intervention of optional procedures .

the procedures used continued to include only motions to postpone , commit , and table , but the consequences of their use became more varied .

some of these motions continued to be adopted by voice vote , but others were either adopted or rejected on roll call votes .

adoption by voice vote may most likely suggest that supporters of the nomination may have been using the motion either to gain time or for routine purposes of agenda management ; rejection by roll call suggests that the motions may have been offered by opponents seeking to bring about delays in consideration .

either of these results , however , normally permitted consideration to continue .

especially when one of these motions was adopted by roll call , on the other hand , it often had the effect of terminating consideration before an up - or - down vote could occur .

in 1835 , the senate tabled a resolution to postpone the taney nomination until a circuit court reorganization , then adopted a motion to postpone it indefinitely .

in 1844 , the senate , by roll call votes , tabled president tyler's nominations of walworth and king , and in the following year it did the same to their renominations , but by voice vote .

the motion for indefinite postponement has the explicit purpose of terminating consideration , but , under the practice of the time , a similar consequence followed from adopting the motions to table only because the senate never subsequently chose to resume consideration of the nomination .

it appears highly likely that in taking these actions , the senate understood that leaving consideration unfinished was their proponents' intent and would be the practical effect .

in the decades after 1845 , political circumstances varied widely , but the overall incidence of procedural complexity on supreme court nominations declined , although not to early levels .

a solid majority of the nominations reaching the floor between 1845 and 1890 ( 20 of 31 ) experienced no optional procedural action at all after being called up .

 ( this figure , however , includes the five nominations confirmed during the civil war , when any substantial opposition to the administration was absent from the senate. ) .

during this period , the motions to postpone , to commit , and to table continued to be used on supreme court nominations , except that , because initial committee referral had become routine , the motion to recommit largely replaced the motion to commit .

these three motions continued to be used in ways similar to the previous period , and continued to have a similar range of consequences .

in 1870 , however , a resolution was offered to lay two supreme court nominations on the table until congress completed a circuit court reorganization , and this proved to be the last occasion on which an attempt was made in the senate to table such a nomination .

the senate , accordingly , has never attempted to use this motion on supreme court nominations during the era when it would have the effect of a final negative disposition .

beginning in 1853 , however , the senate also started to use motions to adjourn with the effect or apparent intent of putting off consideration of a supreme court nomination .

on the badger nomination in 1853 , such a motion was adopted by a roll call vote .

thereafter , the motion to adjourn was offered on six other nominations through 1889 .

on one occasion it was adopted by voice vote , but otherwise a roll call always rejected it .

for a brief period beginning in 1870 , motions to reconsider a vote to confirm also appeared .

the first such motion ( on strong in 1870 ) was withdrawn after three days' debate and the failure of a motion to postpone it .

the second ( on harlan in 1877 ) never reached a vote .

the last ( on woods in 1880 ) was tabled by roll call after a quorum failed on an initial roll call on the motion itself .

after this third unsuccessful attempt , the senate abandoned use of this motion in this context as well .

neither the motion to adjourn nor the motion to reconsider was ever used with the effect of terminating consideration .

the motions to postpone , to recommit , and to table , on the other hand , which had continued to appear since earlier times , were still occasionally used with this effect .

the bradford nomination was tabled in 1852 and received no further action , and the badger nomination in the following year was postponed until a date after congress was to adjourn .

in 1873 , the williams nomination became the only one on which a recommittal ever terminated consideration .

on only one subsequent occasion ( fortas , 1968 ; see below ) has the senate ever again resorted to optional procedural actions to terminate action on a supreme court nomination short of an up - or - down vote .

with this one exception , accordingly , such terminations came about only in the half century from 1828 through 1873 .

this period included not only the nine nominations on which floor action was terminated before a vote through optional procedures during consideration , but also the two on which this effect followed from senate action on a motion to proceed to consider .

as already suggested in the case of the tabled tyler nominations , it appears likely that in these instances , even when the procedures used did not , in themselves , definitively terminate consideration , the senate understood in using them that this would be their practical effect .

after 1890 , the frequency of optional procedural action during consideration declined further ; from then through 1967 , such action appeared on just 14 of the 50 nominations that reached the floor .

additional shifts also occurred in the forms of procedural action used .

these shifts amounted principally to a substantial decline in the use of motions that required a vote of the senate , and an increasing resort instead to live quorum calls , which can be demanded by a single senator , and unanimous consent agreements , which can be blocked by the objection of any single senator .

although the votable motions could potentially be used in ways that would have the effect of terminating consideration , such a result was not likely from either of these procedures that newly came into use on supreme court nominations during this period .

early in this period , the senate continued to adopt motions to recommit and to postpone by voice vote , and to reject them by roll call .

after 1930 , however , these motions became more unusual , and the motion to adjourn ceased to be used at all in this context .

a motion to recommit or postpone has been offered on just four nominations since 1930 , most recently in 1971 ( on rehnquist for associate justice ) , and all have been rejected on roll calls .

only routine motions to adjourn or recess have been offered during consideration of any supreme court nomination since 1890 , except for one occasion ( on the nomination of hughes for chief justice in 1930 ) on which a roll call rejected a motion to recess .

as noted earlier , the motion to reconsider had already become disused in this context , perhaps because the senate had already begun to adopt its current practice of tabling this motion immediately after every successful action .

beginning with the stone nomination for associate justice in 1925 , live quorum calls came to be used with some regularity during consideration ( although a single such call had already occurred once previously , on the woods nomination of 1880 ) .

at least 10 such calls each were demanded on the hughes and parker nominations in 1930 .

this procedure can be used to bring about a certain amount of delay even if it succeeds in producing a quorum , although only once ( in the consideration of parker ) did such a call ever result in the actual failure of a quorum .

after 1930 , live quorum calls occurred on seven more nominations , most recently in 1971 , but no more than three times on any single nomination .

the unanimous consent agreements that are to be taken into account in this connection include only those that assured the ability of the senate to reach a final vote on a nomination , usually by setting either a time certain for the vote or an overall limit on the time for debate .

such an agreement was first reached for brewer ( 1889 ) , but appeared on just three other nominations between then and 1967 .

three of these four agreements were reached either in advance of consideration or on its first day , and accordingly appear likely to represent consensual arrangements to facilitate consideration .

the fourth agreement , by contrast ( on parker in 1930 ) , was not reached until the seventh day of consideration , and so appears more likely to represent a response to attempts to delay or extend consideration .

from 1968 onward , however , consent agreements became the standard means of regulating consideration of supreme court nominations , as they increasingly did for other major matters .

such agreements appeared on 17 of the 21 nominations that have reached the floor during this period , and six of the 17 were established only after the first day of consideration .

many of these agreements , on the other hand , may have represented collegial arrangements rather than attempts to overcome any difficulties in consideration , especially inasmuch as , on 12 of the 17 nominations in question , the consent agreement was the only optional procedural action taken .

overall , indeed , consideration of 16 of the 21 nominations reaching the floor since 1968 involved no optional procedural actions other than the consent agreement .

on the remaining five of these 21 recent nominations , the only optional procedures used were to postpone ( once ) , to recommit ( once ) , and for cloture .

the motion for cloture , which allows a super - majority to limit the time for consideration of a matter , started to be used on supreme court nominations at about the same time as consent agreements became routine .

as noted in the section on " historical trends in floor consideration ," this motion did not become available for use on nominations until 1949 .

it was not used on any nomination , however , until 1968 , when the senate rejected cloture on a motion to proceed to consider the fortas nomination for chief justice ( and thereafter abandoned action on the nomination ) .

this action represents the only time since 1873 when the senate has terminated floor action on a supreme court nomination short of an up - or - down vote .

subsequently , cloture was moved also on the two rehnquist nominations , as noted in the case study presented earlier .

on a 1971 nomination for associate justice the motion failed , but a consent agreement was subsequently reached that permitted the senate to reach a vote on confirmation .

on a 1986 nomination for chief justice , the senate invoked cloture , the first time it had done so on a supreme court nomination .

cloture was invoked also on the fourth supreme court nomination on which it was moved , that of alito in 2006 .

as was the case for forms of disposition and length of consideration , the significance of procedural complexity is more difficult to ascertain than is its occurrence .

the preceding discussion shows that , on some occasions , optional procedures may have been used routinely , with the apparent purpose of managing the flow of business , and with a potential effect only of expediting action .

on other occasions , optional procedures may have been used as means of delaying consideration or even placing obstacles in the way of a final disposition .

in cases when the occurrence of optional procedural action resulted in consideration being terminated before a final vote , for example , it might reasonably be conjectured that the procedural action in question could have been undertaken with the intent of bringing about this result .

it is equally reasonable to suppose that similar actions , undertaken on other nominations , may at least sometimes have reflected similar intentions , even if the results did not successfully fulfill those intentions .

no definitive conclusions , of course , might be drawn about the purpose of optional procedural actions in any specific case in the absence of information about the intentions of senators undertaking them .

even to offer inferences about specific occasions on which such intentions were present would require examination of the political and historical circumstances surrounding each nomination , a task beyond both the scope and the purpose of this report .

the preceding discussion , nevertheless , permits some assessment about which optional procedures may have afforded the possibility of delaying consideration or forestalling a final vote , and , accordingly , which of them might , in principle , have been used in some instances for such a purpose .

as with the level of opposition manifested in the final vote and in the length of floor action , it is plausible to consider the occurrence of procedural actions , or procedural roll calls , as an indication that contention or controversy may have been present , but it is insufficient to demonstrate that substantial contentiousness actually was present .

at most , it may be appropriate to consider that the absence of optional procedural actions that could have been used for delay presents an absence of indication of controversy .

that none of the three indicators examined in this part of the report may be taken as a definitive demonstration of the presence or absence of controversy is substantiated by the observation that these three criteria do not always identify the same nominations as possibly controversial .

on the other hand , substantial overlap does exist among the nominations picked out by each indicator .

this circumstance suggests that a more reliable and comprehensive measure of the level of controversy on each nomination might be derived from a simultaneous consideration of all three indicators together .

such an analysis , however , is beyond the scope of this report .

selected characteristics of floor proceedings table a - 1 provides information on the extent of opposition to , length of consideration of , and procedural actions taken on , each supreme court nomination submitted by the president from 1789 through 2005 .

this table identifies each nomination by the name of the nominee , and nominations for chief justice are distinguished by italics .

each nomination is also identified by the year in which it was submitted ( action on some nominations extended into the following year ) .

nominations that received no floor consideration , or that were withdrawn by the president , are identified in the "notes" column , and for those that received no floor consideration , the columns for characteristics of floor proceedings are blank .

the column on "final vote" gives the tally of each roll call vote on confirmation .

nominations confirmed by a voice vote are identified by the entry of "voice" in this column .

if no vote on confirmation occurred , the column is left blank .

for nominations confirmed by voice vote , by unanimous consent , or with fewer than 10 "nay" votes , the "extent of opposition" column is left blank .

other entries in this column identify those nominations that received no final vote , by an entry of "unfinished ; " were rejected , by an entry of "rejected ; " and were confirmed with more than more than 10 "nay" votes , by an entry of "opposition. .

the column on "optional procedural actions" is blank only for those nominations on which no floor action occurred .

for nominations on which floor action occurred , the extent of optional procedural actions is identified by entries of "n" if no such actions occurred ; "op" if such actions occurred , but with no procedural roll calls ; and "opr" if procedural actions with roll calls occurred .

selected characteristics of committee action table a - 2 provides information about the course of committee action on supreme court nominations which , like that in table a - 1 , may shed light on the extent and intensity of opposition thereto .

also like table a - 1 , this table identifies nominees by name and by year of submission ( which in some cases is not the year in which action was concluded ) , distinguishing nominations for chief justice by italics .

table a - 2 addresses only committee action that occurred before initial floor consideration .

if a nomination was not referred to committee before initial floor consideration , the columns on "days from receipt to committee report ( or other final action ) ," and on ""form of reporting ( or other final committee action ) " are left blank .

similarly , the column on "days of open committee hearings" is left blank for cases in which no open committee hearings are known to have been held .

finally , the column on "floor disposition" is left blank for nominations that were confirmed .

for nominations not confirmed , a summary indication of floor disposition appears in this column , but greater detail appears in table a - 1 , above .

the table provides the "form of reporting ( or other final committee action ) " for each nomination that was referred to committee .

in cases in which the committee action took any form other than the normal form of favorable action , the entry in this column is given in bold face .

"reported" was the normal form of favorable committee action from 1835 to 1865 ; "reported favorably" thereafter .

