there are approximately 30 types of entities that qualify for federal tax - exempt status as organizations described in section 501 ( c ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

the most common types are § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organizations , § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations , § 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) labor unions , and § 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations .

whether a § 501 ( c ) organization may engage in political activity , such as lobbying or campaign activity , under the irc depends on the subparagraph in which it is described .

this report analyzes the irc limitations on political activity by tax - exempt organizations , focusing on these four types of organizations .

it ends with a discussion of the irc reporting and disclosure requirements .

while this report discusses the political activity limitations in the irc , it is important to realize that organizations must also comply with applicable election and lobbying laws .

for analysis of the intersection between tax and campaign finance laws , see crs report r40141 , 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34447 , churches and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r40183 , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rs22895 , 527 groups and campaign activity: analysis under campaign finance and tax laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

for discussion of the applicability of federal lobbying law to tax - exempt organizations , see crs report 96-809 , lobbying regulations on non - profit organizations , by [author name scrubbed] .

while the majority of § 501 ( c ) organizations fall into one of the types discussed above , the irc describes numerous other types of organizations .

the limitations the irc places on the ability of these organizations to participate in political activity is often less clear , and there is minimal irs guidance on the topic .

this may be because the need for guidance has not arisen due to the fact that there are not as many of these organizations and they do not appear to participate in political activities to the same extent as the organizations discussed above .

the other types of § 501 ( c ) organizations appear to fall into two categories .

the first are those that seem to be prohibited from participating in most , if not all , types of political activity .

this category would likely include the § 501 ( c ) trusts whose funds must be dedicated to their exempt purpose ( eg , § 501 ( c ) ( 17 ) supplemental unemployment benefit trusts , § 501 ( c ) ( 21 ) black lung benefit trusts , and § 501 ( c ) ( 22 ) multi - employer pension plan trusts ) .

it also appears to include the organizations that the irs has indicated in unofficial guidance may not participate in political activities "because the subparagraph in which they are described limits them to an exclusive purpose ( for example , irc 501 ( c ) ( 2 ) title holding companies , irc 501 ( c ) ( 20 ) group legal services plans ) . .

this rationale could also prohibit § 501 ( c ) ( 10 ) domestic fraternal societies , for example , from participating in political activities because their net earnings must be devoted exclusively to certain purposes .

to the extent that any organizations are precluded from participating in political activities , there could still be exceptions for such things as lobbying for legislation that affects the organization's existence or status .

the second category are those § 501 ( c ) s that appear able to participate in political activity under the rules applicable to § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) , ( c ) ( 5 ) , and ( c ) ( 6 ) organizations .

examples would appear to include § 501 ( c ) ( 7 ) social and recreational clubs , § 501 ( c ) ( 8 ) fraternal benefit societies and associations , and § 501 ( c ) ( 19 ) veterans' groups .

even though certain § 501 ( c ) organizations may engage in political activity , they are subject to tax if they make an expenditure for a § 527 "exempt function. .

an "exempt function" is the "influencing or attempting to influence the selection , nomination , election , or appointment of any individual to any federal , state , or local public office or office in a political organization , or the election of presidential or vice - presidential electors.... " the tax is imposed at the highest corporate rate on the lesser of the organization's net investment income or the total amount of "exempt function" expenditures .

thus , for organizations with little or no net investment income or those making low - cost expenditures , the tax is of minimal import .

for others groups , however , it might serve as a disincentive to directly engage in the activities giving rise to the taxable expenditures .

section 501 ( c ) organizations may lawfully avoid the tax by setting up a separate segregated fund under § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) to conduct the taxable political activities .

assuming the fund is set up and administered properly , it will be treated as a separate § 527 political organization and the § 501 ( c ) organization will not be subject to tax .

however , a § 501 ( c ) organization may not set up such a fund to accomplish activities the organization itself may not do .

thus , for example , a § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization may not use such a fund as a way to get around the prohibition on campaign intervention .

under the irc , § 501 ( c ) organizations are generally required to file an annual information return ( form 990 ) with the irs .

filing organizations are required to report information regarding their political activities on the form's schedule c. on the schedule c , § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations are required to describe their direct and indirect political campaign activities and report information on their political expenditures , volunteer hours , and any § 4955 excise taxes incurred .

section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations must also report information about their lobbying activities on the schedule .

the specific information that must be reported differs depending on whether the organization made the § 501 ( h ) election .

meanwhile , organizations other than those described in § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) must: ( 1 ) describe their direct and indirect political campaign activities ; ( 2 ) report the amount spent conducting campaign activities and the number of volunteer hours used to conduct those activities ; ( 3 ) report the amount directly spent for § 527 exempt function activities ; ( 4 ) report the amount of funds contributed to other organizations for § 527 exempt function activities ; ( 5 ) report whether a form 1120-pol ( the tax return filed by organizations owing the § 527 tax ) was filed for the year ; and ( 6 ) report the name , address , and employer identification number of every § 527 political organization to which a payment was made and the amount of such payments , and indicate whether the amounts were paid from internal funds or were contributions received and directly transferred to a separate political organization .

there is also space for § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) , ( c ) ( 5 ) , and ( c ) ( 6 ) organizations to report information regarding their lobbying activities with respect to the deductibility of dues paid by their members .

on the form 990's schedule b , § 501 ( c ) organizations must report the names and addresses of significant donors , which are generally individuals who contributed at least $5,000 during the year .

these are all donors meeting this threshold , and not just those who contributed for political activities .

the organization and the irs must make the organization's form 990 and accompanying schedules publicly available .

however , identifying information about the donors reported on the schedule b is not subject to public disclosure , except for donors to private foundations .

