while congress may consider legislation to amend the u.s. patent system to address perceived deficiencies , the u.s. supreme court also plays a significant role in clarifying vague or ambiguous language in the patent act that is often at the heart of disputes between parties involved in patent infringement suits .

in the latter half of this decade , the supreme court has granted certiorari in nine patent cases , perhaps in recognition of the increasing importance of intellectual property to technological innovation , as well as in order to correct errors in lower courts' interpretation and application of patent law .

what follows is a general overview of the facts and outcomes of these recent cases , presented in chronological order starting from the october term 2004 .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit issued two decisions in the 1990s , in re alappat and state street bank & trust co. v. signature financial group , that had expanded the scope of patent - eligible subject matter to include any process that produces a "useful , concrete and tangible result. .

the patent application at issue in bilski v. kappos contained claims that relate to a method of hedging risk in the commodities trading field .

the pto examiner rejected the application on the basis that the claims were not directed to patent - eligible subject matter under § 101 of the patent act , a determination that was upheld by the board of patent appeals and interferences ( "board" ) .

the board held that the transformation of "non - physical financial risks and legal liabilities of the commodity provider , the consumer , and the market participants" is not patentable subject matter .

in addition , the board found that the claimed process did not produce a "useful , concrete and tangible result. .

on october 30 , 2008 , the federal circuit issued an opinion in the case , in which it affirmed the board's decision .

more importantly , the appellate court's decision clarified the standards concerning patentability of process claims .

in so doing , the federal circuit expressly overruled in re alappat , state street bank & trust co. v. signature financial group , and its other prior decisions that relied on the "useful , concrete and tangible result" test for process patent eligibility .

instead , the federal circuit announced a different test that was to exclusively govern the eligibility of process claims for patent protection under § 101 of the patent act: a claimed process is surely patent - eligible under § 101 if: ( 1 ) it is tied to a particular machine or apparatus , or ( 2 ) it transforms a particular article into a different state or thing .

in applying the "machine - or - transformation" test to the facts in bilski , the federal circuit held that bilski's process claim failed to satisfy the new legal standard , because the process does not transform any article to a different state or thing , nor does it meet the machine implementation part of the test as well .

on june 1 , 2009 , the supreme court granted certiorari in bilski to consider two questions: whether the federal circuit erred by holding that a "process" must be tied to a particular machine or apparatus , or transform a particular article into a different state or thing ( "machine - or - transformation" test ) , to be eligible for patenting under 35 u.s.c .

§ 101 , despite this court's precedent declining to limit the broad statutory grant of patent eligibility for "any" new and useful process beyond excluding patents for "laws of nature , physical phenomena , and abstract ideas. .

whether the federal circuit's "machine - or - transformation" test for patent eligibility , which effectively forecloses meaningful patent protection to many business methods , contradicts the clear congressional intent that patents protect "method[s] of doing or conducting business. .

35 u.s.c .

§ 273 .

in an opinion written by justice kennedy , the court held that the federal circuit was erroneous in declaring that the "machine - or - transformation" test is the exclusive test for process patent eligibility under § 101 .

however , the court recognized that its precedents have established that the "machine - or - transformation" test is "a useful and important clue , an investigative tool , for determining whether some claimed inventions are processes under § 101. .

thus , the court did not invalidate the "machine - or - transformation" test , but rather reversed the federal circuit's requirement that the test be the only standard by which processes may be judged for patent eligibility under § 101 .

however , the court did not articulate a different test or adopt new categorical rules for process patent eligibility "that might have wide - ranging and unforeseen impacts," nor did it provide much guidance to the lower courts on this matter .

instead , the court invited the federal circuit to develop additional tests and other limiting criteria regarding what constitutes a patentable process .

the bilski court also ruled that some business methods may be patentable , because: ( 1 ) the patent act's definition of "process" does not categorically exclude business methods ; and ( 2 ) § 273 of the patent act contemplates the possibility that some business methods , at least in some circumstances , may be eligible for patenting .

turning to the particular patent at issue in this case , the court agreed that bilski's patent application is not a patentable "process" under § 101 .

it reached this conclusion without relying upon the "machine - or - transformation" test , but rather its earlier precedents that prohibit the patenting of "laws of nature , physical phenomena , and abstract ideas. .

because the court viewed bilski's patent claims to be attempts to patent abstract ideas , the claimed processes are ineligible for patent protection under § 101 .

in two subparts of the court's opinion that justice scalia did not join , thus representing only a plurality of the court , justice kennedy expressed concern that the "machine - or - transformation" test may negatively impact the information age and might "create uncertainty as to the patentability of software , advanced diagnostic medicine techniques , and inventions based on linear programming , data compression , and the manipulation of digital signals. .

he also opined that "some business method patents raise special problems in terms of vagueness and suspect validity," but suggested that the court's precedents on the unpatentability of abstract ideas could serve as a useful limiting principle in considering whether to grant or uphold patents on business methods .

justice stevens filed a lengthy concurring opinion , joined by justices ginsburg , breyer , and sotomayor , in which he agreed with the court's determinations that the "machine - or - transformation" test was not the sole test for what constitutes a patentable process and that bilski's patent claim is not a "process" within the meaning of § 101 .

however , he disagreed with the court's disposition of the case .

he would have rejected the patent application because bilski's method "describes only a general method of engaging in business transactions — and business methods are not patentable. .

therefore , in the view of these four justices , business methods do not qualify as a "process" eligible for patenting under § 101 .

justice stevens reached this conclusion by finding "strong historical evidence" in patent case law and legislative history , that suggested that business methods are not patentable .

he also expressed concern that business methods may stifle technological progress ( and legitimate business competition and innovation ) rather than promote it .

in a brief concurring opinion , joined in part by justice scalia , justice breyer highlighted the areas of substantial agreement among the members of the court on several of the fundamental issues of patent law raised by the bilski case .

he identified four points that he believed are consistent with the court's opinion and with justice stevens' concurring opinion: 1 .

while the text of § 101 is broad , it is not without limit .

2 .

the "machine - or - transformation" test has been repeatedly helpful to courts in identifying what is a patentable "process. .

3 .

although the "machine - or - transformation" test has always been a "useful and important clue" for determining patentability of processes , it has never been the "sole test. .

4 .

the court disagrees with state street bank's judgment that anything which produces a "useful , concrete , and tangible result" is patentable .

