the creation of a new state department position — director of foreign assistance — has sparked congressional interest regarding the management of u.s. foreign aid programs , its possible impact on funding levels , and any possible future reform of foreign aid operations and account structure .

the director of foreign assistance ( dfa ) , who serves concurrently as administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is randall tobias , the former global aids coordinator .

charged with coordinating u.s. assistance programs , the dfa has authority over most state department and usaid programs , and will provide "guidance" to other agencies that have foreign aid programs .

details of the restructuring have been unveiled in the form of a new strategic framework for foreign assistance .

the restructuring raises a number of questions with regard to how tobias will be able to coordinate aid programs spread throughout almost every government department .

executive officials have said that the current restructuring is a first step in a more thorough overhaul of u.s. foreign assistance .

announced on january 19 , 2006 , the restructuring is part of secretary rice's "transformational development" initiative that seeks to use foreign assistance to transform recipient countries' economic development paths , with the goal of graduating countries from u.s. assistance .

a 2004 usaid white paper defined transformational development as going beyond a traditional focus on raising living standards and reducing poverty .

it would "transform countries , through far - reaching , fundamental changes in institutions of governance , human capacity , and economic structure that enable a country to sustain further economic and social progress without depending on foreign aid. .

in addition to promoting transformational development , the same paper identified four further challenges to which u.s. assistance programs are designed to respond: strengthening fragile states ; providing humanitarian relief ; supporting u.s. geostrategic interests ; and mitigating global and transnational ills .

the concept of transformational development already has been applied by the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) which manages another bush administration foreign aid initiative that rewards "best performing" countries through a competitive process measuring achievements in the areas of governance , economic policies , and social programs .

also announced at about the same time was a related "transformational diplomacy" initiative that will reposition diplomats to "critical emerging areas," enhance language and regional skills , and emphasize outreach to foreign populations .

in this new environment of seeking transformational change in recipient countries through both development and diplomacy , secretary rice has argued for better coordination and policy coherence of u.s. assistance programs , with an emphasis on both short - term , and long - term strategic goals at the country and global level .

secretary rice contends that the dfa position will accomplish those goals .

both initiatives signal a more prominent role for foreign aid after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 and the beginning of the global war on terrorism .

since 2002 , development has been included as one of three pillars — with defense and diplomacy — upon which u.s. national security rests .

countries with high poverty levels and undemocratic governments are considered permissive environments for terrorism and criminal activities .

under such a doctrine , foreign aid has come to be seen as a tool to promote national security in addition to the traditional view of aid as a long - term humanitarian endeavor that will generate good will for the united states and promote eventual trading partners .

the dfa has been charged with two missions: to develop a coordinated u.s. foreign assistance strategy ; and to direct a transformation of foreign assistance to achieve the president's transformational development goals .

as both the usaid administrator and the dfa , tobias serves at the level equivalent to deputy secretary , reporting directly to the secretary of state .

usaid is , and remains , an independent agency under the restructuring .

while it is considered independent , the administrator reports to , and serves under , the foreign policy guidance of the secretary of state .

in testimony before the house foreign operations appropriations subcommittee on april 26 , 2006 , administrator tobias identified a number of challenges that he has begun to address .

among those challenges are: a planning and budgeting process that is fragmented among numerous departments and agencies ; duplication of programs ; poor accountability ; and the lack of linkage between strategic objectives and implementation .

the dfa has authority over foreign assistance programs managed by usaid and the state department .

in addition , the dfa will "provide guidance" for foreign assistance delivered through other government agencies .

some , like the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , the peace corps , and treasury department - managed international financial institutions and debt policy activities , are funded through foreign policy budget accounts .

others are managed and funded through defense department and domestic agency appropriations .

with the increasing number of domestic policy agencies involved in foreign aid programs , as well as the department of defense's growing role in reconstruction and stabilization work , the actual percentage may be lower .

when looking at calendar year 2005 disbursements of just the state department and usaid , their percentage of the total u.s. foreign aid budget is about 53% , or $13 billion .

in the same year , the defense department disbursed roughly 24% , mainly for reconstruction work in iraq and afghanistan that was funded in the fy2004 supplemental .

other departments and agencies disbursed about $5.6 billion , or 22% of total official development assistance .

as the size of foreign aid budgets and the number of operational agencies have increased , especially in recent years , a number of observers have highlighted the fragmentation of programs and the possible lack of coordination among them .

some critics also argue that the bush administration , while launching a number of innovative and important initiatives , has not articulated a coherent foreign aid policy strategy or an integrated set of core objectives within which to operate efficient and well - coordinated assistance programs .

administrator tobias has taken two steps to accomplish his mission of providing better coordination of programs and to develop an overall strategy for u.s. foreign assistance .

the first involves organizational measures to address a fragmented planning and budgeting process .

the second involves potential changes in programs and implementation to achieve transformational development .

while the second could very well involve a number of other departments and agencies that provide foreign assistance , recent tobias statements indicate that his initial focus will be on coordinating usaid and state department programs .

while reforming u.s. foreign assistance strategy and programs has been a matter raised a number of times by past administrations , members of congress , public policy think - tanks , and american non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , implementation of such initiatives has proved difficult .

during the past two decades , congress and the executive branch have considered three broad foreign aid reform proposals , each of which stalled .

as with any restructuring initiative , the creation of the dfa raises a number of questions with regard to implementation .

the restructuring initiative has been applauded by many as marking the beginning of what they perceive as a long overdue effort to reform a cumbersome and fragmented u.s. foreign assistance program .

some supporters of the plan , however , believe it does not go far enough and that the administration is missing an opportunity for launching a much bolder , and necessary reform effort .

some critics have expressed strong concern that the new initiative may lead to a greater degree of aid politicization and that usaid will be further marginalized as a key maker of u.s. development policy .

as currently envisioned , congress will not have a direct role in the restructuring , although key congressional committees are likely to maintain close oversight as the plan moves forward .

the first formal opportunity for the 110 th congress to review the restructuring plan will be in february 2007 when the fy2008 budget is submitted to congress .

it is likely that a request to reprogram fy2007 funds to reflect the new strategic framework will be presented to congress for approval soon after the fy2008 budget is unveiled .

secretary rice has argued that more coordination and coherence is needed in foreign assistance programs in order to meet transformational development goals .

with some 18 foreign aid accounts in both the state department and usaid appropriations , and numerous other programs scattered throughout other government agencies , secretary rice has not been the first to observe that the u.s. foreign aid apparatus is cumbersome and lends itself to inefficiency and redundancy .

a number of programs have similar or identical purposes , but management is split between usaid and state .

it is unclear at this point how much authority the dfa will have to coordinate activities , and what effect better coordination will have on funding levels .

for example , counter - narcotics and democracy programs are shared between usaid and state .

questions have been raised as to whether better coordination will produce efficiencies , reduce redundancy , and result in more effective programs .

it is also unclear how much authority the dfa will have over state department offices that are not formally a part of his portfolio .

for example , the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , administered by the global aids coordinator , is not formally a part of the dfa's budgeting authority .

the coordinator also reports directly to the secretary of state .

while the director of foreign assistance has been granted authority over state department and usaid aid programs , a number of other foreign aid agencies remain outside the scope of the director's responsibility .

as mentioned earlier , the largest is the millennium challenge corporation , but several others , like the peace corps , the overseas private investment corporation , and the trade and development agency maintain smaller but important aid activities .

in addition , the treasury department is responsible for u.s. participation in the world bank and a number of other international financial institutions .

it is unclear how the dfa will provide "guidance" to these types of programs in light of his mission to develop a coordinated u.s. foreign assistance strategy government - wide .

there is also concern that if a truly coordinated foreign assistance strategy is achieved , countries that are not considered prime candidates for transformational development , but who nonetheless are in need , will see their assistance reduced in favor of those countries that are moving in the right direction .

some critics of the restructuring fear that long - term development and poverty reduction goals , the traditional concern of usaid , will be overwhelmed by the demands of shorter - term strategic considerations , often of high priority for the state department .

the need to balance these often competing objectives will be challenging .

some observers have argued that usaid has lost considerable influence in past years due to the separation of policy and implementation in which the state department , as the stronger agency , has gained significant authority over policy .

examples include creating coordinators at state to oversee aid programs in eastern europe and the former soviet union , shifting primary responsibility over international hiv / aids programs from usaid to the global aids coordinator at the department , and dividing democracy promotion activities between the two agencies .

others fear that the role of usaid missions is being diminished in favor of a washington - based planning process .

the future of usaid is unclear at this juncture .

those who believe in usaid's traditional mission of promoting long - term development fear that the agency will be relegated to a position of solely implementing programs rather than shaping development policy .

secretary rice and other senior administration officials , however , contend that the reconfiguration will strengthen usaid's role and status .

since the dfa will also serve as usaid administrator , they argue , usaid will more likely participate in the policy and budget decision - making process to a greater extent than at present .

at his confirmation hearing , ambassador tobias noted that a difficulty faced by his predecessor at usaid , andrew natsios , was the time consumed negotiating with state department officials over whom the administrator had no authority .

this would no longer be the case , he argued , since the dfa would have such authority .

during the state department's 2005 review of foreign aid reforms , a number of other policy options were considered , but either dropped or deferred until later .

it appears that the department seriously considered creating a more formalized position of either a deputy secretary of state or undersecretary for foreign aid .

also planned but eventually dropped was a proposal to restructure the current appropriation accounts .

this option would have required extensive review and ultimate approval by congress .

administration officials have said that the current restructuring effort is only the first step in a more expansive reform of foreign aid , suggesting that issues considered but dropped may be part of subsequent initiative , perhaps in the 110 th congress .

but a number of observers note that a piecemeal approach to comprehensively reorienting u.s. foreign aid is particularly difficult , especially in the final two years of an administration .

they argue that the state department should have aimed for a much broader plan , consulted with congress throughout the review process , and presented a complete legislative package for congressional approval this year .

even previous to the current aid restructuring , some observers have asserted that congressional earmarks hamper the administration's flexibility to respond to changing world events and to prioritize aid objectives .

congress regularly exercises its prerogative to direct funds to certain countries and for certain objectives in the annual foreign operations appropriation bills that in many cases differ from the administration's budget request .

because the initial framework is being implemented within existing appropriation accounts , and without legislation that would restructure foreign aid in general , it is possible that congressional priorities may not completely correspond to the strategic framework as developed by the dfa .

for example , the fy2007 foreign operations bill reported by the senate appropriations committee ( s.rept .

109-277 ) contains numerous directives with regard to the level of funding for programs and activities , as well as recipient countries .

the senate bill restructures some accounts , consolidating several programs into a $1 billion democracy fund , and putting all health related programs into the child survival and health account .

the house - passed bill ( h.r .

5522 / h.rept .

109-486 ) creates a trade capacity enhancement fund that totals $522 million .

how congressional priorities will be reflected in the framework and in the fy2008 appropriations bills is a challenge congress and executive officials will have to confront .

