a variety of crs reports cover u.s. navy programs that in varying degrees can be viewed as responses to china's naval modernization effort , among other things .

these reports include but are not limited to the following: crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs20643 , navy ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carrier program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl30563 , f - 35 joint strike fighter ( jsf ) program , by [author name scrubbed] ( the jsf program is a joint dod program with navy participation ) crs report rl32418 , navy virginia ( ssn - 774 ) class attack submarine procurement: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32109 , navy ddg - 51 and ddg - 1000 destroyer programs: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33745 , navy aegis ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44175 , navy lasers , railgun , and hypervelocity projectile: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed .

in h.r .

5515 as reported by the house armed services committee ( h.rept .

115-676 of may 15 , 2018 ) , section 1242 states the following: sec .

1252 .

united states strategy on china .

 ( a ) findings. — congress finds the following: ( 1 ) the united states has a national strategic interest in ensuring that the united states maintains political , diplomatic , economic , military , and technological advantages over competitive adversaries .

 ( 2 ) the 2018 national defense strategy states that "the central challenge to the u.s. prosperity and security is the reemergence of long - term , strategic competition by what the national security strategy classifies as revisionist powers .

it is increasingly clear that china and russia want to shape a world consistent with their authoritarian model — gaining veto authority over other nations' economic , diplomatic , and security decisions" .

 ( 3 ) the 2018 national defense strategy further states that "china is leveraging military modernization , influence operations , and predatory economics to coerce neighboring countries to reorder the indo - pacific region to their advantage .

as china continues its economic and military ascendance , asserting power through an all - of - nation long term strategy , it will continue to pursue a military modernization program that seeks indo - pacific regional hegemony in the near - term and displacement of the united states to achieve global preeminence in the future" .

 ( 4 ) statements by officials of the united states and leading experts have emphasized that the united states requires a whole - of - government response , across the full spectrum of capabilities , to address the challenges posed by china .

 ( b ) statement of policy. — congress declares that long - term strategic competition with china is a principal priority for the united states that requires the integration of multiple elements of national power , including diplomatic , economic , intelligence , law enforcement , and military elements , to protect and strengthen national security .

 ( c ) strategy required. — ( 1 ) in general. — not later than march 1 , 2019 , the president shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report containing a whole - of - government strategy with respect to the people's republic of china .

 ( 2 ) elements of strategy. — the strategy required by paragraph ( 1 ) shall include the following: ( a ) strategic assessments of and planned responses to address the following activities by the chinese communist party: ( i ) the use of political influence , information operations , censorship , and propaganda to undermine democratic institutions and processes , and the freedoms of speech , expression , press , and academic thought .

 ( ii ) the use of intelligence networks to exploit open research and development .

 ( iii ) the use of economic tools , including market access and investment to gain access to sensitive united states industries .

 ( iv ) malicious cyber activities .

 ( v ) the use of investment , infrastructure , and development projects , such as china's belt and road initiative , in africa , europe , central asia , south america , and the indo - pacific region , and the polar silk road in the arctic , as a means to gain access and influence .

 ( vi ) the use of military activities , capabilities , and defense installations , and hybrid warfare methods , short of traditional armed conflict , against the united states or its allies and partners .

 ( b ) available or planned methods to enhance strategic communication to counter chinese influence and promote united states interests .

 ( c ) an identification of the key diplomatic , development , intelligence , military , and economic resources necessary to implement the strategy .

 ( d ) a plan to maximize the coordination and effectiveness of such resources to counter the threats posed by the activities described in subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( e ) available or planned interagency mechanisms for the coordination and implementation of the strategy .

 ( 3 ) form. — the report required by paragraph ( 1 ) shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex .

 ( 4 ) annual budget submission. — the president shall ensure that the annual budget submitted to congress pursuant to section 1105 of title 31 , united states code clearly highlights the programs and projects proposed to be funded that relate to the strategy required by paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 5 ) appropriate congressional committees. — in this section , the term "appropriage congressional committees" means — ( a ) the committee on armed services , the committee on foreign relations , the select committee on intelligence , the committee on finance , the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , the committee on the judiciary , the committee on commerce , science , and transportation , and the committee on the budget of the senate ; and ( b ) the committee on armed services , the committee on foreign affairs , the permanent select committee on intelligence , the committee on financial services , the committee on homeland security , the committee on the judiciary , the committee on energy and commerce , and the committee on the budget of the house of representatives .

section 1261 of h.r .

5515 as reported by the committee states the following: sec .

1261 .

report and public notification on china's military , maritime , and air activities in the indo - pacific region .

 ( a ) sense of congress. — it is the sense of congress that greater transparency of china's provocative military , maritime , and air activities in the indo - pacific region would — ( 1 ) aid in raising awareness of these activities in regional and international forums ; ( 2 ) enable regional security partners to more effectively protect their sovereignty and defend their rights under international law ; and ( 3 ) maintain stability within the region to enable constructive relations with china .

 ( b ) report. — ( 1 ) in general. — the secretary of defense , in consultation with the director of national intelligence and the secretary of state , shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees on a quarterly basis a report describing china's provocative military , maritime , and air activities in the indo - pacific region .

 ( 2 ) elements. — the report shall , at minimum , address china's provocative military , maritime , and air activities , military deployments , and operations and infrastructure construction in the east china sea , south china sea , taiwan strait , and indian ocean .

 ( 3 ) dissemination to regional allies. — the report shall be disseminated to regional allies and partners , as appropriate , in the indo - pacific region .

 ( 4 ) imagery and supporting analysis. — the report may include imagery from military aircraft and other sources with supporting analysis to describe china's provocative maritime and air activities .

 ( 5 ) form. — the report shall be available to the public and shall be submitted or carried out in unclassified form .

 ( c ) public notification. — ( 1 ) in general. — the secretary of defense , in consultation with the director of national intelligence and the secretary of state , shall provide notice to the public of any activities described in paragraph ( 2 ) immediately after the initiation of any such activities .

 ( 2 ) activities described. — the activities described in this paragraph are any significant destabilizing or deceptive activities of china , including reclamation or militarization activity in the indo - pacific region , use of military , government , or commercial aircraft or maritime vessels to intimidate regional neighbors .

 ( 3 ) written summary. — as soon as practicable after the notification to the public under paragraph ( 1 ) of any activities described in paragraph ( 2 ) , the secretary of defense shall distribute to the appropriate congressional committees and united states allies and security partners in the indo - pacific region a written summary to include imagery and supporting analysis describing such activities .

 ( d ) requirements relating to national security and protection of classified national security information. — the dissemination and availability of the report under subsection ( b ) and the notification to the public under subsection ( c ) shall be made in a manner consistent with national security and the protection of classified national security information .

 ( e ) appropriate congressional committees defined. — in this section , the term "appropriate congressional committees" means — ( 1 ) the congressional defense committees ; and ( 2 ) the committee on foreign relations and the select committee on intelligence of the senate and the committee on foreign affairs and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives .

h.rept .

115-676 states the following: long - range naval carrier aviation the committee notes that section 1067 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( public law 114 – 92 ) directed the secretary of defense to provide three independent studies of alternative future fleet platform architectures for the navy in the 2030 timeframe .

the committee further notes that the three studies concur as to the need for an enhanced carrier - based unmanned long - range strike capability beyond current plans and programs .

the committee remains concerned that while the mq – 25 program leverages unmanned carrier - launched airborne surveillance and strike requirements justification , the most recent documentation sent to industry did not include precision strike capability as a requirement .

the committee believes that the navy may be unnecessarily excluding a critical capability and precluding future growth in a platform that will likely be integrated into the carrier air wing for the next 30 years .

therefore , the committee encourages the navy to develop an unmanned anti - access penetrating long - range strike capability from the aircraft carrier , in addition to the current focus on the mq – 25a .

 ( page 15 ) h.rept .

115-676 also states the following: surface ship torpedo defense the evolving challenges and tensions in the indo - asia - pacific region underscore the ongoing requirement for a surface ship torpedo defense ( sstd ) capability for the navy's high - value units .

the committee understands that the chief of naval operations highlighted this requirement in a 2010 urgent operational need statement and that since that time , potential regional adversaries have continued to improve their submarine and torpedo capabilities .

despite this increasing threat to navy carrier strike groups and surface platforms , and the continued sstd testing success and program maturation , the budget request and the future years defense program inadequately support currently deployed systems and cancel further development of this sstd capability .

the committee is concerned that this decision is based on the need to balance several years of inadequate funding resources across a range of priorities and that this budgetary dynamic is forcing decisions that put at risk the readiness and security of u.s. naval and marine forces without adequate alternative plans to mitigate that threat .

as raised in previous communications with navy officials , the committee also has concerns that the navy has distributed various sstd program responsibilities among various navy resource sponsors , which has led to a lack of determined support for efficient program execution and a lack of focused leadership .

in light of these concerns , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to provide a briefing to the house committee on armed services by october 1 , 2018 , that includes , but is not limited to , the following: an assessment of the current and foreseeable torpedo threats facing high - value units and the navy's plan to adequately protect them , a description of the requirements for sstd , an assessment of the development program concerning each of the sstd capability elements , the plan to consolidate responsibility of the sstd program , and the plan to manage and sustain currently fielded sstd systems .

 ( page 19 ) h.rept .

115-676 also states the following: briefing for the senate committee on armed services and the house committee on armed services on us navy's efforts to expand carrier air wing long - range strike capability the committee notes that the aircraft carrier air wing has been optimized for striking power and sortie generation and believes that it may not be configured to support the long - range strike required by current and future threat systems .

while the introduction of the f – 35c will significantly expand stealth capabilities , the f – 35c could require increased range to address necessary targets .

the committee believes that several options could be used to address this issue to include developing a stealth tanker capability , improved engine technology or to develop and procure a strike capability that is purposely built to strike at increased range .

the committee further notes that the navy previously desired to significantly increase the carrier air wing range with the development of the a – 12 aircraft .

the committee understands that the a – 12 would have included a 5,000-pound internal carriage payload , stealth , and a range of 800 nautical miles .

while the committee believes that requirements to support this capability remain relevant and the technology available , the development of the a – 12 aircraft was mired in acquisition challenges that eventually resulted in the cancellation of the program .

while the committee further believes that the department of defense has successfully developed a suite of long - range intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities , the committee also believes that it is vital that the navy develop a carrier - based long - range strike capability .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to provide a briefing to the senate committee on armed services and the house committee on armed services by january 25 , 2019 , on options to expand the strike range of a carrier air wing in a contested environment , including manned and unmanned capabilities , and , department of the navy capabilities it plans to pursue in the next generation air dominance capability .

 ( page 46 ) h.rept .

115-676 also states the following: mq – 25 unmanned carrier aviation program the budget request contained $718.9 million for the mq – 25 unmanned carrier aviation program .

the committee supports the navy's efforts to develop and field a carrier - based unmanned aerial system to provide refueling as well as intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance support to the fleet .

the committee notes that the chief of naval operations intends to accelerate this program by 2 years in order to provide this capability by 2026 .

to date , the navy has provided insufficient air vehicle justification .

budget documents state that $598.78 million will go to air segment primary hardware development with very little further justification or cost estimates .

the committee recommends a decrease of $116.9 million , for a total of $602.0 million , to procure one test article for the mq – 25 unmanned carrier aviation program .

 ( pages 50-51 ) .

on may 22 , 2018 , as part of its consideration of h.r .

5515 , the house agreed to by voice vote h.amdt .

644 , an en bloc amendment including , inter alia , amendment number 91 as printed in h.rept .

115-698 of may 21 , 2018 , providing for consideration of h.r .

5515 .

amendment 91 added section 1298 , which states the following: sec .

1298 .

modification to annual report on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china .

paragraph ( 22 ) of section 1202 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( public law 106 – 65 ; 10 u.s.c .

113 note ) , as most recently amended by section 1261 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( public law 115 – 91 ; 131 stat .

1688 ) , is further amended by striking "activities in the south china sea" and inserting the following: ""activities — " ( a ) in the south china sea ; " ( b ) in the east china sea , including in the vicinity of the senkaku islands ; and " ( c ) in the indian ocean region." .

on may 23 , 2018 , as part of its consideration of h.r .

5515 , the house agreed to by voice vote h.amdt .

645 , an en bloc amendment including , inter alia , amendment number 40 as printed in h.rept .

115-702 of may 22 , 2018 , on h.res .

908 , providing for the further consideration of h.r .

5515 .

amendment number 40 added section 1299c , which states the following: sec .

1299c .

briefing on china's military installation in the republic of djibouti .

 ( a ) briefing required. — not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense , in coordination with the secretary of state , shall brief the appropriate congressional committees on the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the impact of the people's republic of china's first overseas military installation in the republic of djibouti on the ability of the united states forces to operate in the region .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of china's ability to obtain sensitive information and impact operations conducted from camp lemmonier in djibouti , the largest united states military installation on the african continent .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the ability of the president of djibouti to terminate by all methods , including by simple decree , the department of defense's lease agreement governing operation of camp lemmonier .

 ( 4 ) an assessment of the impact of the chinese base in djibouti on security and safety of united states personnel in djibouti .

 ( 5 ) an assessment of the status of china's compliance with the "protocol on blinding laser weapons" that forbids employment of laser weapons .

 ( 6 ) an assessment of the laser attack in djibouti that injured united states airmen .

 ( 7 ) an assessment of djibouti's compliance with its treaty obligations under the ottawa convention to end the use of landmines .

 ( b ) appropriate congressional committees defined. — in this section , the term "appropriate congressional committees" means — ( 1 ) the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign relations of the senate ; and ( 2 ) the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives .

in s. 2987 as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

115-262 of june 5 , 2018 ) , section 1242 states the following: sec .

1242 .

modification of annual report on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china .

section 1202 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( 10 u.s.c .

113 note ) is amended — ( 1 ) by redesignating paragraphs ( 6 ) through ( 16 ) and ( 17 ) through ( 23 ) as paragraphs ( 7 ) through ( 17 ) and ( 19 ) through ( 25 ) , respectively ; ( 2 ) by inserting after paragraph ( 5 ) the following new paragraph ( 6 ) : " ( 6 ) china's overseas military basing and logistics infrastructure .

" ; ( 3 ) in paragraph ( 8 ) , as so redesignated , by striking "including technology transfers and espionage" in the first sentence and inserting "including investment , industrial espionage , cybertheft , academia , and other means of technology transfer" ; ( 4 ) by inserting after paragraph ( 17 ) , as so redesignated , the following new paragraph ( 18 ) : " ( 18 ) an assessment of relations between china and the russian federation with respect to security and military matters .

" ; and ( 5 ) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: " ( 26 ) the relationship between chinese overseas investment , including initiatives such as the belt and road initiative , and chinese security and military strategy objectives .

" ( 27 ) efforts by china to influence the media , cultural institutions , business , and academic and policy communities of the united states to be more favorable to its security and military strategy and objectives .

" ( 28 ) efforts by china to monitor and influence , in support of its security and military strategy and objectives , the following: " ( a ) chinese citizens in the united states .

" ( b ) united states citizens of chinese descent." .

regarding section 1242 , s.rept .

115-262 states the following ( emphasis added ) : modification of annual report on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china ( sec .

1242 ) the committee recommends a provision that would amend section 1202 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( public law 106 – 65 ) , and modify the annual report on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china .

while significant attention has been focused on russian malign influence in recent years , the committee is also concerned by china's increasingly active influence operations , which exploit the openness of democratic systems , including in the united states .

therefore , among other elements that would be added to the matters included in the annual report for analyses and forecasts , the provision would add efforts by china to influence the media , cultural institutions , business , and academic and policy communities of the united states to be more favorable to its [i.e. , china's] security and military strategy and objectives .

the committee recognizes that the department of defense ( dod ) is not the agency primarily responsible for countering chinese malign influence in the united states .

however , the committee encourages the secretary of defense to examine how dod can make appropriate use of existing authorities and resources to support interagency efforts to counter chinese malign influence .

for example , the committee is concerned about china's use of confucius institutes — which are under the supervision of hanban , a chinese state agency — as a tool of malign influence at american universities .

multiple reports by academic organizations have highlighted the threat to academic freedom and open debate posed by confucius institutes , and have called on universities to terminate or substantially renegotiate agreements with hanban .

in order to protect free inquiry and free expression , the secretary of defense could examine whether dod should terminate research and development partnerships with universities that fail to terminate or substantially renegotiate agreements with hanban .

 ( pages 297-298 ) s.rept .

115-262 also states the following: long range anti - ship missile the budget request included $81.2 million in line number 17 of [the] weapons procurement , navy ( wpn ) [account] , for the long range anti - ship missile .

the committee notes that after several years of assuming risk in the procurement of munitions , the current level of munitions inventory is low .

in an attempt to address this , the department of defense has requested many munitions be funded at the maximum production capacity .

however , there are several munitions that are not funded at maximum capacity within the budget request .

the long range anti - ship missile is a highly - capable system that is critical for the warfight .

the committee recommends an increase of $30.0 million in line number 17 of wpn for an additional 10 missiles .

this increases procurement to the maximum capacity for the long range anti - ship missile .

this was on the chief of naval operations' unfunded priorities list .

 ( page 22 ) s.rept .

115-262 also states the following: surface ship torpedo defense the budget request included $11.3 million in line number 42 of [the] other procurement , navy ( opn ) [account] , for surface ship torpedo defense programs .

the committee notes a delay in the an / slq – 25e contract award .

therefore , the committee recommends a decrease of $5.0 million in line number 42 of opn .

additionally , the committee is concerned by the termination of the torpedo warning system ( tws ) , which addressed a critical capability gap .

accordingly , not later than january 1 , 2019 , the committee directs the chief of naval operations to provide the congressional defense committees with a report on the specific capability gap or gaps that the tws was rapidly fielded to address , the performance of the tws in addressing such gap or gaps , the warfighting risk that will be accepted without the tws deployed , and the navy's plans to address the specific capability gap or gaps without the tws deployed .

 ( page 29 ) s.rept .

115-262 also states the following: report on navy's current and future state of long range strike capability the secretary of the navy is directed to submit a report to the congressional defense committees not later than february 1 st , 2019 that describes the current and future state of the navy's long range strike strategy .

this report should include a comprehensive description of the navy's plan to use all the various navy munitions programs to meet operational requirements for land and maritime strike .

the report should include discussion of the next generation long - range attack weapon ( nglaw ) , the tomahawk and follow - on upgrades like the maritime strike tomahawk and the joint multi - effects warhead system ( jmews ) , conventional prompt strike , over - the - horizon missile , sm – 6 , the long range anti - ship missile ( lrasm ) , and any follow - on programs .

the report should include how the navy strategy will impact to the missile industrial base .

 ( page 49 ) .

in the conference report ( h.rept .

115-874 of july 25 , 2018 ) on h.r .

5515 , section 1260 states ( emphasis added ) : sec .

1260 .

modification of annual report on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china .

section 1202 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( 10 u.s.c .

113 note ) is amended — ( 1 ) by redesignating paragraphs ( 6 ) through ( 16 ) and ( 17 ) through ( 23 ) as paragraphs ( 7 ) through ( 17 ) and ( 19 ) through ( 25 ) , respectively ; ( 2 ) by inserting after paragraph ( 5 ) the following new paragraph ( 6 ) : '' ( 6 ) china's overseas military basing and logistics infrastructure .

'' ; ( 3 ) in paragraph ( 8 ) , as so redesignated , by striking ''including technology transfers and espionage'' in the first sentence and inserting ''including by espionage and technology transfers through investment , industrial espionage , cybertheft , academia , and other means'' ; ( 4 ) by inserting after paragraph ( 17 ) , as so redesignated , the following new paragraph ( 18 ) : '' ( 18 ) an assessment of relations between china and the russian federation with respect to security and military matters .

'' ; and ( 5 ) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: '' ( 26 ) the relationship between chinese overseas investment , including initiatives such as the belt and road initiative , and chinese security and military strategy objectives .

'' ( 27 ) efforts by the government of the people's republic of china to influence the media , cultural institutions , business , and academic and policy communities of the united states to be more favorable to its security and military strategy and objectives .

'' ( 28 ) efforts by the government of the people's republic of china to use nonmilitary tools in other countries , including diplomacy and political coercion , information operations , and economic pressure , including predatory lending practices , to support its security and military objectives.'' .

h.rept .

115-874 states: briefing on china's military installation in the republic of djibouti the house bill contained a provision ( sec .

1299c ) that would require a briefing from the secretary of defense and secretary of state on an assessment of chinese military operations in djibouti and its compliance with international treaty obligations related to laser weapons and landmines .

the senate amendment contained no similar provision .

the house recedes .

the conferees direct not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this act the secretary of defense , in coordination with the secretary of state , to provide a briefing to the armed services committees of the senate and house of representatives and the foreign relations committee of the senate and foreign affairs committee of the house of representatives on china's military installation in the republic of djibouti .

the briefing shall include the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the impact of the people's republic of china's first overseas military installation in the republic of djibouti on the ability of the united states forces to operate in the region .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of china's ability to obtain sensitive information and impact operations conducted from camp lemonier in djibouti , the largest united states military installation on the african continent .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the ability of the president of djibouti to terminate by all methods , including by simple decree , the department of defense's lease agreement governing operation of camp lemonier .

 ( 4 ) an assessment of the impact of the chinese base in djibouti on security and safety of united states personnel in djibouti .

 ( 5 ) an assessment of the status of china's compliance with the 'protocol on blinding laser weapons' that forbids employment of laser weapons for the purposes of blinding .

 ( 6 ) an assessment of the laser attack in djibouti that injured united states airmen .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

115-769 of june 20 , 2018 ) on h.r .

6157 , states the following: tomahawk production the committee is concerned by the navy's mismanagement of the tomahawk missile program .

in the previous two fiscal years , the congress has added funding above the budget requests for the tomahawk program due to the fact that the navy has requested fewer missiles than necessary to maintain a minimum sustainment rate and that missiles have been expended in the central command area of operations .

the department of defense appropriations act , 2018 , included $102,000,000 above the request to procure additional munitions , as requested by the navy in its updated unfunded requirements list .

however , despite the request by the navy and the direction by the congress to procure additional tomahawks , the navy has now proposed to not procure any missiles , but to use the funding to purchase support and test equipment .

therefore , the committee recommendation includes a rescission of $115,657,000 of fiscal year 2018 funds from the tomahawk program and directs the secretary of the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees not later than 90 days after the enactment of this act that details the inventory requirement and current level for the tomahawk missile and the feasibility of restarting missile production in fiscal year 2020 .

 ( page 154 ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

115-290 of june 28 , 2018 ) on s. 3159 states the following: next generation land attack weapon [nglaw] and interim capabilities . — the fiscal year 2019 president's budget request includes $16,900,000 to continue the analysis of alternatives [aoa] for the nglaw .

the committee understands that nglaw is intended to address the navy's cruise missile strategy against future threats and targets in time to replace or modify existing weapons programs .

the committee notes that a capabilities based assessment conducted by the navy deferred the nglaw initial operating capability [ioc] requirement by several years and the committee further notes that the aoa , which commenced in fiscal year 2017 , has expanded in scope and its completion is delayed .

therefore , the committee has supported efforts to sustain the industrial base and provide incremental improvements to existing capabilities as interim solutions .

this includes investments in multiple capability upgrades and the acquisition of additional tomahawk all - up rounds [aur] , most recently by providing $102,000,000 above the president's budget request in the department of defense appropriations act , 2018 ( public law 115 – 141 ) , pursuant to the navy's fiscal year 2018 enhancement request following enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( public law 115 – 123 ) .

the fiscal year 2019 president's budget request for tomahawk does not include funding for new production aurs , reflecting the navy's strategy to transition from new production to recertification and modernization activities .

in addition , the navy has proposed to repurpose the fiscal year 2018 appropriated increase for new production missiles , in contradiction to the navy's request .

the committee directs the secretary of the navy to conduct a full review of the tomahawk program including: an analysis of the viability of new production in fiscal year 2020 ; an analysis of the capacity for concurrent new production and recertification activities within existing facilities ; revised cost and schedule projections for modification and recertification activities , to include alternatives with and without concurrent new production ; a detailed review of the execution of the fiscal year 2017 and 2018 new production congressional adds ; certified courses of action and cost estimates for the $102,000,000 new production funding added in fiscal year 2018 , to include detailed actions and milestones ; and an analysis of surface and sub - surface launched land attack weapons inventory and requirements projections through the nglaw ioc date , to include tomahawk and other weapons systems that may provide an interim capability .

the secretary of the navy shall provide a report detailing the results of the review to the congressional defense committees not later than 90 days after enactment of this act .

in addition , the committee is aware that a surface launched variant of the long range anti - ship missile [lrasm] offers the potential to increase the fleet's surface warfare capability at a relatively low cost - per - kill while leveraging existing capability .

therefore , the committee directs the deputy chief of naval operations for warfare systems to provide a report to the congressional defense committees not later than 90 days after the enactment of this act identifying the capabilities the surface launched lrasm could bring to the fleet .

further , the assistant secretary of the navy ( financial management and comptroller ) is directed to identify costs to validate a surface launch lrasm and the benefits of fielding such a system .

 ( page 98-99 ) s.rept .

115-290 also states the following: offensive anti - surface warfare increment i / long range anti - ship missile operational test . — the offensive anti - surface warfare [oasuw] increment i / long range anti - ship missile [lrasm] will provide an early operational capability in 2018 in support of an urgent operational needs statement [uons] from us .

pacific fleet .

the committee notes that in the fiscal year 2019 president's budget request , the navy has included $129,400,000 in fiscal years 2019 and 2020 for oasuw increment i / lrasm capability improvements , which the committee fully supports .

however , the committee is concerned that the navy has not agreed to a test plan for these capability improvements with the director , operational test and evaluation , nor budgeted for any operational test requirements .

the committee does not agree with this approach and directs that of the funds requested in fiscal year 2019 for oasuw increment i / lrasm capability improvements , no less than $20,000,000 be applied toward operational test .

further , the committee directs the director , operational test and evaluation , in coordination with the deputy chief of naval operations for warfare systems to provide to the congressional defense committees , with the fiscal year 2020 president's budget request , a plan for oasuw increment i / lrasm full independent operational test [iot&e] ; the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development and acquisition ) is directed to submit an acquisition strategy that supports that test strategy ; and the assistant secretary of the navy ( financial management and comptroller ) is directed to certify that the fiscal year 2020 president's budget request for oasuw increment i / lrasm fully funds the development of capability improvements and the associated operational test strategy .

finally , the committee directs that not more than $25,000,000 may be obligated for oasuw increment i / lrasm capability improvements in fiscal year 2019 until the deputy chief of naval operations for warfare systems certifies the requirements for capability improvements to the congressional defense committees .

 ( pages 175-176 ) appendix a .

strategic and budgetary context this appendix provides an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which china's naval modernization effort and its implications for u.s. navy capabilities may be considered .

there is also a broader context of u.s. - china relations and u.s. foreign policy toward the asia - pacific that is covered in other crs reports .

shift in international security environment world events have led some observers , starting in late 2013 , to conclude that the international security environment has undergone a shift from the familiar post - cold war era of the past 20 to 25 years , also sometimes known as the unipolar moment ( with the united states as the unipolar power ) , to a new and different situation that features , among other things , renewed great power competition with china and russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the u.s. - led international order that has operated since world war ii .

china's improving naval capabilities can be viewed as one reflection of that shift .

uncertainty regarding future u.s. role in the world the overall u.s. role in the world since the end of world war ii in 1945 ( i.e. , over the past 70 years ) is generally described as one of global leadership and significant engagement in international affairs .

a key aim of that role has been to promote and defend the open international order that the united states , with the support of its allies , created in the years after world war ii .

in addition to promoting and defending the open international order , the overall u.s. role is generally described as having been one of promoting freedom , democracy , and human rights , while criticizing and resisting authoritarianism where possible , and opposing the emergence of regional hegemons in eurasia or a spheres - of - influence world .

certain statements and actions from the trump administration have led to uncertainty about the administration's intentions regarding the future u.s. role in the world .

based on those statements and actions , some observers have speculated that the trump administration may want to change the u.s. role in one or more ways .

a change in the overall u.s. role could have profound implications for u.s. defense strategy , plans , and programs , including those relating to countering improved chinese naval capabilities .

u.s. grand strategy the above - mentioned shift in the international security environment and uncertainty over the future u.s. role in the world has led to a renewed emphasis in discussions of u.s. security and foreign policy on grand strategy and geopolitics .

from a u.s. perspective , grand strategy can be understood as strategy considered at a global or interregional level , as opposed to strategies for specific countries , regions , or issues .

geopolitics refers to the influence on international relations and strategy of basic world geographic features such as the size and location of continents , oceans , and individual countries .

from a u.s. perspective on grand strategy and geopolitics , it can be noted that most of the world's people , resources , and economic activity are located not in the western hemisphere , but in the other hemisphere , particularly eurasia .

in response to this basic feature of world geography , u.s. policymakers for the past several decades have chosen to pursue , as a key element of u.s. national strategy , a goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of eurasia or another , on the grounds that such a hegemon could represent a concentration of power strong enough to threaten core u.s. interests by , for example , denying the united states access to some of the other hemisphere's resources and economic activity .

although u.s. policymakers have not often stated this key national strategic goal explicitly in public , u.s. military ( and diplomatic ) operations in recent decades — both wartime operations and day - to - day operations — can be viewed as having been carried out in no small part in support of this key goal .

some observers view china's military ( including naval ) modernization effort as part of broader chinese effort to become a regional hegemon in its part of eurasia .

renewed focus on great power competition as noted earlier , the trump administration's december 2017 national security strategy ( nss ) and the 11-page unclassified summary of its january 2018 national defense strategy ( nds ) reorient u.s. national security strategy and , within that , u.s. defense strategy , toward an explicit primary focus on great power competition with china and russia and on countering chinese and russian military capabilities .

the new u.s. strategy orientation set forth in the 2017 nss and 2018 nds is sometimes referred to a "2+3" strategy , meaning a strategy for countering two primary challenges ( china and russia ) and three additional challenges ( north korea , iran , and terrorist groups ) .

emphasis on indo - pacific region as also noted earlier , in addition to the 2017 nss and 2018 nds , the trump administration has highlighted the concept of a free and open indo - pacific ( foip ) , with the term indo - pacific referring to the indian ocean , the pacific ocean , and the countries ( particularly those in eurasia ) bordering on those two oceans .

the concept , which is still being fleshed out by the trump administration , appears to be a general u.s foreign policy and national security construct for the region , but observers view it as one that includes a military component .

declining u.s .

technological and qualitative edge dod officials have expressed concern that the technological and qualitative edge that u.s. military forces have had relative to the military forces of other countries is being narrowed by improving military capabilities in other countries .

china's improving naval capabilities contribute to that concern .

challenge to u.s. sea control and u.s .

position in western pacific observers of chinese and u.s. military forces view china's improving naval capabilities as posing a challenge in the western pacific to the u.s. navy's ability to achieve and maintain control of blue - water ocean areas in wartime — the first such challenge the u.s. navy has faced since the end of the cold war .

more broadly , these observers view china's naval capabilities as a key element of a broader chinese military challenge to the long - standing status of the united states as the leading military power in the western pacific .

implications of military balance in absence of a conflict some observers consider a u.s. - chinese military conflict in the pacific over taiwan or some other issue to be very unlikely because of significant u.s. - chinese economic linkages and the tremendous damage that such a conflict could cause on both sides .

in the absence of such a conflict , the u.s. - chinese military balance in the pacific could nevertheless influence day - to - day choices made by other pacific countries on whether to align their policies more closely with china or the united states .

in this sense , decisions that congress and the executive branch make regarding u.s. navy programs for countering improved chinese maritime military forces could influence the political evolution of the pacific and consequently the ability of the united states to pursue various policy goals .

china's "salami - slicing" tactics in east and south china seas china's actions for asserting and defending its maritime territorial and exclusive economic zone ( eez ) claims in the east china ( ecs ) and south china sea ( scs ) , particularly since late 2013 , have heightened concerns among observers that ongoing disputes over these waters and some of the islands within them could lead to a crisis or conflict between china and a neighboring country , and that the united states could be drawn into such a crisis or conflict as a result of obligations the united states has under bilateral security treaties with japan and the philippines .

more broadly , china's actions for asserting and defending its maritime territorial and eez claims , including recent land reclamation and construction activities at several sites in the scs , have led to increasing concerns among some observers that china is seeking to dominate or gain control of its near - seas region .

some observers characterize china's approach for asserting and defending its territorial claims in the ecs and scs as a "salami - slicing" strategy that employs a series of incremental actions , none of which by itself is a casus belli , to gradually change the status quo in china's favor .

regional u.s .

allies and partners the united states has certain security - related policies pertaining to taiwan under the taiwan relations act ( h.r .

2479 / p.l .

96-8 of april 10 , 1979 ) .

the united states has bilateral security treaties with japan , south korea , the philippines , and an additional security treaty with australia and new zealand .

in addition to u.s. treaty allies , certain other countries in the western pacific can be viewed as current or emerging u.s. security partners .

limits on defense spending in budget control act of 2011 as amended limits on the "base" portion of the u.s. defense budget established by budget control act of 2011 , or bca ( s. 365 / p.l .

112-25 of august 2 , 2011 ) , as amended , combined with some of the considerations above , have led to discussions among observers about how to balance competing demands for finite u.s. defense funds , and about whether programs for responding to china's military modernization effort can be adequately funded while also adequately funding other defense - spending priorities , such as initiatives for responding to russia's actions in ukraine and elsewhere in europe and u.s. operations for countering the islamic state organization in the middle east .

u.s. navy officials have stated that if defense spending remains constrained to levels set forth in the bca as amended , the navy in coming years will not be able to fully execute all the missions assigned to it under the 2012 dod strategic guidance document .

appendix b .

2014 oni testimony on china's navy this appendix presents the prepared statement of jesse l. karotkin , oni's senior intelligence officer for china , for a january 30 , 2014 , hearing before the u.s. - china economic and security review commission on china's military modernization and its implications for the united states .

the text of the statement is as follows: trends in china's naval modernization us china economic and security review commission testimony jesse l. karotkin introduction at the dawn of the 21 st century , the people's liberation army navy ( pla ( n ) ) remained largely a littoral force .

though china's maritime interests were rapidly changing , the vast majority of its naval platforms offered very limited capability and endurance , particularly in blue water .

over the past 15 years the pla ( n ) has carried out an ambitious modernization effort , resulting in a more technologically advanced and flexible force .

this transformation is evident not only the pla ( n ) 's gulf of aden counter - piracy presence , which is now in its sixth year , but also in the navy's more advanced regional operations and exercises .

in contrast to its narrow focus a just decade ago , the pla ( n ) is evolving to meet a wide range of missions including conflict with taiwan , enforcement of maritime claims , protection of economic interests , as well as counter - piracy and humanitarian missions .

the pla ( n ) currently possesses approximately 77 principal surface combatants , more than 60 submarines , 55 medium and large amphibious ships , and roughly 85 missile - equipped small combatants .

although overall order - of - battle has remained relatively constant in recent years , the pla ( n ) is rapidly retiring legacy combatants in favor of larger , multi - mission ships , equipped with advanced anti - ship , anti - air , and anti - submarine weapons and sensors .

during 2013 alone , over fifty naval ships were laid down , launched , or commissioned , with a similar number expected in 2014 .

major qualitative improvements are occurring within naval aviation and the submarine force , which are increasingly capable of striking targets hundreds of miles from the chinese mainland .

the introduction of long - range anti - ship cruise missiles across the force , coupled with non - pla ( n ) weapons such as the df - 21d anti - ship ballistic missile , and the requisite c4isr architecture to support targeting , will allow china to significantly expand its "counter - intervention" capability further into the philippine sea and south china sea over the next decade .

many of these capabilities are designed specifically to deter or prevent u.s. military intervention in the region .

even if order - of - battle numbers remain relatively constant through 2020 , the pla ( n ) will possess far more combat capability due to the rapid rate of acquisition coupled with improving operational proficiency .

beijing characterizes its military modernization effort as a "three - step development strategy" that entails laying a "solid foundation" by 2010 , making "major progress" by 2020 , and being able to win "informationized wars by the mid - 21 st century. .

although the pla ( n ) faces capability gaps in some key areas , including deep - water anti - submarine warfare and joint operations , they have achieved their "strong foundation" and are emerging as a well equipped , competent , and more professional force .

a multi - mission force as china began devoting greater resources to naval modernization in the late 1990s , virtually all of its ships , submarines were essentially single - mission platforms , poorly equipped to operate beyond the support of land - based defenses .

the pla ( n ) has subsequently acquired larger , multi - mission platforms , capable of long - distance deployments and offshore operations .

china's latest defense white paper , released in 2013 , noted that the pla ( n ) "endeavors to accelerate the modernization of its forces for comprehensive offshore operations… [and] develop blue water capabilities. .

the luyang iii - class ddg ( 052d ) , which will likely enter service this year , embodies the trend towards a more flexible force with advanced air defenses and long - range strike capability .

china has made the most demonstrable progress in anti - surface warfare ( asuw ) , deploying advanced , long - range ascms throughout the force .

with the support from improved c4isr , this investment significantly expands the area that surface ships , submarines , and aircraft and are able to hold at risk .

the pla ( n ) has also made notable gains in anti - air warfare ( aaw ) , enabling the recent expansion of blue - water operations .

just over a decade ago , just 20 percent of pla ( n ) combatants were equipped with a rudimentary point air defense capability .

as a result , the surface force was effectively tethered to the shore .

initially relying on russian surface to air missiles ( sams ) to address this gap , newer pla ( n ) combatants are equipped with indigenous medium - to - long range area air defense missiles , modern combat management systems , and air - surveillance sensors .

although progress in anti - submarine warfare ( asw ) is less pronounced , there are indications that the pla ( n ) is committed to addressing this gap .

more surface platforms are being equipped with modern sonar systems , to include towed arrays and hangars to support shipboard helicopters .

additionally , china appears to be developing ay - 8 naval variant that is equipped with a magnetic anomaly detector ( mad ) boom , typical of asw aircraft .

over the next decade , china is likely to make gains in asw , both from improved sensors and operator proficiency .

china's submarine force remains concentrated almost exclusively on asuw , with exception of the jin ssbn , which will likely commence deterrent patrols in 2014 .

the type - 095 guided missile attack submarine , which china will likely construct over the next decade , may be equipped with a land - attack capability .

the deployment of lacms on future submarines and surface combatants could enhance china's ability to strike key u.s. bases throughout the region , including guam .

naval aviation is also expanding its mission set and capability in maritime strike , maritime patrols , anti - submarine warfare , airborne early warning , and logistics .

although it will be several years before the liaoning aircraft carrier and its air wing can be considered fully operational , this development signals a new chapter in chinese naval aviation .

by 2020 , carrier - based aircraft will be able to support fleet operations in a limited air - defense role .

although some older air platforms remain in the inventory , the pla ( n ) is clearly shifting to a naval aviation force that is equipped to execute a wide variety of missions both near and far from home .

pla ( n ) surface force china analysts face a perpetual challenge over how to accurately convey the size and capability of china's surface force .

as u.s. navy capt dale rielage noted in [the u.s .

naval institute] proceedings last year , key differences in the type of pla ( n ) ships ( in comparison to the u.s. navy ) make it extremely difficult to apply a common basis for comparing the order of battle .

a comprehensive tally of ships that includes hundreds of small patrol craft , mine warfare craft , and coastal auxiliaries provides a deceptively inflated picture of china's actual combat capability .

conversely , a metric based on ship displacement returns the opposite effect , given the fact that many of china's modern ships , such as the 1,500 ton jiangdao ffl , are small by u.s. standards , and equipped primarily for regional missions .

to accurately capture potential impact of china's naval modernization , it is necessary to provide a more detailed examination of the ships and capabilities in relation to the missions they are likely intended to fulfill .

for the sake of clarity , the term "modern" is used in this paper to describe a surface combatant that possesses a multi - mission capability , incorporates more than a point air defense capability , and has the ability to embark a helicopter .

as of early 2014 , the pla ( n ) possesses 27 destroyers ( 17 of which are modern ) , 48 frigates ( 31 of which are modern ) , 10 new corvettes , 85 modern missile - armed patrol craft , 56 amphibious ships , 42 mine warfare ships , over 50 major auxiliary ships , and over 400 minor auxiliary ships and service / support craft .

during the 1990s , china began addressing immediate capability gaps by importing modern surface combatants , weapon systems , and sensors from russia .

never intended as a long - term solution , the pla ( n ) simultaneously sought to design and produce its own weapons and platforms from a mix of imported and domestic technology .

less than a decade ago china's surface force could be characterized as an eclectic mix of vintage , modern , converted , imported , and domestic platforms utilizing a variety weapons and sensors and with widely ranging capabilities and varying reliability .

by the second decade of the 2000s , surface ship acquisition had shifted entirely to chinese designed units , equipped primarily with chinese weapons and sensors , though some engineering components and subsystems remain imported or license - produced in - country .

until recently , china tended to build small numbers of a large variety of ships , often changing classes rapidly as advancements were made .

in the period between 1995 and 2005 alone , china constructed or purchased major surface combatants and submarines in at least different 15 classes .

using a combination of imported technology , reverse engineering , and indigenous development , the prc has rapidly narrowed the technology and capability gap between itself and the world's modern navies .

additionally , china is implementing much longer production runs of advanced surface combatants and conventional submarines , suggesting a greater satisfaction in their recent ship designs .

the pla ( n ) surface force has made particularly strong gains in anti - surface warfare ( asuw ) , with sustained development of advanced anti - ship cruise missiles ( ascms ) and over - the - horizon targeting systems .

most pla ( n ) combatants carry variants of the yj - 8a ascm ( ~65-120nm ) , while the luyang ii - class ( 052d ) destroyer is fitted with the yj - 62 ( ~120nm ) , and the newest class , luyang iii - class destroyer is fitted with a new vertically - launched ascm .

as these extended range weapons require sophisticated over - the - horizon - targeting ( oth - t ) capability to realize their full potential , china has invested heavily in maritime reconnaissance systems at the national and tactical levels , as well as communication systems and datalinks to enable the flow of accurate and timely targeting data .

in addition to extended range ascms , the luyang iii ddg , which is expected to enter the force in 2014 , may also be equipped with advanced sams , anti - submarine missiles , and possibly an eventual land - attack cruise missile ( lacm ) from its multipurpose vertical launch system .

these modern , high - end combatants will likely provide increased weapons stores and overall flexibility as surface action groups venture more frequently into blue water in the coming years .

further enabling this trend , china's surface force has achieved sustained progress in shipboard air defense .

the pla ( n ) is retiring legacy destroyers and frigates that possess at most a point air defense capability , while constructing newer ships with medium - to - long range area air defense missiles .

the pla ( n ) has produced a total of six luyang ii ddg with the hhq - 9 surface - to - air missile ( ~55nm ) , and the luyang iii ddg will carry an extended - range variant of the hhq - 9 .

at least fifteen jiangkai ii ffgs ( 054a ) , with the vertically - launched hhq - 16 ( ~20-40nm ) are now operational , with more under construction .

sometimes referred to as the "workhorse" of the pla ( n ) these modern frigates have proven instrumental in sustaining china's counter - piracy presence in the gulf of aden .

the new generation of destroyers and frigates utilize modern combat management systems and air - surveillance sensors , such as the chinese sea eagle and dragon eye phased - array radars .

while older platforms with little or no air defense capability remain in the inventory , the addition of these newer units allows the pla ( n ) 's surface force to operate with increased confidence outside of shore - based air defense systems , as one or two ships can now provide air defense for the entire task group .

currently , approximately 65 percent of china's destroyers and frigates are modern .

by 2020 that figure will rise to an estimated 85 percent .

the pla ( n ) has also phased out hundreds of cold war - era missile patrol boats and patrol craft as they shifted from a coastal defense orientation to a more active , offshore orientation over the past two decades .

during this period china acquired a modern coastal - defense and area - denial capability with 60 houbei class guided missile patrol boats .

the houbei design integrates a high - speed wave - piercing catamaran hull , waterjet propulsion , considerable signature - reduction features , and the yj - 8a ascm .

while not equipped for coastal patrol duties , the houbei is an essential component of the pla ( n ) 's ability to react at short notice to threats within china's exclusive economic zone ( eez ) and slightly beyond .

in 2012 china began producing the new jiangdao class corvette ( ffl ) , which , in contrast to the houbei , is optimized to serve as the primary naval patrol platform in china's eez and potentially defend china's territorial claims in the south china sea ( scs ) and east china sea ( ecs ) .

the 1500-ton jiangdao is equipped for littoral warfare with 76mm , 30mm , and 12.7mm guns , four yj - 8 ascms , torpedo tubes , and a helicopter landing area .

the jiangdao is ideally - suited for general medium - endurance patrols , counter - piracy , and other littoral duties in regional waters , but is not sufficiently armed or equipped for major combat operations in blue - water .

at least ten jiangdaos are already operational and thirty or more units may be built , replacing both older small patrol craft as well as some of the pla ( n ) 's aging jianghu i frigates .

the rapid construction of jiangdao ffls accounts for a significant share of ship construction in 2012 and 2013 .

in recent years , china's amphibious acquisition has shifted decisively towards larger , high - end , ships .

since 2007 china has commissioned three yuzhao class amphibious transport docks ( lpd ) , which provide a considerably greater capacity and flexibility compared to previous landing ships .

at 20,000 tons , the yuzhao is the largest domestically produced chinese warship and has deployed as far as the gulf of aden .

the yuzhao can carry up to four of the new air cushion landing craft yuyi lcua ( similar to lcac ) , as well as four or more helicopters , armored vehicles , and troops on long - distance deployments .

additional yuzhaos are expected to be built , as well as a follow - on amphibious assault ship ( lha ) design that is larger and with a full - deck flight deck for additional helicopters .

the major investment in a large - deck lpd signaled the pla ( n ) 's emerging interest in expeditionary warfare and over - the horizon amphibious assault capability , as well as a flexible platform for humanitarian assistance / disaster relief ( ha / dr ) and counter - piracy capabilities .

in contrast , the pla ( n ) appears to have suspended all construction of lower - end tank landing ships ( lst / lsm ) since 2006 , following a spate of acquisition in the early 2000s .

the expanded set of missions further into the western pacific and indian ocean , including counter - piracy deployments , ha / dr missions , survey voyages and goodwill port visits have increased demands on pla ( n ) 's limited fleet of ocean - going replenishment and service vessels .

in 2013 the pla ( n ) added two new fuchi replenishment oilers ( aors ) bringing the total aor force level to seven ships .

these ships constantly rotate in support of gulf of aden ( goa ) counter - piracy deployments .

in addition , the pla ( n ) recently added three state - of - the - art dalao submarine rescue ships ( asr ) and three dasan fast - response rescue ships ( ars ) .

other recent additions include the anwei hospital ship ( ah ) , the danyao af ( island resupply ) , yuan wang 5&6 ( satellite and rocket launch telemetry ) , three kanhai ag ( swath - hull survey ships ) , two yuan wang 21 missile tenders ( aem ) , and the large daguan ag , which provides berthing and logistical support to the kuznetsov aircraft carrier liaoning .

traditionally , anti - submarine warfare ( asw ) has lagged behind asuw and aaw as a priority for the pla ( n ) .

some moderate progress still continues , with more surface ships possessing modern sonars , to include towed arrays , as well as hangars to support shipboard helicopters .

given these developments , the pla ( n ) surface force may be more capable of identifying adversary submarines in limited areas by 2020 .

over the past decade , china's surface force has made steady proficiency gains and become much more operationally focused .

beginning in 2009 , the gulf of aden deployments have provided naval commanders and crews with their first real experience with extended deployments and overseas logistics .

we have also witnessed an increase in the complexity of training and exercises and an expansion of operating areas both within and beyond the first island chain .

to increase realism , the force engages in opposing force training and employs advanced training aids .

in 2012 the surface force conducted an unprecedented seven deployments to the philippine sea .

this was followed by nine philippine sea deployments in 2013 .

extended surface deployments and more advanced training build core warfare proficiency in asuw , asw and aaw .

furthermore , these deployments reflect efforts to "normalize" distant seas training in line with general staff department ( gsd ) guidelines .

china's aircraft carrier program with spectacular ceremony in september 2012 , china commissioned its first carrier , the liaoning .

china is currently engaged in the long and complicated path of learning to operate fixed wing aircraft from the carrier's deck .

the first launches and recoveries of the j - 15 aircraft occurred in november 2012 , with additional testing and training occurring in 2013 .

despite recent progress , it will take several years before chinese carrier - based air regiments are operational .

the pla's newspaper , jiefangjun bao recently noted , "aircraft carrier development is core to the pla ( n ) , and could serve as a deterrent to countries who provoke trouble at sea , against the backdrop of the u.s. pivot to asia and growing territorial disputes in the south china sea and east china sea. .

the liaoning is much less capable of power projection than the u.s. navy's nimitz - class carriers .

not only does liaoning's smaller size limit the total number of aircraft it can carry , but also the ski - jump configuration significantly limits aircraft fuel and ordnance load for take offs .

furthermore , china does not yet possess specialized supporting aircraft such as the e - 2c hawkeye , which provides tactical airborne early warning ( aew ) .

the liaoning is suited for fleet air defense missions , rather than us - style , long range power projection .

although it has a full suite of weapons and combat systems , liaoning's primary role for the coming years will be to develop the skills required for carrier aviation and to train its first groups of pilots and deck crews .

china's initial carrier air regiment will consist of the shenyang j - 15 flying shark , which is externally similar to the russian su - 33 flanker d .

however , the aircraft is thought to possess many of the domestic avionics and armament capabilities of the chinese j - 11b flanker .

likely armament for the j - 15 includes pl - 8 and pl - 12 air - to - air missiles and modern ascms .

six j - 15 prototypes are currently involved in testing and at least one two - seat j - 15s operational trainer has been observed .

china is fully aware of the inherent limitations of the mid - sized , ski - jump carrier .

while beijing has provided no public information on the size and configuration of its next carrier , there is intense speculation that china may adopt a catapult launching system .

recent media reports suggest that china recently commenced construction of its first indigenously produced carrier .

finally , as china expands carrier operations beyond the immediate region , it will almost certainly be constrained by a lack of distant bases and support infrastructure .

although commercial ports can provide some peacetime support , beijing may eventually find it expedient to abandon its longstanding , self - imposed prohibition on foreign basing .

pla ( n ) submarine force china has long regarded its submarine force as a critical element of regional deterrence , particularly when conducting "counter - intervention" against modern adversary .

the large , but poorly equipped force of the 1980s has given way to a more modern submarine force , optimized primarily for regional anti - surface warfare missions near major sea lines of communication .

currently , the submarine force consists of five nuclear attack submarines , four nuclear ballistic missile submarines , and 53 diesel attack submarines .

in reference to the submarine force , the term "modern" applies to second generation submarines , capable of employing anti - ship cruise missiles or submarine - launched intercontinental ballistic missiles .

by 2015 approximately 70 percent of china's entire submarine force will be modern .

by 2020 , 75 percent of the conventional force will be modern and 100 percent of the ssn force will be modern .

currently , most of the force is conventionally powered , without towed arrays , but equipped with increasingly long range ascms .

submarine launched ascms with ranges well in excess of 100nm not only enhance survivability of the shooter , but also enable a small number of units to hold a large maritime area at risk .

a decade ago , only a few of china's submarines were equipped to launch a modern anti - ship cruise missile .

given the rapid pace of acquisition , well over half of china's nuclear and conventional attack submarines are now ascm equipped , and by 2020 , the vast majority of china's submarine force will be armed with advanced , long - range ascms .

china's small nuclear attack submarine force is capable of operating further from the chinese mainland , conducting intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) , as well as asuw missions .

currently , china's submarines are not optimized for either anti - submarine warfare or land attack missions .

like the surface force , china's submarine force is trending towards a more streamlined mix of units , suggesting the pla ( n ) is relatively satisfied with recent designs .

for its diesel - electric force alone , between 2000 and 2005 , china constructed ming ss , song ss , the first yuan ssp , and purchased 8 kilo ss from russia .

while all of these classes remain in the force , only the yuan ssp is currently in production .

reducing the number of different classes in service helps streamline maintenance , training and interoperability .

the yuan ssp is china's most modern conventionally powered submarine .

eight are currently in service , with as many as 12 more anticipated .

its combat capability is similar to the song ss , as both are capable of launching chinese - built anti - ship cruise missiles , but the yuan ssp also possesses an air independent power ( aip ) system and may have incorporated quieting technology from the russian - designed kilo ss .

the aip system provides a submarine a source of power other than battery or diesel engines while still submerged , increasing its underwater endurance , thereby reducing its vulnerability to detection .

the remainder of the conventional submarine force is a mix of song ss , ming ss , and russian - built kilo ss .

of these , only the ming ss and four of the older kilo ss lack an ability to launch ascms .

eight of china's 12 kilo ss are equipped with the ss - n - 27 ascm , which provides a long - range anti - surface capability out to approximately 120nm .

although china's indigenous yj - 82 ascm has a much shorter range , trends in surface and air - launched cruise missiles suggest that a future indigenous submarine - launched ascm will almost certainly match or exceed the range of the ss - n - 27 .

china is now modernizing its relatively small nuclear - powered attack submarine force , following a protracted hiatus .

the shang ssn's initial production run stopped after just two launches in 2002 and 2003 .

after nearly 10 years , china resumed production with four additional hulls of an improved variant , the first of which was launched in 2012 .

these six submarines will replace the aging han ssn on nearly a 1-for - 1 basis over the next several years .

following the completion of the improved shang ssn , the pla ( n ) will likely progress to the type 095 ssn , which may provide a generational improvement in many areas such as quieting and weapon capacity , to include a possible land - attack capability .

perhaps the most anticipated development in china's submarine force is the expected operational deployment of the jin ssbn in 2014 , which would mark china's first credible at - sea second - strike nuclear capability .

with a range in excess of 4000nm , the jl - 2 submarine launched ballistic missile ( slbm ) , will enable the jin to strike hawaii , alaska , and possibly western portions of conus from east asian waters .

the three jin ssbns currently in service would be insufficient to maintain a constant at - sea presence for extended periods of time , but if the pla navy builds five units as some sources suggest , a continuous peacetime presence may become a viable option for the pla ( n ) .

historically , the vast majority of chinese submarine operations have been limited in duration .

in recent years however , leadership emphasis on more realistic training and operational proficiency across the pla appears to have catalyzed an increase in submarine patrol activity .

prior to 2008 , the pla ( n ) typically conducted a very small number of extended submarine patrols , typically fewer than 5 or 6 in a given year .

since that time , it has become common to see more than 12 patrols in a given year .

this trend suggests the pla ( n ) seeks to build operational proficiency , endurance , and training in ways that more accurately simulate combat missions .

pla ( n ) air forces the capabilities and role of the planaf have steadily evolved over the past decade .

as navy combatants range further from shore and more effectively provide their own air defense , the planaf is able to concentrate on an expanded array of missions , including maritime strike , maritime patrols , anti - submarine warfare , airborne early warning , and logistics .

both helicopters and fixed wing aircraft will play an important role in enabling fleet operations over the next decade .

additionally , in the next few years the planaf will possess its first - ever sea - based component , with the liaoning cv [aircraft carrier] .

every major pla ( n ) surface combatant currently under construction is capable of embarking a helicopter , increasing platform capabilities in areas such as over the horizon targeting , anti - submarine warfare , and search and rescue ( sar ) .

the pla ( n ) operates three main helicopter variants: the z - 9 , the z - 8 , and the helix .

in order to keep pace with the rest of the pla ( n ) , the helicopter fleet will almost certainly expand in the near future .

the pla ( n ) 's primary helicopter , the z - 9c , was originally obtained under licensed production from aerospatiale ( now eurocopter ) in the early 1980s .

the z - 9c is capable of operating from any helicopter - capable pla ( n ) combatant .

it can be fitted with the klc - 1 search radar , dipping sonar , and is usually seen with a single lightweight torpedo .

a new roof - mounted electro - optical ( eo ) turret , unguided rockets , and 12.7 mm machine gun pods have been observed on several z - 9cs during counter piracy deployments .

there are now approximately twenty operational z - 9cs in the pla ( n ) inventory and the helicopters are still under production .

an upgraded naval version of the z - 9 , designated the z - 9d , has been observed with ascms .

like the z - 9 , the z - 8 is a chinese - produced helicopter based on a french design .

in the late 1970s , the pla ( n ) purchased and reverse engineered the sa 321 super frelon .

this medium lift helicopter is capable of performing a wide variety of missions but is most often utilized for sar , troop transport , and logistical support roles .

it is usually observed with a rescue hoist and a nose radome and typically operates unarmed .

the z - 8's size provides a greater cargo capacity compared to other pla ( n ) helicopters , but is limited in its ability to deploy from most pla ( n ) combatants .

an aew variant of the z - 8 has been observed operating with the liaoning .

in 1999 , the pla ( n ) took delivery of an initial batch of eight russian - built ka - 28 helix helicopters .

the pla ( n ) typically uses the ka - 28 for asw .

they are fitted with a search radar , dipping sonar and can employ sonobuoys , torpedoes , depth charges , or mines .

in 2010 china also ordered nine ka - 31 helix aew helicopters .

fixed - wing aircraft over the last two decades , the planaf has significantly upgraded its fighters and expanded the type of aircraft it operates .

as a consequence , it can successfully perform a wide range of missions including offshore air defense , maritime strike , maritime patrol / antisubmarine warfare , and in the not too distant future , carrier - based operations .

a decade ago , this modernization was largely reliant on exports from russia , however , the planaf has recently benefited from the same domestic combat aircraft production that has propelled earlier plaaf modernization .

historically , the pla ( n ) relied on older chengdu j - 7 variants and shenyang j - 8b / d finback fighters for the offshore air defense mission .

these aircraft were limited in range , avionics , and armament .

the j - 8 is perhaps best known in the west as the aircraft that collided with a u.s. navy ep - 3 reconnaissance aircraft in 2001 .

in 2002 , the pla ( n ) purchased 24 su - 30mk2 , making it the first 4 th generation fighter fielded with the navy .

these aircraft feature an extended range and maritime radar systems , enabling the su - 30mk2 to strike enemy ships at long distances , while still maintaining a robust air - to - air capability .

several years later , the pla ( n ) began replacing older j - 8b / ds with the newer j - 8f variant .

the j - 8f featured improved armament such as the pl - 12 radar - guided air - to - air missile , upgraded avionics , and an improved engine with higher thrust .

today , the pla ( n ) is taking deliveries of modern domestically produced 4 th generation fighter aircraft such as the j - 10a vigorous dragon and the j - 11b flanker .

equipped with modern radars , glass cockpits , and armed with pl - 8 and pl - 12 air - to - air missiles , pla ( n ) j - 10a and j - 11b aircraft are among the most modern aircraft in china's inventory .

for maritime strike , the pla ( n ) has relied on the h - 6 badger for decades .

the h - 6 is a licensed copy of the ex - soviet tu - 16 badger , which can employ advanced ascms against surface targets .

as many as 30 badgers likely remain in service with the pla ( n ) .

despite the older platform design , chinese h - 6 badgers benefit from upgraded electronics and payloads .

noted improvements include the ability to carry a maximum of four ascms , compared with two on earlier h - 6d variants .

some h - 6s have been modified as tankers , increasing the pla ( n ) 's flexibility and range .

the jh - 7 flounder , with at least five regiments fielded across the three fleets also provides a maritime strike capability .

the jh - 7 is a domestically produced tandem - seat fighter / bomber , developed as a replacement for obsolete q - 5 fantan light attack aircraft and h - 5 beagle bombers .

the jh - 7 can carry up to four ascms and two pl - 5 or pl - 8 short - range air - to - air missiles , providing it with considerable payload for maritime strike missions .

in addition to combat aircraft , the planaf is expanding its inventory of fixed - wing maritime patrol aircraft ( mpa ) , airborne early warning ( aew ) , and surveillance aircraft .

the y - 8 , a chinese license - produced version of the ex - soviet an - 12 cub , forms the basic airframe for several pla ( n ) special mission variants .

as the navy pushes farther from the coast , long - range aircraft play a key role in providing a clear picture of surface and air contacts in the maritime environment .

internet photos from 2012 suggest that the pla ( n ) is also developing a y - 8 naval variant , equipped with a mad ( magnetic anomaly detector ) boom , typical of asw aircraft .

this asw aircraft features a large surface search radar mounted under the nose and multiple blade antennae on the fuselage for probable electronic surveillance .

it also appears to incorporate a small eo / ir turret and an internal weapons bay forward of the main landing gear .

the aircraft appeared in a primer yellow paint scheme , suggesting that it remains under development .

unmanned aerial vehicles in recent years china has developed several multi - mission uavs for the maritime environment .

there are some indications the pla ( n ) has begun to integrate uavs into their operations to enhance situational awareness .

for well over a decade , china has actively pursued uav technology and they are emerging among the worldwide leaders in uav development .

china's latest achievement was the unveiling of their first prototype unmanned combat aerial vehicle ( ucav ) , the lijan , which features a blended - wing design as well as low observable technologies .

the pla ( n ) will probably employ significant numbers of land and ship based uavs to supplement manned isr aircraft and aid targeting for various long - range weapons systems .

uavs will probably become one of the pla ( n ) 's most valuable isr assets in on - going and future maritime disputes and protection of maritime claims .

uavs are ideally suited for this mission set due to their long loiter time , slow cruising speed , and ability to provide near real - time information through the use of a variety of onboard sensors .

the pla ( n ) has been identified operating the austrian camcopter s - 100 rotary - wing uav from several combatants .

following initial evaluation and deployment of the camcopter s - 100 , the pla ( n ) will likely adopt a domestically produced uav into ship - based operations .

naval mines china has a robust mining capability and currently maintains a varied inventory estimated at over 50,000 mines .

china also has developed a robust infrastructure for naval mine related research , development , testing , evaluation , and production .

during the past few years china has gone from an obsolete mine inventory , consisting primarily of pre - wwii vintage moored contact and basic bottom influence mines , to a robust mine inventory consisting of a large variety of mine types including moored , bottom , drifting , rocket propelled and intelligent mines .

china will continue to develop more advanced mines in the future , possibly including extended - range propelled - warhead mines , anti - helicopter mines , and bottom influence mines equipped to counter minesweeping efforts .

maritime c4isr ( command , control , computers , communication , intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance ) china's steady expansion of naval missions beyond the littoral , including counter - intervention missions are enabled by a dramatic improvement in maritime c4isr over the past decade .

the ranges of china's modern anti - ship cruise missiles extend well beyond the range of a ship's own sensors .

emerging land - based weapons , such as the df - 21d anti - ship ballistic missile , with a range of more than 810nm are even more dependent on remote targeting .

modern navies depend heavily on their ability to build and disseminate a picture of all activities occurring in the air and sea .

for china , this provides a formidable challenge .

in order to characterize activities in the "near seas," china must build a maritime and air picture covering nearly 875,000 square nautical miles ( sqnm ) .

the philippine sea , which could become a key interdiction area in a regional conflict , expands the battlespace by another 1.5 million sqnm .

in this vast space , many navies and coast guards converge along with tens of thousands of fishing boats , cargo ships , oil tankers , and other commercial vessels .

in order to sort through this complex environment and enable more sophisticated operations , china has invested in a wide array of sensors .

direct reporting from chinese ships and aircraft provides the most detailed and reliable information , but can only cover a fraction of the regional environment .

a number of ground - based coastal radars provide overlapping coverage of coastal areas , but their range is limited .

to gain a broader view of activity in its near and far seas , china requires more sophisticated sensors .

the skywave over - the - horizon radar provides awareness of a much larger area than conventional radars by bouncing signals off the ionosphere .

china also operates a growing array of reconnaissance satellites , which allow observation of maritime activity virtually anywhere on the earth .

conclusion the pla ( n ) is strengthening its ability to execute a range of regional missions in a "complex electromagnetic environment" as it simultaneously lays a foundation for sustained , blue water operations .

over the next decade , china will complete its transition from a coastal navy to a navy capable of multiple missions around the world .

current acquisition patterns , training , and operations provide a window into how the pla ( n ) might pursue these objectives .

given the pace of pla ( n ) modernization , the gap in military capability between the mainland and taiwan will continue to widen in china's favor over the coming years .

the prc views reunification with taiwan as an immutable , long - term goal and hopes to prevent any other actor from intervening in a taiwan scenario .

while taiwan remains a top - tier priority , the pla ( n ) is simultaneously focusing resources on a growing array of potential challenges .

china's interests in the east and south china seas include protecting its vast maritime claims and preserving access to regional resources .

beijing prefers to use diplomacy and economic influence to protect maritime sovereignty , and generally relies on patrols by the recently - consolidated china coast guard .

however , ensuring maritime sovereignty will remain a fundamental mission for the pla ( n ) .

pla ( n ) assets regularly patrol in most of china's claimed territory to conduct surveillance and provide a security guarantee to china's coast guard .

in the event of a crisis , the pla ( n ) has a variety of options to defend its claimed territorial sovereignty and maritime interests .

the pla ( n ) could lead an amphibious campaign to seize key disputed island features , or conduct blockade or sloc interdiction campaigns to secure strategic operating areas .

china's realization of an operational aircraft carrier in the coming years may also enable beijing to exert greater pressure on its scs rivals .

recent acquisitions speak to a future in which the pla ( n ) will be expected to perform a wide variety of tasks including assuring the nation's economic lifelines , asserting china's regional territorial interests , conducting humanitarian assistance and disaster relief , and demonstrating a chinese presence beyond region waters .

appendix c. joint concept for access and maneuver in global commons ( jam - gc ) this appendix provides additional background information joint concept for access and maneuver in the global commons ( jam - gc ) , previously known as air - sea battle ( asb ) .

october 10 , 2013 , hearing on october 10 , 2013 , the seapower and projection forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee held a hearing with several dod officials as the witnesses that focused to a large degree on the air - sea battle concept .

one of the witnesses — rear admiral upper half james g. foggo iii , assistant deputy chief of naval operations ( operations , plans and strategy ) ( n3 / n5b ) — provided the following overview of asb in his opening remarks: so let me begin by answering the question , what is the airsea battle concept ? .

the airsea battle concept was approved by the secretary of defense in 2011 .

it is designed to assure access to parts of the global commons , those areas of the airsea , cyberspace , and space that no one necessarily owns but which we all depend on such as sea lines of communication .

our adversaries' anti - access / area denial strategies employ a range of military capabilities that impede the free use of these ungoverned spaces .

these military capabilities include new generations of cruise , ballistic , air to air , surface to air missiles with improved range , accuracy and lethality that are being produced and proliferated .

quiet , modern submarines and stealthy fighter aircraft are being procured by many nations while naval mines are being equipped with mobility , discrimination and autonomy .

both space and cyberspace are becoming increasingly important and contested .

accordingly , airsea battle in its concept is intended to defeat such threats to access and provide options to national leaders and military commanders to enable follow - on operations which could include military activities as well as humanitarian assistance and disaster response .

in short , it is a new approach to warfare .

the airsea battle concept is also about force development in the face of rising technological challenges .

we seek to build at the service level a pre - integrated joint force which empowers u.s. combatant commanders , along with allies and partners to engage in ways that are cooperative and networked across multiple domains — the land , maritime , air , space and cyber domains .

and our goal includes continually refining and institutionalizing these practices .

when implemented , the airsea battle concept will create and codify synergies within and among our services that will enhance our collective war fighting capability and effectiveness .

so that's , in a nutshell , what the airsea battle concept is .

but now , what is it not ? .

sir , you pointed out the airsea battle concept is not a strategy — to answer your question on the difference between airland battle and the airsea battle concept .

national or military strategies employs ways and means to a particular and / or end - state , such as deterring conflict , containing conflict or winning conflict .

a concept in contrast is a description of a method or a scheme for employing military capabilities to attain specific objectives at the operational level of war .

the overarching objective of the airsea battle concept is to gain and maintain freedom of action in the global commons .

the airsea battle does not focus on a particular adversary or a region .

it is universally applicable across all geographic locations , and by addressing access challenges wherever , however , and whenever we confront them .

i said earlier that the airsea battle represents a new approach to warfare .

here's what i meant by that .

historically , when deterrence fails , it's our custom to amass large numbers of resources , leverage our allies for a coalition support and base access or over flight and build up an iron mountain of logistics , weapons and troops to apply overwhelming force at a particular space and time of our choosing .

this approach of build up , rehearse and roll back has proven successful from operation overlord in the beaches of normandy in 1944 to operation iraqi freedom in the middle east .

but the 21 st century operating environment is changing .

future generations of american service men and women will not fight their parents' wars .

and so i'll borrow a quote from abraham lincoln , written in a letter to this house on 1 december , 1862 when he said , "we must think anew , act anew .

we must disenthrall ourselves from the past , and then we shall save our country. .

new military approaches are emerging specifically intended to counter our historical methods of projecting power .

adversaries employing such an approach would seek to prevent or deny our ability to aggregate forces by denying us a safe haven from which to build up , rehearse , and roll back .

anti - access is defined as an action intended to slow deployment of friendly forces into a theater or cause us to operate from longer distances than preferred .

area denial impedes friendly operations or maneuver in a theater where access cannot be prevented .

the airsea battle concept mitigates the threat of anti - access and area denial by creating pockets and corridors under our control .

the reason conflict in libya , operation odyssey dawn in 2011 , is a good example of this paradigm shift .

though airsea battle was still in development , the fundamental idea of leveraging access in one domain to provide advantage to our forces in another was understood and employed against libya's modest anti - access / area denial capability .

on day one of combat operations , cruise missiles launched from submarines and surface ships in the maritime domain targeted and destroyed libya's lethal air defense missile systems ; thereby enabling coalition forces to conduct unfettered follow - on strikes and destroy the libyan air force and control the air domain .

establishing a no - fly zone , key to interdicting hostile regime actions against innocent civilians — and that was our mission , to protect civilians — was effectively accomplished within 48 hours of receiving the execution order from the president .

i was the j3 or the operations officer for admiral sam locklear , commander of joint task force , odyssey dawn .

and i transitioned from u.s. - led coalition operations to operation unified protector as a taskforce commander for nato .

during the entire campaign which lasted seven months , nato reported in its un after action report that there were just under 18,000 sorties flown , employing 7,900 precision guided munitions .

that's a lot .

more than 200 tomahawk land attack missiles were used , over half of which came from submarines .

the majority of the libyan regime order of battle , which included 800 main battle tanks , 2,500 artillery pieces , 2,000 armored personnel carriers , 360 fixed wing fighters and 85 transports were either disabled or destroyed during the campaign .

not one american boot set foot on the ground ; no americans were killed in combat operations .

we lost one f - 15 due to mechanical failure but we recovered both pilots safely .

muammar gaddafi , as you know , was killed by libyan rebels in october .

2011 .

the airsea battle concept , in its classified form , was completed in november 2011 , one month later .

i provided admiral locklear with a copy of the airsea battle concept and we reviewed it on a trip to united kingdom .

upon reading it , i thought back to the libya campaign plan and i wondered how i might leverage the concepts of airsea battle to fight differently , to fight smarter .

operation odyssey dawn accelerated from a non - combatant evacuation operation and humanitarian assistance to kinetic operations in a very short period .

there was very little time for build - up and rehearse our forces .

to coin a phrase from my boss , this was like a pickup game of basketball .

and we relied on the flexibility , innovation and resiliency of the commanders of the forces assigned to the joint taskforce .

the libyan regime's anti access area denial capability was limited as i said .

and we were able to overwhelm and defeat it with the tools that we had .

but we must prepare for a more stressing environment in the future .

airsea battle does so , by providing commanders with a range of options , both kinetic and non - kinetic to mitigate or neutralize challenges to access in one or many domains simultaneously .

this is accomplished through development of networked integrated forces capable of attack in - depth to disrupt , destroy and defeat the adversary .

and it provides maximum operational advantage to friendly joint and coalition forces .

i'm a believer and so are the rest of the flag and general officers here at the table with me .

dod unclassified summary released june 2013 on june 3 , 2013 , dod released an unclassified summary of the air - sea battle concept .

