midwestern flooding in 2008 and hurricane katrina flooding in 2005 have enlivened interest in reducing the risk of flooding in communities across the nation .

these large - scale events have demonstrated that not only is property damaged during floods , but also floods can represent significant risks to life and can cause economic disruption and other social hardships .

the 110 th congress , like many earlier congresses , is faced with numerous flood control issues , including responding to flood events and altering federal flood damage reduction , mitigation , and insurance policies .

these issues have been brought to the fore as the midwest experiences its second major flood in 15 years .

in the united states , local governments are responsible for land use and zoning decisions that direct floodplain and coastal development ; however , state and federal governments also influence community and individual decisions on managing flood risk .

for example , the federal government constructs some of the nation's flood control infrastructure , supports hazard mitigation actions , offers flood insurance , and provides emergency response and disaster aid for significant floods .

the federal agencies most involved in flood damage reduction and flood fighting and emergency response are the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

this report is divided into three sections .

the first describes the current intergovernmental division of responsibilities for flood management and the federal role and interest in flood management .

the second provides a framework for understanding flood risk management issues and the challenge of addressing the reliability and level of protection of the nation's levees .

the third section describes actions that the 110 th congress has already taken and selected remaining issues that it , and many previous congresses , have faced .

recent major flooding events have drawn attention to ongoing debates about how to improve management of flood risk and the roles and responsibilities of individuals , communities , and the various levels of government .

as with many other policy areas , the federal system has resulted in public functions for flood damage reduction being shared by all levels of government .

local governments are responsible for land use and zoning decisions that direct floodplain and coastal development ; however , numerous federal and state flood policies and programs influence local and individual decision - making .

the federal government also funds some flood and storm damage reduction measures , manages a flood insurance and mitigation program , and provides disaster assistance .

it also generates essential data through mapping and other efforts .

levees may be built by federal , state , or local entities ( including private entities at the local level ) .

generally , levees are maintained by a local entity , with some exceptions .

local levee districts are generally the first entities responsible for monitoring levee conditions during flooding .

the levee districts are also the first entity responsible for emergency response .

if a flood or other emergency exhausts the levee district's flood fighting resources , the district typically contacts the state .

the state will contribute its flood fighting resources to the local effort ; as the state's resources are exhausted , it typically will contact the corps for assistance under the corps' emergency response authority .

hurricane katrina and recent midwestern flooding demonstrate that not only property damage but also significant risks to life , economic disruption , and other social hardships occur during floods .

flood risk is a composite of three factors: vulnerability , which allows a threat to cause consequences ( eg , level of protection provided by levees and dams , their reliability , and location within a floodplain ) ; threat of an event ( eg , probability of a category 5 hurricane storm surge or a 200-year flood affecting a particular location ) ; and consequence of an event ( eg , property damage , loss of life , economic loss , environmental damage , reduced health and safety , and social disruption ) .

in the first omnibus water resources development act ( wrda , which is the legislative authorization vehicle for the corps ) enacted after hurricane katrina — wrda 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 ) — congress addressed a number of policy changes and authorized numerous flood and storm damage reduction projects and project modifications .

wrda 2007 included the following provisions specifically related to flood - related policies: water resources principles and guidelines ( §2031 ) — this provision states a national water resources planning policy that includes avoiding unwise use of floodplains and flood - prone areas , and requires the corps to update by 2010 the guidelines it uses for planning and implementing corps water resources projects .

water resources priorities report ( §2032 ) — ths provision requires the president submit to congress a report by 2010 on the vulnerability of the nation to flood damages , including the risk to human life , which is to include assessments of current programs and recommendations for improvements .

planning ( §2033 ) — this provision makes changes to corps planning activities , including requirements that the economic analysis of flood damage reduction projects consider the risk that remains behind levees and floodwalls , upstream and downstream impacts , and equitable analysis of structural and nonstructural alternatives .

safety assurance review ( §2034 ) — this provision requires that the design and construction of corps flood and storm damage reduction projects be independently reviewed by experts to assure public health , safety , and welfare .

national levee safety program ( title iv ) — this title creates a committee on levee safety to make recommendations to congress by mid - 2008 for a national levee safety program ; however , the committee has not yet been funded .

the title also requires the corps to establish and maintain a database with an inventory of the nation's levees by 2009 and to inspect federally constructed and other levees .

how these changes are implemented over the next few years may affect the nature of the federal investment in flood and storm damage infrastructure and mitigation measures .

the 2005 hurricane season and the 2008 midwestern floods have focused the nation's attention once again on issues that flood experts have debated for decades .

the devastation of these events renewed public concerns about reliability of the nation's aging flood control levees and dams .

the debate over what is an acceptable level of risk — especially for low - probability , high - consequence events — and who should bear the costs to reduce the flood risk ( particularly in the case of levees ) is taking place not only in the affected states , but nationally .

the concerns being raised range widely , including interest in providing more protection for concentrated urban populations , risk to the nation's public and private economic infrastructure , support for reducing vulnerability by investing in natural buffers , equity in protection for low - income and minority populations , consistency in and the form of flood insurance and disaster aid , and the level of federal , state , and local investment in structural and nonstructural flood damage reduction measures .

response to the 2005 hurricane season and previous midwestern floods included discussions of expanding mitigation activities ( such as floodproofing structures and buyouts of structures on the most flood - prone lands ) , investing in efforts to restore natural flood and storm surge attenuation , and assuring vigilant maintenance of existing flood control structures , as well as interest in new and augmented structural flood protection measures .

although major flood events , generally spur these discussions , the policy changes implemented often are incremental .

the 110 th congress , like previous congresses , faces a challenge in reaching consensus on whether and how to proceed on anything other than incremental change because of the wealth of constituencies and communities affected by federal flood policy .

another practical challenge is the division of congressional committee jurisdictions over the federal agencies and programs involved in flood mitigation , protection , and response .

there are many questions that remain about how events unfolded in the aftermath of hurricane katrina , and much information that is still needed to understand how to apply and communicate nationally the lessons in the gulf and midwestern states learned about flood risk and disaster preparedness and response .

although there is no way to protect against all flood risk , many contend that more information is needed to evaluate flood risk , to understand the reliability and residual risk of structural flood protection , and to incorporate the full range of flood consequences into local , state , and federal decision - making and programs .

