wetlands , with a variety of physical characteristics , are found throughout the country .

they are known in different regions as swamps , marshes , fens , potholes , playa lakes , or bogs .

although these places can differ greatly , they all have distinctive plant and animal assemblages because of the wetness of the soil .

some wetland areas may be continuously inundated by water , while other areas may not be flooded at all .

in coastal areas , flooding may occur daily as tides rise and fall .

prior to the mid - 1980s , federal laws and policies to protect wetlands were generally limited to providing habitat for migratory waterfowl , especially ducks and geese .

some laws encouraged destruction of wetland areas , including selected provisions in the federal tax code , public works legislation , and farm programs .

since the mid - 1980s , the values of wetlands have been recognized in different ways in numerous national policies , and federal laws either encourage wetland protection , or prohibit or do not support their destruction .

these laws , however , do not add up to a fully consistent or comprehensive national approach .

the central federal regulatory program , found in section 404 of the clean water act , requires permits for the discharge of dredged or fill materials into many but not all wetland areas .

however , other activities that may adversely affect wetlands do not require permits , and some places that scientists define as wetlands are exempt from this permit program because of physical characteristics or the type of activity that takes place .

one agricultural program , swampbuster , is a disincentive program that indirectly protects wetlands by making farmers who drain wetlands ineligible for federal farm program benefits ; those who do not receive these benefits ( 62% of all farmers received no direct payments from the farm subsidy program in 2007 ) have no reason to observe the requirements of this program .

numerous other acquisition , protection , and restoration programs complete the current federal effort .

although numerous wetland protection bills have been introduced in recent congresses , the most significant new wetlands legislation to be enacted has been in farm bills .

congress also has reauthorized several wetlands programs , mostly setting higher appropriations ceilings , without making significant shifts in policy .

the george w. bush administration endorsed wetland protection in legislation , such as the farm bill and the north american wetlands conservation act reauthorization , and at events , such as earth day presentations .

the bush administration also issued rules on mitigation policies .

in 2015 the obama administration promulgated controversial changes to regulatory program jurisdiction ( see discussion below ) .

congress has provided a forum in numerous hearings where conflicting interests in wetland issues have been debated .

these debates encompass disparate scientific and programmatic questions and conflicting views of the role of government where private property is involved .

broadly speaking , the conflicts are between: environmental interests and wetland protection advocates who have been pressing for greater wetlands protection as multiple values have been more widely recognized , by improving coordination and consistency among agencies and levels of governments , and strengthened programs ; and others , including landowners , farmers , and small businessmen , who counter that protection efforts have gone too far , by aggressively regulating privately owned wet areas that provide few wetland values .

they have been especially critical of the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , asserting that they administer the section 404 program in an overzealous and inflexible manner .

recent wetland legislative activity in congress centered broadly on two issues .

one was on wetlands conservation provisions in the farm bill .

provisions enacted in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) repealed the wetlands reserve program , but it created a new conservation easement program , which continues voluntary efforts to protect and restore wetlands .

the law also reauthorized the conservation reserve program ( crp ) , the largest federal , private - land retirement program , but reduced the acreage enrollment cap by 25% .

crp compensates landowners who voluntarily remove land from agricultural production for the benefit of soil and water quality and wildlife habitat .

the second major area of recent legislative interest has been proposals addressing the scope of geographic jurisdiction of wetlands regulations under the clean water act .

this interest arises because federal courts have played a key role in interpreting and clarifying the limits of federal jurisdiction to regulate activities that affect "waters of the united states," including wetlands , especially since a 2001 supreme court ruling in the so - called swancc decision and another in 2006 in rapanos v s .

united states .

for several congresses , legislation intended to reverse the swancc and rapanos rulings was introduced but not enacted .

more recently , legislation that instead would halt or redirect obama administration rules to re - define "waters of the united states" has been introduced , including numerous bills in the 114 th congress .

scientific questions about wetlands , with answers that can be important to policymakers , include how to define wetlands ; how to catalogue the rate and pattern of wetland declines and losses as well as restorations and increases ; and how to assess the importance of wetland changes to broader ecosystems .

wetlands science has made considerable strides in developing a fuller and more sophisticated knowledge about many aspects of wetlands in the more than two decades since protecting wetlands became a general policy goal in federal law and program administration .

there are two topics where scientific information and wetland protection policies remain inconsistent: should all regulated wetlands be treated equally ; and if all scientifically defined wetlands are not covered by the federal regulatory program , what subset should be covered , and how should such decisions be made ? .

while discussion of either question has major science elements , both are primarily addressed in the section below about the clean water act section 404 program .

federal program issues include the administration of programs to protect , restore , or mitigate wetland resources ( especially the clean water act section 404 program ) ; relationships between agricultural and regulatory programs ; whether all wetlands should be treated the same in federal programs , and which wetlands should be subject to regulation ; and whether protecting wetlands by acres is an effective proxy for protecting wetlands based on the functions they perform and the values they provide .

in addition , private property questions are raised , because almost three - quarters of the remaining wetlands are located on private lands .

some property owners believe that they should be compensated when federal programs limit how they can use their land and for decisions that arguably diminish the value of the land .

in addition to federal programs and activities , wetlands in the united states are regulated and protected through a variety of state and local laws and regulations , as well as through initiatives and actions of nongovernmental organizations , schools and universities , and private citizens .

the role of states in wetland protection is especially important , as noted in a study by the environmental law institute .

states have long held the right and the responsibility to provide stewardship over their resources , and state agency staff typically have a well - versed understanding of the "lay of the land," in terms of both topography and state priorities , policies , and practices .

finally , in light of recent uncertainty over federal jurisdiction of wetlands and limited federal resources for wetland protection , the role of states in conserving wetlands may be more important now than ever before .

states use a variety of programs and tools to protect and manage wetlands , including regulation and mitigation , wetland water quality standards , monitoring and assessment , voluntary restoration , tax incentives , coordination among state and federal agencies , and public / private partnerships .

programs vary substantially from state to state and often derive their authorities from more than one statute and / or regulation .

as a result , different programs may be administered by different state agencies .

in addition , programs may change from year to year .

every state regulates , to some degree , activities that affect wetlands , but two - thirds of the states lack regulatory programs that comprehensively regulate wetlands .

many states rely solely or primarily on authority in cwa section 401 , under which states may review any activity that requires a federal permit or license to determine its effect on the state's water quality standards .

section 401 gives states the authority to approve , condition , or deny the federal permit — including a section 404 permit — or license based on their review .

in areas where there is no section 404 permit requirement , and therefore no opportunity for review under section 401 , some states also require a state permit for activities that affect aquatic resources: 23 states have authority to issue permits for dredge and fill activities in wetlands and other waters of the state , such as geographically isolated wetlands ( although as described previously , only new jersey and michigan have been delegated 404 permitting authority ) .

as is the case with the federal regulatory program under cwa section 404 , an important consideration is how a state determines which waters fall within its regulatory jurisdiction .

states' definitions of their waters are typically much broader than the federal definition of "waters of the united states," meaning that states may exert jurisdiction over waters within their boundaries that are not covered by the cwa .

state definitions often include phrases such as "all surface waters. .

they also may exclude certain waters , such as private lakes or ponds .

groundwater is not included in the federal regulatory definition , but most states include groundwater in their regulatory programs .

all 50 states include wetlands in either or both their statutory and regulatory definitions of state waters — 32 make this inclusion explicit , and 18 define waters more generally , including wetlands implicitly .

the inclusion of wetlands in a state's definition of state waters does not give automatic protection to these waters ; the state must also have some form of complementary regulatory authority , such as to issue permits .

other findings of the eli report include the following .

the majority of states have adopted legislation , policies , and / or guidelines for mitigating impacts to aquatic resources that are permitted in their states .

mitigation provisions range from general requirements to specific replacement ratios , site preferences , and mitigation options such as purchasing credits from a mitigation bank ( also see " wetland restoration and mitigation " ) .

one - third of states report having a wetland - specific monitoring and / or assessment program or monitoring wetlands as part of a larger state monitoring program .

nearly one - half of the states operate a formal program for partnering with private landowners on restoration or conservation , and a majority of states report that they conduct outreach or provide technical assistance to private landowners .

ninety percent of states have one or more agencies that carry out education and outreach activities related to wetlands .

much of the attention to reversing wetland loss has focused on louisiana , where an estimated 80% of the total loss of u.s. coastal wetlands has occurred and where about 40% of u.s. coastal wetlands that remain in the lower 48 states are located ( coastal wetlands are about 5% of all u.s. wetlands ) .

changes to louisiana's coastal area result from a combination of natural environmental processes ( erosion , saltwater intrusion into fresh systems , sea level rise ) and human - related activities , according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) .

wetland loss has occurred naturally for centuries , but until recently , land losses have been counterbalanced by various natural wetland - building processes .

usgs estimates that , since 1932 , coastal louisiana has experienced a net change in land area of approximately 1,883 square miles — an area the size of delaware .

land loss rates on the louisiana coast have slowed from an average of more than 30 square miles per year between 1956 and 1978 , to an estimated 11.8 square miles per year from 1985 to 2004 .

when the hurricanes of 2005 and 2008 are factored in , the trend increased the amount of land loss to 16.6 square miles from 1985 to 2010 .

according to usgs , if this loss were to occur at a constant rate , it would equal losing more than a football field every hour .

as a result of wetlands loss , the natural flow of mississippi river and floodwaters to feed sediment to the marshes has been reduced .

saltwater has invaded the brackish estuaries , destroying vegetation and areas that are needed for fish , shellfish , and wildlife .

in response to these losses , congress authorized a task force , led by the corps , to prepare a list of coastal wetland restoration projects in the state , and also provided funding to plan and carry out restoration projects in this and other coastal states under the coastal wetlands planning , protection and restoration act of 1990 , also known as the breaux act .

the projects range from reintroduction of freshwater and diversion of sediment to construction of shoreline barriers and planting of vegetation .

in total , the estimated total cost to complete all 147 approved projects is $1.78 billion .

in a 2007 report , gao reported that it is impossible to determine the collective success of restoring coastal wetlands in louisiana , because of an inadequate approach to monitoring .

gao had reviewed the breaux act program to identify the types of projects that have been designed and lessons that have been learned from 74 projects that have been completed so far .

others , including the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , disagreed with gao's findings , observing that long - term data being provided through ongoing project monitoring are intended to yield insight into qualitative and quantitative project performance .

in the wake of hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 , multiple legislative proposals were introduced to fund additional restoration projects already planned by the u.s. army corps of engineers and to explore other opportunities that would restore and stabilize wetlands in southern louisiana .

before the hurricanes , congress was considering legislation that would have provided about $2 billion to the restoration effort .

since the 2005 hurricanes , more expansive options costing up to $14 billion that were proposed in the 1998 report coast 2050 have also been considered .

the gulf of mexico energy security act , legislation that authorizes additional revenues to states adjacent to offshore oil and gas production activities , was passed during the final days of the 109 th congress .

one of the purposes for which these revenues can be spent is wetland restoration , and the availability of these funds may affect the amount and scale of wetland restoration activity in the central gulf coast .

concern for louisiana's coastal wetlands was heightened by the oil spill following the april 2010 explosion of bp's drilling rig , the deepwater horizon , in the gulf of mexico .

although efforts focused on preventing oil from reaching coastal shorelines , some oil escaped capture and was pushed by wind and tides toward land .

the degrees of impacts of oil on wetland vegetation are variable and complex and can be both acute and chronic , ranging from short - term disruption of plant functioning to mortality .

the primary acute damage to the marshes is that plants , which hold the soil in place and stabilize shoreline , suffocate and die , especially if multiple coatings of oil occur .

once vegetation dies , the soil collapses .

then the soil becomes flooded , and plants cannot regrow .

if plants cannot reestablish , soil erosion is accelerated , giving rise to even more flooding and further wetland loss .

if oil penetrates into the sediments , roots are continuously exposed to oil , with chronic toxicity making production of new shoots problematic .

consequently , plant recovery is diminished , and eventually land loss occurs .

in addition to direct impacts on plants , oil that reaches wetlands also affects animals that use wetlands during their life cycle , especially benthic organisms that reside in the sediments and are a foundation of the food chain .

public and private efforts were taken to protect the wetlands from oil that moved through gulf waters towards coastal areas , but scientists remained concerned that high tides and wind could push oil into the marshes , and that the grasses and other vegetation that provide habitat for fish and wildlife would likely be destroyed .

wetland plants can be affected both by oil that floats over the surface of the marsh and by oil that has been incorporated into sediment .

while oil was still flowing from the deepwater horizon site , cleanup of marshes was limited to triage of heavily oiled marshes and wetlands , because experts were concerned that greater harm than good could be done to the sensitive environmental ecosystems .

the well was capped , and oil stopped flowing from the well site in mid - july 2010 .

experts say that spill response efforts succeeded in keeping large amounts of oil from reaching coastal marshes .

nevertheless , oil remains in the gulf environment , and potential for re - oiling of coastal areas , for example as a result of storms , will remain a concern for some time .

a recent federal report observes that louisiana's coast 2050 is a comprehensive plan to protect and restore the state's coastal wetlands , but that other gulf of mexico states are only beginning similar planning processes for restoration of the damage caused by the deepwater horizon spill .

mitigation has become an important cornerstone of the section 404 program in recent years .

a 1990 moa signed by the agencies with principal regulatory responsibilities ( epa and the corps ) outlines a sequence of three steps leading to mitigation: first , activities in wetlands should be avoided when possible ; second , when they cannot be avoided , impacts should be minimized ; and third , where minimum impacts are still unacceptable , mitigation is appropriate .

therefore , to compensate for such impacts , mitigation may be required as a condition of a section 404 permit .

compensatory mitigation is typically accomplished through one of three ways: a mitigation bank , in - lieu fee program , or permittee - responsible mitigation .

federal wetland policies during the past 30 years have increasingly emphasized restoration of wetland areas .

much of this restoration occurs as part of efforts to mitigate the loss of wetlands at other sites .

the mitigation concept has broad appeal , but implementation has left a conflicting record .

examination of this record , presented in a 2001 report from the national research council , found it to be wanting .

the nrc report said that mitigation projects called for in permits affecting wetlands were not meeting the federal government's "no net loss" policy goal for wetlands function .

likewise , a 2001 gao report criticized the ability of the corps to track the impact of projects under its current mitigation program that allows in - lieu - fee mitigation projects in exchange for issuing permits allowing wetlands development .

both scientists and policymakers debate whether it is possible to restore or create wetlands with ecological and other functions equivalent to or better than those of natural wetlands that have been lost over time .

results so far seem to vary , depending on the type of wetland and the level of commitment to monitoring and maintenance .

some wetland protection advocates are critical of mitigation , which they view as justifying destruction of wetlands .

they believe that the section 404 permit program should be an inducement to avoid damaging wetland areas .

these critics also contend that adverse impacts on wetland values are often not fully mitigated and that mitigation measures , even if well - designed , are not adequately monitored or maintained .

supporters of current efforts counter that they generally work as envisioned , but little data exist to support this view .

questions about implementation of the 1990 moa and controversies over the feasibility of compensating for wetland losses further complicate the wetland protection debate .

in response to criticism in the nrc and gao reports on mitigation , in 2001 , the corps issued new guidance to strengthen the standards on compensating for wetlands lost to development .

but the guidance was criticized by environmental groups and some members of congress for weakening rather than strengthening mitigation requirements and for the corps' failure to consult with other federal agencies .

in 2002 , the corps and epa released an action plan including 17 items that both agencies believed would improve the effectiveness of wetlands restoration efforts .

in section 314 of the 2004 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , p.l .

108-136 ) , congress directed the army corps to develop regulations , consistent with cwa section 404 , that establish equivalent standards and criteria for mitigation banks , in - lieu fee programs , and permittee - responsible mitigation .

in 2008 , in response to the nrc and gao reports and the ndaa directive , the corps and epa promulgated a mitigation rule to replace the 1990 moa with clearer requirements on what will be considered a successful project to compensate for wetlands lost to activities like construction , mining , and agriculture .

the rule sets performance standards and criteria for three types of wetlands mitigation: mitigation banks , in - lieu programs , and permittee - responsible compensatory mitigation .

it sets standards to mitigate the loss of wetlands and associated aquatic resources and is intended to improve the planning , implementation , and management of compensatory mitigation projects designed to restore aquatic resources that are affected by activities that disturb a half - acre or more of wetlands .

it also is designed to help ensure no net loss of wetlands by addressing key recommendations raised in the 2001 nrc report .

under the rule , all compensation projects must have mitigation plans that include 12 fundamental components , such as objectives , site selection criteria , a mitigation work plan , and a maintenance plan .

mitigation banks are believed to be the most reliable form of compensatory mitigation , because the mitigation is undertaken before an activity that would affect aquatic resources is permitted , and thus are the preferred option under the 2008 rule .

in 2015 , the corps and epa completed a retrospective review of the 2008 rule .

among its main findings was that , as a result of the rule , impacts to wetlands and waters covered by the cwa are avoided and minimized as much as possible .

it also found that there has been an increased focus on stream mitigation since the rule's release and that the use of mitigation banking and ilf programs to meet compensatory mitigation requirements has reduced permitting times , while permit processing times for projects that utilize permittee - responsible mitigation have been increasing .

for corps - permitted authorizations between 2010 and 2014 that required compensatory mitigation , 41% of projects used mitigation bank credits , 11% used in - lieu fee program credits , and 48% did permittee - responsible mitigation .

numerous public and private banks have been established .

in a study of mitigation , the environmental law institute determined that as of 2005 , there were 330 active banks .

more recent data paint a larger picture .

according to the army corps , as of september 2016 , there are 1,521 approved and active mitigation banks and in - lieu fee programs .

for permit applicants , obtaining compensatory mitigation credits for a planned project can be a challenge , and concerns about a mitigation bank program with available credits not being located sufficiently close to a project site are not unknown , as are concerns about the established price of credits .

mitigation banks are economics - driven , that is , if bankers do not see a potential market or potential development that will need credits and do not see a potential profit opportunity , banks will not be established .

the market for mitigation bank credits depends upon the demand for credits , which , in turn , depends upon mandates for compensatory mitigation for unavoidable losses to aquatic resources .

potential bankers face market and regulatory risks .

a sponsor's decision to establish a bank is likely influenced by many factors , including cost and demand .

under the 2008 rule , the corps does not determine the price of compensatory mitigation credits , which is solely determined by the sponsor of the mitigation bank or ilf program .

congress has repeatedly endorsed mitigation through legislation .

provisions in several laws , such as the farm bill and the 1998 transportation equity act ( tea - 21 ) , endorse the mitigation banking concept .

in 2003 , congress enacted wetlands mitigation provisions as part of the fy2004 department of defense ( dod ) authorization act ( p.l .

108-136 ) .

section 314 of that act directed dod to make payments to wetland mitigation banking programs in instances where military construction projects would result or could result in destruction of or impacts to wetlands .

further , the water resources development act ( wrda ) of 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 ) identified mitigation banking as the preferred mechanism for offsetting unavoidable wetland impacts associated with corps civil works projects .

