the annual agriculture appropriations law includes all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( except the forest service ) , plus the food and drug administration and the commodity futures trading commission .

a continuing resolution ( p.l .

109-383 ) is providing temporary funding for fy2007 through february 15 , 2007 , at the lower of either the fy2006 level or the house - passed level in h.r .

5384 .

the full house passed the fy2007 agriculture appropriations bill on may 23 , 2006 ( h.r .

5384 , h.rept .

109-463 ) .

the senate appropriations committee reported its version on june 22 , 2006 ( h.r .

5384 , s.rept .

109-266 ) .

the full senate took up the agriculture appropriations bill on december 5 , 2006 , to consider a crop disaster amendment ; the amendment was defeated by a procedural vote of 56-38 .

the house - passed bill provides a total of $93.9 billion , $691 million ( - 0.7% ) less than the $94.6 billion senate - reported bill .

in addition , the senate - reported bill includes $4 billion of emergency agricultural disaster assistance , which does not count against budgetary caps .

the house bill has no disaster provisions .

the house bill provides $17.8 billion in "net" discretionary appropriations , about $1 billion above fy2006 .

because the bills limit certain mandatory programs , the "gross" discretionary amounts are higher .

the house's $18.4 billion "gross" discretionary subtotal is 1.5% less than the senate's , and 0.7% less than in fy2006 .

for mandatory programs , the house bill includes $76.1 billion , $300 million less than the senate bill .

this would be down nearly $7 billion from fy2006 , mostly due to changing economic conditions .

the agriculture appropriations bill includes all of usda ( except the forest service ) , plus the food and drug administration and the commodity futures trading commission .

because the fy2007 fiscal year began before most of the appropriations bills were enacted , including the agriculture appropriations bill , congress has passed three continuing resolutions to continue funding the government .

the first provided temporary funding through november 17 , 2006 ( division b of p.l .

109-289 ) ; the second through december 8 , 2006 ( p.l .

109-369 ) ; and the third through february 15 , 2007 ( p.l .

109-383 ) .

the continuing resolutions are funding federal agencies at the lower of the house - passed , senate - passed , or fy2006 levels .

since the senate did not pass the agriculture appropriations bill , agriculture - related agencies are being funded at the lower of either the house - passed or fy2006 levels ( see table 12 at the end of this report ) .

press statements by senator byrd and representative obey , chairmen of the senate and house appropriations committees , indicate that the 110 th congress is expected to consider a joint resolution to fund government agencies for the remainder of fy2007 at fy2006 levels , with some adjustments for certain agencies .

the approach is expected to be more streamlined than a regular omnibus appropriations bill , reducing or eliminating earmark language and specific agency instructions , but allowing limited funding adjustments for certain agencies .

the appropriations bill for agriculture and related agencies covers all of usda except for the forest service , which is funded through the interior appropriations bill .

this amounts to about 95% of usda's total appropriation .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the safety of foods , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices .

now part of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , fda was originally housed in the department of agriculture , and the congressional appropriation subcommittees on agriculture and rural development still have jurisdiction over the fda budget .

fda's budget has two components: direct appropriations and user fees .

for fy2007 , the senate - reported bill ( h.r .

5384 ) would provide a direct appropriation of $1.57 billion to fda , $27.3 million more than the house - passed bill , $25.4 million more than the president's request , and $96 million more than the fy2006 enacted appropriation ( figure 15 ) .

for the entire fda budget ( direct appropriations and user fees ) , the senate - reported bill would provide fda $1.947 billion , compared with $1.919 billion in the house - passed bill , $1.921 billion in the president's request , and $1.832 billion in the fy2006 appropriation .

the president , the house committee , and the senate committee account for various user fees differently , resulting in a different calculation of the president's request .

the president's budget justification includes three sets of fees: ( 1 ) those from existing programs under the prescription drug user fee act , the medical device user fee and modernization act , and the animal drug user fee act ( $375.9 million ) ; ( 2 ) ongoing collections from mammography clinics and for export and import certifications ( $26.0 million ) ; and ( 3 ) proposed reinspection and food and animal feed export certification fees ( $25.5 million ) .

the $401.9 million of fees in the president's request includes the first and second .

the house committee , however , includes only the first in its numerical calculation ; it mentions the second in text .

the result is a $26 million difference in the user fee part of the budget and therefore in the total program level .

the senate committee also includes only the first in its totals but does note the second and third .

a separate issue: the $25.5 million in proposed new fees that would require legislative action .

none of the three includes these fees in the appropriations totals .

the president's request outlines programs — distributed across most fda centers and field units — related to: pandemic preparedness ( $30.5 million increase ) ; the house - passed and senate - reported bills would annualize the fy2006 $20 million supplemental ; for new activities , the house would provide another $8.1 million and the senate would give another $30.5 million ; food defense ( $19.8 million increase ) ; the house - passed bill would include $4.9 million and the senate - reported bill recommends $5.5 million ; critical path to personalized medicine ( $5.9 million increase ) ; the house - passed bill would include a $4.9 million increase ; and the senate - reported bill would include the $5.9 million requested ; drug safety ( $4 million increase ) ; the house - passed bill would include the requested $4 million plus $1 million relating to anti - counterfeiting technologies ; and the senate - reported bill would include $4 million ; and human tissues ( $2.5 million increase ) , also in the house - passed and senate - reported bills .

the president's request also highlights triggers needed for the user fees authorized by the device and animal drug user fee acts ; the house - passed bill would provide $8.2 million for this .

the president's budget request included $20.2 million for cost of living pay increases , for which the house - passed bill would provide $15.6 million and the senate - reported bill would give $20.3 million .

the house - passed bill would increase the president's request for generic drug review by $5 million and the senate - reported bill would add another $5 million so that the office of generic drugs would receive $10 million more than the president requested .

both the house - passed and senate - reported bills would provide $14.3 million for consolidation at the white oak campus and rental payments to gsa .

to achieve the program goals in its proposed budget , the president used "fda re - deployed resources from base programs. .

the reductions — affecting each center and program area — total $52.3 million .

the house committee recommended that cfsan funds not be redirected .

the senate - reported bill would restore $29.7 million — specifically to cfsan and nctr — of the $52.3 million .

the senate - reported bill expanded an amendment in the house - passed bill regarding financial conflicts of interest of fda advisory committee and panel members .

adding to the house's prohibiting fda from waiving specific financial conflicts of interest restrictions of individuals serving as voting members of fda advisory committees and panels ; the senate - reported bill would allow such an individual to serve if the hhs secretary were to disclose , on the fda website at least 15 days before the relevant meeting , the nature of the conflict , and the nature and basis of the waiver or any recusal due to the potential for conflict of interest .

the senate - reported bill also would require that the fda commissioner submit a semiannual report to senate and house appropriations and authorizing committees and the hhs inspector general that describes , in detail outlined in the amendment , efforts that fda took to find individuals without potential conflicts or interest .

not included in the senate - reported bill is a house - passed amendment that would prohibit fda from using funds to prevent individuals , pharmacists , or wholesalers from importing prescription drugs that comply with core requirements of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act .

thus , this year's conference committee may face the annual struggle over drug importation: the fy2005 conference report had prohibited fda from using funds to enforce the current statute that bans importation of prescription drugs by parties other than drug companies , and the fy2006 appropriations conferees did not adopt a house amendment that would have allowed prescription drug importation , thus averting a possible veto .

table 11 displays , by program area , the budget authority ( direct appropriations ) , user fees , and total program levels in the enacted fy2006 appropriation , the president's fy2007 request , the house - passed bill , and the senate - reported bill .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is the independent regulatory agency charged with oversight of derivatives markets .

the cftc's functions include oversight of trading on the futures exchanges , registration and supervision of futures industry personnel , prevention of fraud and price manipulation , and investor protection .

although most futures trading is now related to financial variables ( interest rates , currency prices , and stock indexes ) , congressional oversight is vested in the agricultural committees because of the market's historical origins .

for fy2007 , the senate - reported bill provides $99.5 million for the cftc , an increase of $2.1 million ( 2.2% ) from the fy2006 appropriation of $97.4 million .

the house - passed bill provides $109.4 million , a 12% increase over fy2006 , but $17.6 million less than ( - 14% ) the administration's request of $127.0 million ( figure 15 ) .

the administration requested a large increase in recognition of growth and change in the markets that the agency regulates , and the house - passed bill supports some of that increase .

both the house and senate bills reject the administration's proposal that cftc be funded by a transaction fee rather than by appropriated funds .

the administration's request did not specify any particular fee rate , but said that the proposed fee would "cover the cost of the cftc's regulatory activities. .

to fund the cftc at the $127 million level , a fee of about six or seven cents per transaction on the futures exchanges would be required ( based on 2005 trading volumes ) .

the same futures transaction fee proposal was last included in the administration's fy2003 budget but was not enacted by congress .

in fact , every administration since ronald reagan's has called unsuccessfully for such a fee .

the futures industry argues that such a fee would be anti - competitive and could divert trading to foreign markets or to the unregulated over - the - counter market .

however , it is not clear that a fee of this relatively modest size would have a significant impact on trading decisions in a market where the value of a single contract may rise or fall by hundreds or thousands of dollars in a day .

the administration notes that the "cftc is the only federal financial regulator that does not derive its funding from the specialized entities it regulates. .

for more information about the cftc user fee proposal , see crs report rs22415 , proposed transaction fee on futures contracts , by [author name scrubbed] .

