the privacy and security of health information is recognized as a critical element of transforming the health care system through the use of health information technology .

as part of h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , the 111 th congress is considering legislation to promote the widespread adoption of health information technology ( hit ) , and the bill includes provisions dealing with the privacy and security of health records , and specifically authorizes state attorneys general to file lawsuits in federal court on behalf of state residents , seeking injunctive relief or civil damages against "any person" who violates hipaa's privacy provisions .

to carry out the requirements of part c , the hipaa privacy rule , 45 c.f.r .

parts 160 and 164 , was adopted as the national standard for the protection of individually identifiable health information .

enforcement of the privacy rule began on april 14 , 2003 , except that for small health plans with annual receipts of $5 million or less enforcement began april 2004 .

the office of civil rights ( ocr ) in hhs is responsible for enforcing the privacy rule .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) has delegated authority to enforce the non - privacy hipaa standards , including the security rule .

because of the explicit language of hipaa , the privacy rule applies only to a specified set of "covered entities": ( 1 ) health plans , ( 2 ) health care clearinghouses , and ( 3 ) health care providers who transmit information in electronic form in connection with standard transactions governed by the administrative simplification provisions .

medicare prescription drug sponsors were added to the list of "covered entities" in 2003 .

excluded from the definition of covered entities are employees of covered entities .

business associates of covered entities are subject to certain aspects of the privacy rule .

the privacy rule applies to protected health information that is individually identifiable health information "created or received by a health care provider , health plan , or health care clearinghouse" that "[r]elates to the ... health or condition of an individual" or to the provision of or payment for health care .

the hipaa privacy rule governs the use and disclosure of protected health information by hipaa - covered entities ( health plans , health care providers , and health care clearinghouses ) .

the rule requires a covered entity to obtain the individual's written authorization for any use or disclosure of protected health information that is not for treatment , payment or health care operations or otherwise permitted or required by the privacy rule .

a covered entity is required to disclose protected health information in two situations: ( 1 ) to individuals when they request access to or an accounting of disclosures of their protected health information ; and ( 2 ) to hhs for compliance review or enforcement action .

the hipaa privacy rule permits use and disclosure of protected health information , without an individual's authorization or consent , for 12 national priority purposes .

regulations governing security standards under hipaa require health care covered entities to maintain administrative , technical , and physical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of electronic protected health information ; to protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such information , as well as protect against any unauthorized uses or disclosures of such information .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) has been delegated authority to enforce the hipaa security standard .

effective on february 16 , 2006 , the department of health and human services delegated to cms the authority and responsibility to interpret , implement , and enforce the hipaa security rule provisions ; to conduct compliance reviews and investigate and resolve complaints of hipaa security rule noncompliance ; and to impose civil monetary penalties for a covered entity's failure to comply with the hipaa security rule provisions .

the security rule applies only to protected health information in electronic form ( ephi ) , and requires a covered entity to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of all ephi the covered entity creates , receives , maintains , or transmits .

covered entities must protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such information , and any reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are not permitted or required under the privacy rule ; and ensure compliance by its workforce .

the security rule allows covered entities to consider such factors as the cost of a particular security measure , the size of the covered entity involved , the complexity of the approach , the technical infrastructure and other security capabilities in place , and the nature and scope of potential security risks .

the rule establishes "standards" in three categories — administrative , physical , and technical — that covered entities must meet , accompanied by implementation specifications for each standard .

the security rule requires covered entities to enter into agreements with business associates who create , receive , maintain or transmit ephi on their behalf .

under such agreements , the business associate must: implement administrative , physical and technical safeguards that reasonably and appropriately protect the confidentiality , integrity and availability of the covered entity's electronic protected health information ; ensure that its agents and subcontractors to whom it provides the information do the same ; and report to the covered entity any security incident of which it becomes aware .

the contract must also authorize termination if the covered entity determines that the business associate has violated a material term .

a covered entity is not liable for violations by the business associate unless the covered entity knew that the business associate was engaged in a practice or pattern of activity that violated hipaa , and the covered entity failed to take corrective action .

on february 16 , 2006 , hhs published the final enforcement rule , with both procedural and substantive provisions , applicable to all hipaa administrative simplification standards in part c. the final rule went into effect march 16 , 2006 .

the following discussion summarizes the main provisions of the enforcement rule .

criminal convictions have been obtained in four cases involving employees of covered entities who improperly obtained protected health information .

three of the hipaa criminal cases were brought after the olc legal opinion limiting direct liability for violations to covered entities .

according to recently released data from hhs , from april 2003 , when enforcement of the privacy rule began , to december 31 , 2008 , approximately 41,107 health information privacy complaints were filed with hhs .

in 23,466 cases , hhs did not find enforcement authority under hipaa .

hhs found authority to investigate and resolve 7,729 cases .

in those cases , hhs obtained changes in the investigated entity's privacy practices or other corrective actions .

hhs found no violation of the privacy rule in 3,858 cases .

almost 6,054 cases remained unresolved .

according to hhs , the compliance issues most frequently investigated were for impermissible use or disclosure of protected health information , lack of adequate safeguards for protected health information , lack of patient access to his or her protected health information , the disclosure of more information than is minimally necessary to satisfy a particular request for information , and failure to have an individual's authorization for a disclosure that requires one .

the covered entities most commonly required to take corrective action by hhs , in order of frequency , include private practices , general hospitals , outpatient facilities , health plans , and pharmacies .

according to its enforcement website , hhs did not report any civil penalties during the five - year period of 2003-2008 .

hhs reported that more than 448 cases were referred by hhs to doj for criminal investigation of knowing disclosure or access to protected health information in violation of the privacy rule .

an additional 285 cases were referred to the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) for investigation of cases that involve a potential violation of the hipaa security rule .

although information on criminal convictions was not reported by hhs , criminal convictions were obtained in four cases involving employees of covered entities who improperly obtained protected health information .

concerns have been raised by some that the hipaa privacy rule is being underenforced by the u.s .

departments of health and human services ( hhs ) and justice ( doj ) .

privacy advocates have been critical of hhs' enforcement of the hipaa privacy rule which has focused on technical assistance and voluntary cooperation for the covered entity with hhs .

according to hhs , several factors contribute to the number of enforcement actions taken by it for violations of the hipaa privacy rule .

first is hhs's preference for voluntary compliance , corrective action , and / or resolution agreement .

second , hipaa applies only to certain groups , defined as covered entities , health plans , health care clearinghouses , and health care providers who transmit financial and administrative transactions electronically .

hipaa does not cover all types of entities that maintain personal health information ( eg , life insurers , employers , workers compensation carriers , schools and school districts , state agencies such as child protective service agencies , law enforcement agencies , and municipal offices ) .

third , hipaa does not cover of all types of health transactions .

fourth , the statute does not create a private right of action , but rather public enforcement by hhs and doj .

fifth , the complained - of activity might not be a violation of the privacy rule .

in july 2008 , the first time since the privacy rule went into effect in 2003 , hhs required a resolution agreement from a covered entity ( a contract signed by hhs and the covered entity ) for violations of the hipaa privacy and security rules .

hhs entered into a resolution agreement with providence health & services requiring the covered entity to pay $100,000 and to implement a corrective action plan to safeguard identifiable electronic patient information to settle potential violations of the hipaa privacy and security rules .

in this case the violations involved the loss of backup tapes and theft of laptops containing individually identifiable health information .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the agency within hhs that is responsible for enforcing the hipaa security rule .

in october 2008 , the hhs inspector general released a report on the results of his audit to evaluate the effectiveness of cms's oversight and enforcement of covered entities' implementation of the hipaa security rule .

inspector general daniel r. levinson concluded that cms had taken limited actions to ensure that covered entities adequately implement the hipaa security rule .

these actions had not provided effective oversight or encouraged enforcement of the hipaa security rule by covered entities .

although authorized to do so by federal regulations as of february 16,2006 , cms had not conducted any hipaa security rule compliance reviews of covered entities .

to fulfill its oversight responsibilities , cms relied on complaints to identify any noncompliant covered entities that it might investigate .

as a result , cms had no effective mechanism to ensure that covered entities were complying with the hipaa security rule or that ephi was being adequately protected .

although cms did not agree with those findings , the inspector general recommended that cms establish policies and procedures for conducting hipaa security rule compliance reviews of covered entities .

