rising health care costs have for many years focused congressional attention upon the development and availability of prescription drugs .

recently , the presence of "authorized generic" pharmaceuticals in the drug marketplace has been the subject of congressional concern .

an "authorized generic" is a pharmaceutical that is marketed by or on behalf of a brand - named drug company , but is sold under a generic name .

the brand - name firm may distribute the drug under its own auspices or via a license to a generic drug company .

the price of this "authorized copy" is ordinarily lower than that of the brand - name drug .

some sources refer to authorized generics as "branded," "flanking," or "pseudo" generics. .

authorized generics may be pro - consumer in that they potentially increase competition and lower prices , particularly in the short - term .

they have nonetheless proven controversial .

authorized generics ordinarily enter the market at about the time the brand - name drug company's patents are set to expire .

some observers argue that such products may possibly discourage independent generic firms both from challenging drug patents and from selling their own generic products .

the potential diminution in independent generic incentives may in turn lead to less desire on the part of brand - name firms to market authorized generics themselves .

legal challenges to authorized generics practice have thus far been unsuccessful in the courts .

legislation has been introduced regarding authorized generic practice , however .

legislation introduced but not yet enacted in the 112 th congress , h.r .

741 and s. 373 , proposed to prevent pharmaceutical firms from selling authorized generics .

this report presents an analysis of the innovation and public health issues relating to authorized generic drugs .

the report begins with a review of the procedures through which independent generic drug companies receive government permission to market their products and resolve patent disputes with brand - name firms .

it then provides detailed background information pertaining to the concept of authorized generics and assesses their potential impact upon patent challenges and consumer welfare .

the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and possible alternatives .

the practice of authorized generics has arisen within a complex statutory framework established by the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , legislation more commonly known as the hatch - waxman act .

under parameters established by that statute , a manufacturer that wishes to sell a generic drug must both obtain marketing approval from the food and drug administration ( fda ) and account for any patent rights that pertain to that product .

this report first addresses fda marketing approval procedures for generic drugs , and then turns to possible patent implications .

although congress made significant amendments to the hatch - waxman act as recently as 2003 , authorized generics were not subject to discussion at that time .

the rise of this practice , as well as the vigor of the debate surrounding it , suggests both the pace of change within the industry and the prominence of the pharmaceutical industry within the national public health system .

as discussion of authorized generics continues , congress may wish to have a sense of its legislative options .

should congress conclude that authorized generics are appropriate , then it may simply take no action .

the opinions of the d.c. and fourth circuits suggest that , as currently drafted , the hatch - waxman act does not allow the fda to restrict the ability of brand - name firms to sell or approve of authorized generics .

absent legislative input , the fda may be unlikely to alter its interpretation of the hatch - waxman act in this respect in the future .

alternatively , congress could simply disallow authorized generics practice .

unenacted bills introduced in the 112 th congress , h.r .

741 and s. 373 , would have prohibited nda holders from manufacturing , marketing , selling , or distributing an authorized generic drug .

the term "authorized generic drug" was defined as "any version of a listed drug ... that the holder of new drug application ... seeks to commence marketing , selling , or distributing , directly or indirectly , after receipt of a notice" that an anda has been filed .

drugs marketed by firms eligible for the 180-day generic exclusivity , or that were sold by anyone after that exclusivity has expired , were not considered to be authorized generic drugs .

another option is to require brand - name firms to file a supplemental nda , or a similar application , with the fda when they market authorized generics .

this filing would then place the brand - name firm in the same category as generic applicants who did not qualify as the first to file .

in turn , the 180-day generic exclusivity period would then apply against the authorized generic .

notably , whether the 180-day generic exclusivity period strikes an appropriate balance between encouraging patent challenges and ensuring prompt access to generic medications is itself a contested proposition within the pharmaceutical industry .

discussion of the authorized generics issue may also prompt further reflection on the basic structure of incentives within the hatch - waxman act .

current interest in authorized generics reflects long - standing congressional concern for the appropriate balance between innovation and competition within the pharmaceutical industry .

although academic inquiry into authorized generics practice remains in its early phases , it is notable that knowledgeable commentators have reached disparate views of the benefits or detriments of this practice .

some observers stress that authorized generics benefit consumers by providing enhanced access to lower - cost alternatives to branded drugs , while others express concerns that authorized generics will defeat the incentives that independent generic firms possess to challenge pharmaceutical patents .

future studies may shed additional light on the impact of authorized generics upon consumer welfare .

