most voting systems used in federal , state , and local elections in the united states rely on computers in some way .

the most computerized is the direct recording electronic voting machine , in which votes are recorded directly onto computer memory devices .

dres are the most technologically advanced of current voting systems .

they and other forms of electronic voting offer substantial promise for improving elections for both voters and election officials .

questions about the security and reliability of dres were a relatively minor issue until 2003 .

two factors led to a sharp increase in public concerns about them: ( 1 ) the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava ) requires at least one voting machine in each precinct to fully accommodate disabled voters and dres are the only system that currently meets this requirement ; and ( 2 ) the security vulnerabilities of dres were widely publicized as the result of several studies released in 2003 .

much of the debate over dres has focused on whether they should be required to produce a paper ballot that can be verified by the voter as a solution to potential vulnerabilities .

this approach is often called the voter - verified paper audit trail ( vvpat ) .

bills to require vvpat were introduced in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , but there is divided opinion about both vvpat and the security vulnerabilities of dres , particularly with respect to the comparative vulnerabilities of other voting methods and various other aspects of election administration .

proposals to require that dres use vvpat or another method of verification have been seen by some observers , including many computer - security experts , as the method of choice for addressing the concerns .

however , others , including many election officials , believe that vvpat is unnecessary or even counterproductive and that security issues are best addressed through other approaches .

the public debate about dres and vvpat has led to some confusion about the problems and issues involved , and as a consequence , the options that might resolve them .

the questions and answers that follow address selected issues and misperceptions concerning dres and vvpat , in an effort to clarify and inform the ongoing policy discussion .

questions that arise frequently with respect to the controversy surrounding dres and possible misperceptions in the debate can be classified into three categories: those relating to dres themselves , those that relate to paper audit trails , and those that relate to recounts and audits .

questions in each of those categories are addressed in turn below .

as of the end of 2006 , most states required paper ballot records .

however , neither maryland nor georgia , which use dres statewide , had enacted such requirements , opting instead to focus on other security approaches .

as vvpat is used by more states , and more studies of its effectiveness are done , more will be known about the cost , performance , and any limitations of vvpat in normal use .

misperceptions about dres could have important policy implications as states , and possibly congress , consider proposals to require vvpat for all electronic voting machines .

in particular , the following issues may be worth considering: lack of information .

there remains considerable uncertainty about the relative security of dres in comparison to other voting systems ; how security measures such as vvpat may impact other important goals such as accuracy , reliability , usability , and accessibility ; and the effectiveness of those security measures .

congress could direct the eac to fill those information gaps through appropriate research as states move to implement vvpat and other security measures .

potential conflicts with hava requirements .

to the extent that states require paper - based ballots , they may be perceived to be in violation of the accessibility requirements of hava , unless their paper - based systems can be made sufficiently accessible .

congress might be asked to resolve any such conflicts through changes to hava .

voter confidence .

one of the arguments used in favor of vvpat by some observers is that it is necessary to help restore voter confidence in the u.s. election process .

however , there is little evidence that confidence of the average voter is affected by this issue .

even if the adoption of vvpat does increase confidence in the electoral process , if that confidence is false — as might be the case if voters mistakenly believe that a paper - ballot requirement is a "magic bullet" security measure — that could itself pose a risk to the integrity of elections .

congress may wish to examine the extent and causes of any decline in voter confidence , and the impact of various possible measures on it , in considering whether to enact legislation relating to this matter .

impacts on innovation .

while the mandating of security requirements such as vvpat can result in innovation with respect to those requirements , there is a risk that the requirements will be written in such a way that other kinds of innovation , such as potentially superior security measures not using vvpat , will be difficult to implement without additional legislation .

for example , any law requiring paper ballots would have to be changed before an alternative independent - verification or software - independent system , such as those discussed in the vvsg , could be implemented .

congress may wish to consider ways to ensure that the federal and state regulatory environment for voting systems does not inhibit such innovation .

