the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) was created by ยง20301 of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , and it is currently codified in ยง241 ( i ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

the program is administered by the bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , which is part of the department of justice's ( doj ) office of justice programs ( ojp ) .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) aids bja in administering the program .

scaap is designed to reimburse states and localities for correctional officers' salary costs incurred for incarcerating "undocumented criminal aliens. .

the ina defines the term "undocumented criminal alien" in the context of scaap to mean an alien who ( 3 ) ( a ) has been convicted of a felony or two or more misdemeanors ; and ( i ) entered the united states without inspection or at any time or place other than as designated by the attorney general ; ( ii ) was the subject of exclusion or deportation proceedings at the time he or she was taken into custody by the state or a political subdivision of the state ; or ( iii ) was admitted as a nonimmigrant and at the time he or she was taken into custody by the state or a political subdivision of the state has failed to maintain the nonimmigrant status in which the alien was admitted or to which it was changed under section 248 , or to comply with the conditions of any such status .

any state or locality that incurred costs for incarcerating "undocumented criminal aliens" is eligible to apply for scaap funding .

currently , this includes all 50 states , the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and more than 3,000 counties and cities .

for states and localities to qualify for scaap reimbursement , aliens under their jurisdiction must have at least one felony or two misdemeanor convictions under state or local law and be incarcerated for at least four consecutive days .

although the program is intended to compensate states and localities for correctional officers' salary costs , funds provided through scaap payments until recently have been unrestricted and could be used for any lawful purpose .

in some instances , scaap funds were used for projects such as interoperable communications systems , inmate medical care , and construction .

in many instances , funds were used for the jurisdiction's criminal justice system or jails .

the criteria for the amount of scaap funds received have evolved over time .

prior to fy2003 , the criteria were based on factors such as average cost per inmate multiplied by the number of eligible inmates and the total number of foreign - born inmates claimed .

in many cases , this resulted in reimbursement for ineligible aliens such as naturalized citizens and legal permanent residents ( lprs ) .

the formula is determined administratively by doj .

in fy2007 , the scaap reimbursement formula was determined through a multi - step process , as follows .

doj determined a per diem rate per inmate , using a combination of correctional officers' annual salary costs and the total number of all inmate days .

 ( the average inmate per diem for fy2007 was $30.30 ) ; immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) in dhs analyzed applicant inmate records submitted by the applicants , and provided bja with a report reflecting the number of eligible , ineligible , unknown , and invalid inmates ; the number of inmate days and a percentage of unknown days were totaled , then multiplied by the applicant's per diem rate ; the value of each applicant's correctional officers' salary costs associated with its eligible and credited unknown inmate days was totaled .

 ( this value reflected the maximum allowable reimbursement ) ; and the values were compared with the annual appropriation and a percentage factor was developed , and the percentage factor was applied uniformly to all jurisdictions .

the reimbursement factor for fy2007 scaap awards was approximately 42% .

funding for scaap has been appropriated by congress annually since 1995 .

levels of funding for the program have fluctuated from $130 million in fy1995 to $565 million in fy2002 and have remained relatively consistent between $400 and $410 million for fy2006 through fy2009 .

the administration's fy2010 budget did not request funding for this program .

from fy2000 to fy2008 , scaap reimbursements totaled approximately $4 billion .

as table 1 illustrates , california historically has received the largest annual awards , having received more than $1.7 billion since the program's inception .

florida , illinois , new york , and texas have consistently received larger awards as well , with smaller awards going to states such as west virginia , vermont , north dakota , and the u.s. territories .

in 2005 , scaap was reauthorized through fy2011 , and a provision was added that required scaap reimbursement funds be used for correctional purposes only .

legislation had been introduced in previous congresses that would have modified the program to include covering costs for indigent defense , translators , criminal aliens charged with two misdemeanors or a felony , and limited reimbursement to border states and states with large numbers of unauthorized aliens .

in the 111 th congress , legislation has been introduced to reauthorize the program until fy2014 ( h.r .

2282 ) , and to allow costs related to criminal aliens charged with specified crimes to be considered for scaap reimbursement ( s. 168 ) .

the administration's fy2010 budget request did not include funding for scaap ; however , funding for the program was included in the commerce , justice , science and related agencies appropriations act of 2010 ( h.r .

2847 ) .

h.r .

2847 as passed by the house on june 18 , 2009 , would appropriate $300 million for scaap , and the senate reported version would appropriate $228 million for the program .

