federal government programs and policies have financial effects that stretch far into the future .

nevertheless , the overwhelming focus of federal fiscal policy is short term in nature .

discussions of federal fiscal policy typically center on deficits in the current fiscal year or 10-year budget windows .

short - term accounting or budget measures , however , provide only a partial view of the costs of federal programs and policies , and they frequently offer a potentially misleading view of the federal government's ability to pay its bills in the long term .

short - term measures , such as annual budget estimates , or medium - term measures , such as the congressional budget office ( cbo ) 10-year baseline estimates , do not reflect long - term fiscal imbalances , and in particular they do not reflect the large anticipated costs needed to finance the baby - boom generation's retirement .

therefore , if short - and medium - term measures are not used in conjunction with long - term fiscal measures , then long - term fiscal effects of current policy will be understated or hidden .

budget measures are useful to the extent they permit governments and their citizens to make better decisions .

economic theory suggests that budget deficits can be a useful tool to smooth out short - run fluctuations , so that households are not subjected to sharp fluctuations in taxes and program benefits .

in the long run , however , budgets must balance .

furthermore , deficits that persist beyond the short run will redistribute wealth among generations , and will thus have important distributional consequences .

in addition , most economists believe long - term deficits have important negative effects on capital accumulation and economic growth .

therefore long - term budget measures provide valuable information about intergenerational equity and about prospects for long - term economic growth .

investors use both income statements , which show cash flows in a given year , and balance sheets , which show assets and liabilities , to understand a business's financial condition .

similarly , understanding a government's fiscal position requires more than one set of accounts .

long - term projections or measures are particularly important for understanding the growth of entitlement programs , where the full consequences of policy decisions take decades to emerge .

government programs and tax law provisions often have effects that stretch well beyond the end of standard budget windows .

that being said , it is also true that short - run budget estimates have the advantage of providing far more detail .

furthermore , short - term forecasting , which exploits momentum in economic activity to predict future economic indicators , gives more reliable estimates than long - run forecasting , which depends on the presumption that key economic parameters will match historical values or values considered "reasonable" by analysts .

discussions of fiscal policy usually start with the annual budget deficit or medium - term estimates such as the 10-year cbo budget outlook projections .

another approach has been to develop forward - looking summary measures of federal fiscal policy .

while the federal debt is the sum total of all deficits , net of surpluses , from the beginning of the u.s. government to the present , these forward - looking summary measures reflect aggregate deficits over the next 50 or 75 years , or even over the infinite future .

long - term projections of federal deficits are based on component projections of revenues and expenditures .

the path of future revenues and expenditures depend on many different factors , but economic growth is perhaps the most critical determinant .

the determinants of economic growth are discussed below .

on the expenditure side , simple rules - of - thumb are used to project discretionary spending .

for example , many projections are computed assuming that discretionary spending will grow at the same rate as gdp .

social security and medical care costs comprise the bulk of future mandatary spending , and projecting these costs requires sophisticated techniques that incorporate economic and demographic data .

many estimates use projections computed by social security administration's actuaries , while the cbo computes its own estimates of social security spending .

health care and social security costs are discussed below .

several measures of long - term fiscal conditions have been proposed .

each has some advantages and some drawbacks .

these measures relate closely to one another , although each illustrates different aspects of the government's fiscal situation .

the federal government faces serious fiscal imbalances in the coming decades .

while each of the measures described in the previous section highlight particular aspects of the federal government's fiscal condition , together they point to the same conclusion: under any plausible scenario the misalignment of federal revenues and spending will continue before worsening as the costs of baby - boom retirement and health care fall due .

estimates of each of the fiscal measures discussed above are presented in turn .

the federal government faces large fiscal imbalances .

a former chair of the president's council of economic advisers recently noted , the federal government's current budget deficit is , in a sense , only the tip of the iceberg of the fiscal problems to come .

the federal budget is on an unsustainable path .

when the baby - boom generation retires and becomes eligible for social security and medicare , all hell is going to break loose .

the policy options aren't pretty — either large cuts in promised benefits or taxes vastly higher than anything ever experienced in u.s. history .

if the yearly budget deficit is the tip of the iceberg , then finding a way to measure the iceberg itself , that is , the magnitude of the imbalance in long - term revenues and spending obligations , becomes important .

as with icebergs , the largest and most dangerous parts of long - term fiscal imbalances are less visible .

although all serious fiscal analysts acknowledge the magnitude of future fiscal imbalances , major legislative changes of the scale necessary to address these imbalances have not been enacted — or yet proposed .

the political choices needed to reduce these imbalances in a significant way will be painful , which explains some of the reluctance of policy makers to tackle this issue .

other reasons for the delay in confronting the issue of fiscal imbalances include the belief that economic growth will solve these problems , avoiding the need for difficult allocational decisions , and a belief that the costs of delay are relatively small .

short - and medium - term budgetary measures , such as the current - year estimates and cbo's 10-year forecasts , are not useful tools in understanding the nature and magnitude of the federal government's long - term financial imbalances , although they are essential tools for managing federal operations and for effective congressional oversight .

several measures of long - term financial fiscal stance developed in the recent past have become increasingly influential among budgeting experts , although so far they have had limited influence on wider public debates .

any single summary indicator of the federal budgetary situation provides too little information , so a combination of short - and long - term measures is needed to understand the federal government's fiscal stance .

recent estimates of future federal imbalances that were not constrained by cbo baseline assumptions and which were computed using different technical models , fall in a narrow range .

estimates of the 75-year imbalance run roughly from 7% to 8% of gdp , and estimates of the infinite horizon imbalance are around 10% .

the similarity of these estimates does not imply a lack of substantial uncertainty about the exact size of long - run imbalances .

that similarity does imply a consensus among analysts that these imbalances are not mere computational artefacts , but are real and , by historical standards , large .

the international monetary fund , the comptroller general , leading academics , and prominent policy analysts , among others , have stated that the u.s. government fiscal policy is proceeding on an unsustainable path .

other advanced countries such as belgium , italy , and japan face fiscal problems which are even more severe than those of the united states .

many other major european countries are also running sizeable deficits and face severe demographic challenges .

citizens and policy makers in the united states and in these countries will face unpleasant choices , involving either sharp cuts in benefits or major tax increases .

wider use of long - term fiscal measures , along with more commonly used short - and medium - term measures , may help focus attention on these important issues .

the federal government has run large deficits during major wars as well as during the reagan administration , and past generations of policy makers have managed to steer fiscal policy back towards a sustainable path .

debts accumulated during world war ii were in large part paid off in the 1950s and 1960s .

more recently , large reagan - era deficits in the 1980s were eventually tamed during the 1990s through the discipline of gramm - rudman - hollings , paygo , and other budget processes .

the 1983 greenspan commission introduced several important reforms which , if they did not fix social security's problems , at least extended its viable life by decades .

many analysts , however , conclude that financing the retirement and health care of the baby - boom generation presents financial challenges of a larger magnitude .

