it is estimated that hiv / aids , tb , and malaria together kill more than 6 million people each year .

according to the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) , at the end of 2007 , an estimated 33.2 million people were living with hiv / aids , of whom 2.5 million were newly infected , and 2.1 million died in the course of that year .

more than 2 million of those living with hiv / aids at the end of 2007 were children , and some 290,000 of those who died of aids that year were under 15 years old .

on each day of 2007 , some 1,000 children worldwide became newly infected with hiv , due in large part to little access to drugs that prevent the transmission of hiv from mother to child .

an estimated 9% of pregnant women in low - and middle - income countries were offered services to prevent hiv transmission to their newborns .

although tuberculosis ( tb ) is curable , the world health organization ( who ) estimates that by the end of 2005 ( the year for which the most current data are available ) , the disease killed 1.6 million people , including 195,000 who were also infected with hiv / aids .

some 8.8 million people were estimated to have contracted the disease in 2005 , with about 84% of the cases having occurred in 22 countries .

all but three of those high - burden countries were found in africa or asia .

about half of all new tb cases were in six countries: bangladesh , china , india , indonesia , pakistan , and the philippines .

more than 80% of those living with tb in 2005 were in southeast asia and sub - saharan africa , with the greatest per capita rate found in africa .

according to who , each year there are about 300 million acute malaria cases , which cause more than 1 million deaths annually .

health experts believe that between 85% and 90% of malaria deaths occur in africa , mostly among children , killing an african child every 30 seconds .

while hiv / aids , tb , and malaria are preventable diseases , their impacts have been catastrophic , particularly in sub - saharan africa .

researchers have found that people infected with one of the three illnesses are more likely to contract either of the other two , and the symptoms are more severe in people with two or more of the diseases .

according to who , 90% of people living with aids die within four to twelve months of contracting tb if they do not receive tb treatment .

tb / hiv co - infection is a considerable burden in sub - saharan africa , where 70% of the world's 14 million co - infected people live .

as many as half of all hiv - positive people in africa have tb ( and one out of three dies of tb ) , and up to 80% of all african tb patients have hiv .

research has demonstrated that treatment of tb or hiv in co - infected patients has positive effects on halting the advancement of both diseases .

studies have shown that hiv replication increases during the active phase of tb and returns to baseline after successful tb therapy .

conversely , anti - retroviral ( arv ) treatment may decrease the progression of latent tb to active tb , allowing those infected with hiv to live longer .

some research has also found that malaria contributes to the advancement of hiv replication , greater sexual transmission of hiv , and higher mother - to - child hiv transmission ( mtct ) rates among the co - infected .

for example , one study in malawi found that adults with acute malaria had a seven - fold increase in their hiv viral load .

however , hiv viral loads decreased when malaria treatment was offered to some patients .

conversely , hiv - positive pregnant women were more likely to contract malaria than hiv - negative pregnant women .

additionally , malaria - hiv co - infection was associated with an increased risk of maternal , perinatal , and early infant death compared to infection of either disease alone .

researchers are also beginning to explore whether hiv - positive pregnant women who are co - infected with malaria are more likely to transmit hiv to their children .

in uganda , co - infected women had an hiv - transmission rate of 40% , while hiv - positive women not infected with malaria had an hiv transmission rate of 15.4% .

drug resistance complicates efforts to halt the spread of tb and malaria .

who estimates that about 450,000 new multi - drug - resistant tb cases occur each year .

in september 2006 , who expressed concern about an increase in treatment - resistant tb cases , particularly in the soviet union , asia , and south africa .

who found that extensive drug resistant tb ( xdr - tb ) is resistant not only to the two main first - line tb drugs — isoniazid and rifampicin — but also to three or more of the six classes of second - line drugs .

health experts are particularly concerned about the most recent outbreak of xdr - tb in south africa , which killed 52 out of 53 patients within 25 days on average , including those being treated with anti - retroviral medication .

on october 9 and 10 , 2006 , who convened a meeting of a global task force to review available data on xdr - tb incidence , and to develop an emergency xdr - tb action plan focused on containing the deadly strain and advising health practitioners on xdr - tb case management .

some experts believe that a steady rise in malarial deaths in sub - saharan africa is due in large part to an increase in treatment resistance .

one of the commonly used drugs , chloroquine , is quickly becoming ineffective in treating those infected with malaria .

chloroquine is affordable to many , as it costs approximately 10 cents per course of treatment .

because it has been used for more than 50 years , however , resistant strains of malaria are rapidly developing , rendering the drug useless in a growing number of cases .

newer treatments that are more effective and have no observable resistance are considerably more expensive .

the new drugs , called "artemisinin - based combination therapies" ( acts ) , cost about $2 per treatment course , which is beyond the financial reach of many in the most affected regions .

a number of u.s. departments and agencies are responsible for implementing pepfar programs , though ogac coordinates the distribution of most u.s. global hiv / aids spending .

after the state department , usaid , and hhs ( which includes nih's office of aids research [oar] and cdc's gap ) receive the largest congressional appropriations for international hiv / aids efforts .

the departments of defense ( dod ) and labor ( dol ) also receive global hiv / aids funds , though congress has not appropriated funds to dol since fy2006 .

the section below itemizes obligations by each pepfar - participating department and agency to global hiv / aids programs .

all figures in this section are adjusted to reflect rescissions unless otherwise specified .

congressional debate about reauthorizing pepfar began in the first session of the 110 th congress .

one reauthorization bill has been introduced , and members have begun to debate at what level to fund a second five - year phase of pepfar .

while there appears to be strong support for the reauthorization of the initiative , a number of members and advocates have proposed some changes to the authorizing legislation .

still other hiv / aids analysts suggest that health infrastructure challenges and health worker shortages in many countries will have to be resolved if the united states is to combat effectively the global spread of hiv / aids .

the section below analyzes some of the key issues that congress might consider as it debates pepfar reauthorization .

the leadership act authorized the appropriation of the $15 billion that the president requested to fund pepfar through fy2008 .

ultimately , congress supported the plan in excess of nearly $5 billion , providing $19.7 billion for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria initiatives from fy2004 through fy2008 .

on may 30 , 2007 , president bush requested that congress authorize $30 billion to extend pepfar an additional five years .

the president anticipates that from fy2009 through fy2013 , the plan would support treatment for 2.5 million people , prevent more than 12 million new infections , and care for more than 12 million people , including 5 million orphans and vulnerable children ( ovc ) .

in august 2007 , senator richard lugar introduced the hiv / aids assistance reauthorization act of 2007 ( s. 1966 ) to authorize $30 billion for fy2009 through fy2013 .

the bill maintains the five - year approach to addressing hiv / aids , the global aids coordinator position , and reporting requirements .

some hiv / aids advocates would like congress to provide more than the $30 billion that the president requested .

on november 30 , 2007 , senator joseph biden , chair of the senate foreign relations committee , issued a press release that urged congress to provide $50 billion for a five - year pepfar reauthorization .

representative tom lantos , chair of the house foreign relations committee , announced that he intended to support efforts to increase funding for pepfar "dramatically over current levels" and that the house foreign affairs committee would consider reauthorization of the initiative "as [the] first major order of business in 2008. .

some hiv / aids analysts predict that debate on pepfar reauthorization might include whether to set spending limits for u.s. contributions to the fund and at what levels .

p.l .

108-25 stipulates that u.s. contributions to the fund for fy2004 through fy2008 may not exceed 33% of contributions from all sources .

congress instituted the contribution limit to encourage greater global support for the global fund .

some supporters of the fund argue that the 33% should represent the amount the united states contributes annually .

others argue that the statute serves as a ceiling and does not commit the united states to providing 33% of all contributions .

some question whether u.s. contributions to the fund are provided at the expense of u.s. bilateral hiv / aids programs .

at an fy2005 senate appropriations committee hearing , then - global aids coordinator randall tobias argued that the "incremental difference between what the administration requested and what was appropriated to the fund is money that might have been available" for use in u.s. bilateral [hiv / aids] programs .

while proposing pepfar , the administration announced that it would seek $1 billion for the global fund over the five - year term of the initiative .

in total , the administration requested $1.3 billion for the fund from fy2004 to fy2008 , $200 million in each of fy2004 and fy2005 and $300 million in each of fy2006 through fy2008 .

congress has consistently provided more to the fund than the administration has requested , appropriating some $3 billion from fy2004 through fy2008 .

in fy2008 , congress provided $840.3 million to the fund , the largest u.s. contribution in a fiscal year to date .

some health experts assert that the spending requirements for hiv prevention activities are not well - balanced , place too much emphasis on abstinence until marriage , and hinder countries' ability to utilize prevention funds in a manner that is most relevant to local conditions .

p.l .

108-25 , which delineates how pepfar funds should be allocated , stipulates that between fy2006 and fy2008: 55% of global hiv / aids funds are to be used to treat people infected with hiv / aids , of which 75% should be spent on the purchase and distribution of arv medication ; 15% of global hiv / aids funds are to be used for palliative care ; 20% of global hiv / aids funds are to be used for prevention efforts , of which at least 33% should be expended for abstinence - until - marriage programs ; and 10% of global hiv / aids funds should be reserved for children orphaned or affected by hiv / aids .

opponents of the 33% abstinence - until - marriage provision cite an april 2006 government accountability office ( gao ) report , which concluded that the stipulation places a burden on prevention spending .

gao found that pepfar's spending requirements limit the flexibility with which prevention funds could be spent .

gao estimated that in order to meet the 33% proviso , between fy2004 and fy2006 , ogac increased spending on prevention by almost 55% and mandated that country teams spend half of prevention funds on sexual transmission prevention and two - thirds of those funds on abstinence / faithfulness ( ab ) activities .

additionally , gao found that ogac applied the 33% spending requirement to all pepfar prevention funding , even though p.l .

108-25 specifies application to the 15 focus countries funded through ghai .

congress has already begun to introduce legislation to uphold , modify , or eliminate the abstinence - until - marriage spending requirement .

in the 110 th congress , members have enacted legislation that requires the administration to follow the funding guidelines of congress for prevention activities in fy2008 , notwithstanding the 33% spending requirement for abstinence - until - marriage activities .

members have also introduced the hiv / aids assistance reauthorization act ( s. 1966 ) , which would increase the portion of prevention funds to be spent on abstinence - until - marriage and fidelity activities to 50% .

other bills seek to strike the provision altogether , such as protection against transmission of hiv for women and youth act of 2007 ( h.r .

1713 and s. 2415 ) and hiv prevention act of 2007 ( s. 1553 ) .

the 33% spending requirement is particularly troubling to some hiv / aids experts .

they contend that the provision does not consider gender dynamics in some of the most affected countries .

research has shown that in africa , married girls and women are more likely to contract hiv than their single counterparts .

for example , 30% of married adolescents' spouses were hiv - positive in kenya , while 11.5% of the partners of their unmarried counterparts were infected with hiv .

similarly , in zambia , 31.6% of married girls' partners were found to carry hiv , while 16.8% of unmarried girls' boyfriends were hiv - positive .

in response to these findings , some members have introduced legislation that aims to make pepfar responsive to gender inequities .

for example , the protection against transmission of hiv for women and youth act of 2007 ( h.r .

1713 and s. 2415 ) requires the president to formulate and submit to congress a comprehensive , integrated , and culturally appropriate global hiv prevention strategy that addresses the vulnerabilities of married and unmarried women and girls to hiv infection and seeks to reduce the gender disparities in hiv infection rates .

some hiv advocates argue that a disproportionate percentage of prevention funds are spent on abstinence - only programs , effectively limiting the amount of funds available for other hiv prevention strategies .

many health experts advocate for greater spending on the prevention of mother - to - child hiv transmission ( pmtct ) .

unaids estimates that 1,800 children worldwide become infected with hiv each day , the vast majority of whom are newborns .

more than 85% of children infected with hiv live in sub - saharan africa , although mtct rates are rapidly rising in eastern europe and central asia .

unaids estimates that in 2005 , just less than 8% of pregnant women in low - and middle - income countries had access to services that could prevent the transmission of hiv to their babies .

the global pediatric hiv / aids prevention and treatment act of 2007 ( s. 2472 ) amends pepfar authorizing legislation to ensure that by 2013 , 80% of pregnant women in the focus countries receive hiv counseling and testing and all those who test positive receive pmtct services .

a number of hiv / aids advocates argue that if pepfar is reauthorized , the guidelines on condom usage should be expanded .

critics contend that the pepfar policy , which advises implementing partners to distribute condoms to "high risk groups" has limited effectiveness .

other observers complain that although research has demonstrated that married women are particularly at risk of contracting hiv in africa and india , u.s. condom distribution strategies do not include married women , unless their husbands test positive for hiv .

supporters of u.s. condom distribution guidelines counter that the definition of "high risk" individuals is broad enough to include the most vulnerable groups .

some hiv / aids experts urge congress to enact legislation that includes language similar to that proposed in hiv prevention act of 2007 ( s. 1553 ) , which expands the definition of "high risk" individuals to include married and young people .

a growing number of health analysts are calling for better integration of family planning and hiv / aids programs .

supporters of this strategy assert that adding family planning services to pmtct programs can achieve the same effect as increasing drug coverage but at a lower cost .

according to the ensuring access to contraceptives act of 2007 ( h.r .

2367 ) — a bill which aims to expand access to contraceptives — at equal funding levels , family planning services can avert nearly 30% more hiv - positive births than arvs .

the focus on family worldwide act of 2007 ( h.r .

1225 ) also aims to integrate family planning and hiv / aids activities .

according to unaids , some 2.1 million children and infants are living with hiv / aids worldwide .

in 2007 , the virus killed an estimated 290,000 children .

without treatment and care , approximately 50% of all hiv - positive children will die before age two and 75% will die before age five .

ogac estimates that in fy2006 , it allocated 9% of all spending on arvs to children .

some advocates for children urge congress to increase spending on pediatric hiv / aids arvs so that funding meets the needs of children currently without access to treatment .

the global pediatric hiv / aids prevention and treatment act of 2007 ( s. 2472 ) amends pepfar authorizing legislation to require that by 2013 , children account for at least 15% of those receiving treatment .

on june 22 , 2004 , the white house belatedly selected vietnam to be the last of the 15 focus countries .

according to a white house press release , u.s. officials chose the country in part because they believed that vietnam was facing an hiv / aids explosion , though the country had about 130,000 infected people at the time .

additionally , u.s. officials decided that vietnam had demonstrated significant commitment to fighting the disease , as it was spending about $36 per person for hiv / aids care , prevention , and treatment .

some hiv / aids analysts argued that india might have been a better selection , because at the time , it shared the distinction with south africa of having the highest number of hiv - positive people ( about 5.3 million ) .

administration critics theorized that india was not chosen because at the time it had threatened to develop and distribute generic versions of patented arvs .

the white house responded that india was not chosen for a number of reasons , including the fact that the united states was already providing the country more than $20 million in hiv / aids assistance .

in january 2007 , u.s. representative barbara lee introduced h.r .

175 , to provide assistance to combat hiv / aids in india .

the bill would add india as to the list of focus countries .

hiv / aids analysts are beginning to advocate that other countries where the virus is rapidly spreading be included in ghai .

some hiv / aids advocates would like congress to increase support in areas where hiv has become more entrenched , particularly in eastern europe and central asia .

unaids estimates that the number of people living with hiv in those regions has increased by 150% since 2001 , when about 630,000 people were living with the virus .

at the end of 2007 , about 1.6 million people were living with hiv in the two regions , 90% of whom were in ukraine and russia .

while eastern europe and central asia has demonstrated significant increases in hiv prevalence , members have introduced legislation to boost support in other areas , namely india and the caribbean .

in february 2007 , representative luis fortuno introduced h.r .

848 to amend the state department basic authorities act of 1956 to authorize assistance to combat hiv / aids in certain countries of the caribbean region .

latest estimates indicate that the average hiv / aids prevalence rate for the caribbean is 1% .

nearly 75% of the 230,000 people living with hiv / aids in the region reside in haiti or the dominican republic .

global aids coordinator ambassador mark dybul testified at a march 2006 hearing on pepfar that ill - equipped health systems compromise the ability of the united states to implement its pepfar programs efficiently .

ambassador dybul stated that building health infrastructure and strengthening health systems are critical components of pepfar programs .

according to ogac , in fy2005 , an estimated 25% of all pepfar - supported activities had components directly related to strengthening health systems , such as quality assurance , financial management and accounting , health networks and infrastructure , and commodity distribution and control .

in fy2006 , ogac allocated $44.8 million to policy analysis and system strengthening .

although ogac reports that it is allocating funds to strengthen health systems , in a july 2004 report , gao criticized some aspects of pepfar's health system strengthening efforts .

gao found that some of ogac's strategies aimed at increasing the quality and quantity of health care workers in africa might not be cost - effective or practical for long - term implementation .

the african health capacity investment act of 2007 ( h.r .

3812 and s. 805 ) aims to address some of these issues .

the bill authorizes funds to improve health care capacity on the continent .

related activities include training for african health care workers , provision of incentive to encourage health worker retention , and establishment of off - site hiv / aids testing and treatment facilities for health care providers .

the bill also requires the president to develop a strategy that would coordinate health - related strategies with other donors .

some bills aim to improve health care capacity by integrating hiv / aids programs with other key health services , such as child survival and maternal health .

the united states commitment to global child survival act of 2007 ( h.r .

2266 and s. 1418 ) authorizes funds to integrate and coordinate activities related to pmtct , hiv / aids prevention , care and treatment , malaria , tb , and family planning .

the united nations' food and agriculture organization ( fao ) estimates that in 2001-2003 there were 854 million undernourished people in the world .

most of the world's undernourished were in asia ( 162 million , excluding india and china ) , india ( 221 million ) , and china ( 142 million ) , though africa ( 206 million ) had the greatest proportion ; one in three people in africa were undernourished .

poor nutrition in hiv - positive people is particularly detrimental because poor nutrition weakens the body's immune response to the hiv virus and a number of hiv - associated opportunistic infections .

hiv - positive people with weak immune systems become sick more frequently and develop aids more rapidly .

malnutrition may also be associated with increased risk of hiv transmission from mother to child .

if patients are not well nourished , they can suffer significant side effects while taking anti - retroviral medication ( arvs ) , and the drugs can be less effective .

studies have demonstrated that a person with hiv requires 10% to 15% more energy and 50% to 100% more protein a day than a non - infected adult .

researchers in singapore found that patients who are malnourished when they start arv therapy are six times more likely to die than well - nourished patients and are more likely to suffer side - effects , which often caused them to stop taking the treatments .

a growing number of hiv / aids advocates are urging congress to mandate ogac to integrate nutritional support in pepfar programs .

ogac maintains that it supports limited therapeutic feeding for malnourished aids patients , particularly malnourished hiv - positive pregnant and lactating women , as well as malnourished orphans and vulnerable children born to hiv - positive parents , who are clinically malnourished and have no other food resources .

further , the administration contends that "[t]he emergency plan has a clear responsibility to prevent , treat and care for people with hiv and aids , but comprehensively addressing issues of food insecurity is beyond the scope of the emergency plan. .

at an april 2007 house foreign affairs committee hearing on the progress of pepfar , global aids coordinator mark dybul testified that ogac had contributed $2.45 million to the world food program ( wfp ) and would contribute an additional $4.27 million in fy2007 .

according to the administration , the united states provides nearly half of all wfp's resources , when all sources of u.s. funding are included .

in the house report ( h.rept .

109-265 ) accompanying the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations ( p.l .

109-102 ) , members urged ogac to develop and implement a strategy to address the nutritional requirements of those taking arvs .

in division j — the explanatory section for department of state and foreign operations appropriations — of the fy2008 consolidated appropriations , congress directed that ogac allocate no less than $100 million of pepfar funds to "address short - term and long - term approaches to food security as components of a comprehensive approach to fighting hiv / aids. .

additionally , in december 2007 , representative donald payne introduced the global hiv / aids food security and nutrition support act of 2007 ( h.r .

4914 ) to amend the pepfar authorization to integrate food security and nutrition activities into hiv / aids activities .

some hiv / aids advocates oppose congressional spending requirements , in part because they limit the ability of implementers to explore emerging technologies .

a growing number of health experts are increasingly optimistic about the possible development of a microbicide .

hiv / aids proponents urge congress to increase support for microbicide research and development .

members have introduced legislation in support of microbicide research , such as house and senate versions of the microbicide development act ( h.r .

1420 and s. 823 ) .

the bills amend the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

300cc - 40 et seq. ) .

and direct the office of aids research to expedite the implementation of a federal microbicide research and development plan , annually review the plan , and prioritize related funding and activities .

the bills also mandate the director of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases to establish , within the division of aids , an organizational unit that would conduct microbicide research and development .

the bills direct the head of the office of hiv / aids at usaid to develop and implement a program that would support the development of microbicides products and facilitate their wide - scale availability .

some researchers recommend that congress expand support for hiv / aids vaccine research and development .

supporters of this idea argue that vaccine identification should be an intractable part of u.s. international hiv / aids assistance .

a key concern for many vaccine proponents is that the cost of u.s. international hiv / aids initiatives will continue to rise as more people receive treatment .

an hiv / aids vaccine could prevent new infections and ultimately save the u.s. government billions of dollars .

in february 2007 , senator richard lugar introduced the vaccines for the future act of 2007 ( s. 569 ) .

the bill , and its house companion ( h.r .

1391 ) , authorizes a number of strategies to accelerate the development of vaccines for diseases primarily affecting developing countries , including hiv / aids .

proposed strategies include encouraging public - private partnerships ; supporting research , development , and manufacturing incentives ; and providing tax credits for participating researchers and manufacturers .

appendix a. glossary of abbreviations and acronyms appendix b .

participating agencies and departments in u.s .

global hiv / aids initiatives: life and pepfa .

