the increasing costs of health care have focused congressional attention upon both the development and public availability of prescription drugs .

congress has long recognized that the patent system has an important role to play in the pharmaceutical industry in each respect .

the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , commonly known as the hatch - waxman act , in part reformed the patent laws to balance incentives for innovation and competition within the pharmaceutical industry .

congress subsequently amended this legislation on several occasions , most recently via the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 .

recently , congressional attention has been directed towards one aspect of the patent system , the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation .

although brand - name pharmaceutical companies commonly procure patents on their innovative products and processes , such rights are not self - enforcing .

if a brand - name drug company wishes to enforce its patents against generic competitors , it must pursue litigation in the federal courts .

such litigation ordinarily terminates in either a judgment of infringement , which typically blocks generic competition until such time as the patent expires , or a judgment that the patent is invalid or not infringed , which typically opens the market to generic entry .

as with other sorts of commercial litigation , however , the parties to pharmaceutical patent litigation may choose to settle their case .

certain of these settlements call for the generic firm to neither challenge the brand - name company's patents nor sell a generic version of the patented drug .

in exchange , the brand - name drug company agrees to make cash payments to the generic firm .

this compensation has been termed an "exclusion" or "exit" payment or , because the payment flows counterintuitively , from the patent proprietor to the accused infringer , a "reverse" payment. .

commentators differ markedly in their views of reverse payment settlements .

some observers believe that they result from the specialized patent litigation procedures established by the hatch - waxman act .

others conclude that when one competitor pays another not to market its product , such a settlement is anti - competitive and a violation of the antitrust laws .

since 2003 , congress has required that litigants notify federal antitrust authorities of their pharmaceutical patent settlements .

to date , congress has not stipulated substantive standards for assessing the validity of these agreements under the antitrust law , however .

that determination was left to judicial application of general antitrust principles .

uniformity of results has not been a hallmark of this line of cases .

facing different factual patterns , some courts have concluded that a particular reverse payment settlement constituted an antitrust violation , while others have upheld the agreement .

the judicial tendency is towards a more favorable view of reverse payment settlements , however .

in the 112 th congress , one legislative proposal would have taken a different approach .

the preserve access to affordable generics act ( s. 27 ) would create a presumption that certain reverse payment settlements are unlawful .

s. 27 then establishes relevant factors to be weighed in deciding whether that presumption has been overcome through a showing that the procompetitive benefits of the settlement outweigh its anticompetitive effects .

another bill , s. 1882 , the fair generics act , would disqualify any generic firm from entering into a reverse payment settlement ( as defined in the legislation ) from enjoying the 180-day exclusivity .

neither bill has yet been enacted .

this report introduces and analyzes innovation policy issues concerning pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements .

it begins with a review of pharmaceutical patent litigation procedures under the hatch - waxman act .

the report then introduces the concept of reverse payment settlements .

next , the report analyzes the status of reverse payment settlements under the antitrust laws .

the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and alternatives .

as discussed previously , a generic firm's filing of a paragraph iv anda may result in a patent infringement suit brought by a brand - name drug company .

in such a litigation , if the nda holder demonstrates that the independent generic firm's proposed product would violate its patents , then the court will ordinarily issue an injunction that prevents the generic drug company from marketing that product .

that injunction will expire on the same date as the nda holder's patents .

independent generic drug companies commonly amend their andas or section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) applications in this event , replacing their paragraph iv certifications with paragraph iii certifications .

on the other hand , the courts may decide in favor of the independent generic firm .

the court may conclude that the generic firm's proposed product does not infringe the asserted patents , or that the asserted patents are invalid or unenforceable .

in this circumstance , the independent generic firm may launch its product once the fda has finally approved its anda or section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) application .

in addition to the issuance of final judgment in favor of either the brand - name drug company or generic firm , another resolution of pharmaceutical patent litigation is possible .

this legal situation led to a number of cases with varying details , but a common core fact pattern .

upon filing a paragraph iv anda , a generic firm would be sued for patent infringement as provided by the hatch - waxman act .

the nda holder and generic applicant would then settle their dispute .

the settlement would call for the generic firm to neither challenge the patent nor produce a generic version of the patented drug , for a period of time up to the remaining term of the patent .

in exchange , the nda holder would agree to compensate the anda applicant , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years .

opinions about the effects of reverse payment settlements upon social welfare have varied .

some commentators believe that such settlements are anticompetitive .

they believe that many of these agreements may amount to no more than two firms colluding in order to restrict output and share patent - based profits .

such settlements are also said to eliminate the possibility of a judicial holding of patent invalidity , which may open the market to generic competition and benefit consumers .

on the other hand , some commentators have found nothing inherently troublesome about reverse payment settlements .

among their observations is that there is a general judicial policy in favor of promoting settlement .

settlements can allow the parties to avoid the expenses of litigation , achieve a resolution to the dispute in a timely manner , and avoid the risk of an uncertain result in the courtroom .

the settlement of litigation further serves the goal of resolving disputes in a peaceful manner , and also preserves scarce judicial resources .

second , any settlement of litigation between rational actors necessarily involves an exchange of benefits and obligations .

as judge richard posner has explained: [ a ] ny settlement agreement can be characterized as involving "compensation" to the defendant , who would not settle unless he had something to show for the settlement .

if any settlement agreement is thus to be classified as involving a forbidden "reverse payment," we shall have no more patent settlements .

third , certain reverse payment settlements have allowed for the introduction of generic competition prior to the date the relevant patent expires .

it is possible , for example , for the brand - name and generic firms to "split" the remaining patent term , with the generic firm being allowed to market a competing product prior to the running of the full patent term .

such agreements may potentially benefit consumers , certainly in comparison to a judgment that the patent is not invalid and infringed .

finally , the dispute settlement procedures established by the hatch - waxman act may themselves promote the use of reverse payment settlements in pharmaceutical patent litigation .

in patent litigation outside the hatch - waxman act context , the accused infringer is ordinarily using or marketing the patented technology .

a judicial finding of infringement would expose the accused infringer to an injunction , along with damages awarded for past uses and sales .

as a result , the accused infringer may well be willing to compensate the patent proprietor in order to avoid the risk of such a holding .

some observers believe that the structure of the hatch - waxman act alters the traditional balance of risks between the plaintiff - patentee and accused infringer .

as explained by one federal district court: [i]n creating an artificial act of infringement ( the anda iv filing ) , the hatch - waxman amendments grant generic manufacturers standing to mount a validity challenge without incurring the cost of entry or risking enormous damages flowing from infringing commercial sales.... because of the hatch - waxman scheme , [the generic firm's] exposure in the patent litigation was limited to litigation costs , but its upside — exclusive generic sales — was immense .

the patent holder , however , has no corresponding upside , as there are no infringement damages to collect , but has an enormous downside — losing the patent .

as a result , some commentators believe that it is entirely predictable that the unique procedures of the hatch - waxman act have resulted in the new phenomenon of reverse payment settlements .

at the present time , the congressional response to pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements has been limited .

in the 2003 medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) , congress mandated that the department of justice ( doj ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) receive copies of certain patent settlements agreements in the pharmaceutical field .

the filing requirement applies to agreements executed on or after january 7 , 2004 , between an anda applicant , on one hand , and either the nda holder or an owner of an orange book - listed patent , on the other .

such agreements trigger the statutory notification requirement if they relate to one of three topics: ( 1 ) the manufacture , marketing , or sale of the brand - name drug that is the listed in the anda ; ( 2 ) the manufacture , marketing , or sale of the generic drug for which the anda was submitted ; or ( 3 ) the 180-day generic exclusivity period as it applies to that anda , or to another anda filed with respect to the same brand - name drug .

the mma stipulates that certain agreements are not subject to this filing requirement .

in particular , agreements that solely consist of purchase orders for raw materials , equipment and facility contracts , employment or consulting contracts , or packaging and labeling contracts do not need to be submitted to the doj or ftc .

further , the filing obligation applies only to andas that include a paragraph iv certification .

in particular , agreements with respect to section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) applications need not be filed .

although the mma imposed a filing obligation upon certain patent settlements between pharmaceutical firms , that legislation did not set substantive standards as to the validity of these agreements .

both prior and subsequent to congressional enactment of the mma , however , various government and private actors asserted that certain reverse payment settlements violated the antitrust laws .

in order to resolve these claims , different courts applied general principles of antitrust law .

facing different factual patterns , the courts ultimately reached varying results .

after introducing the basic concepts of antitrust law , this report next reviews several of the more notable judicial opinions analyzing reverse payment settlements .

the primary legal mechanism for addressing conduct alleged to be anti - competitive — including reverse payment settlements — consists of the antitrust laws .

the antitrust laws are comprised of the sherman act , the clayton act , the federal trade commission act , and other federal and state statutes that prohibit certain kinds of anticompetitive economic conduct .

although a complete review of the antitrust laws exceeds the scope of this report , other sources provide more information for the interested reader .

section 1 of the sherman act declares "[e]very contract , combination in the form of trust or otherwise , or conspiracy , in restraint of trade ... to be illegal. .

the courts have long interpreted this language as applying only to unreasonable restraints of trade .

the determination of whether particular conduct amounts to an unreasonable restraint of trade is commonly conducted under the "rule of reason. .

under this approach , "the finder of fact must decide whether the questioned practice imposes an unreasonable restraint on competition , taking into account a variety of factors , including specific information about the relevant business , its condition before and after the restraint was imposed , and the restraint's history , nature , and effect. .

the rule of reason essentially calls upon courts to reach a judgment of reasonableness by balancing the anticompetitive consequences of a challenged practice against its business justifications and potentially procompetitive impact .

other sorts of restraints are deemed unlawful per se .

per se illegality is appropriate "[o]nce experience with a particular kind of restraint enables the court to predict with confidence that the rule of reason will condemn it. .

the supreme court has explained that "there are certain agreements or practices which because of their pernicious effect on competition and lack of any redeeming virtue are conclusively presumed to be unreasonable and therefore illegal without elaborate inquiry as to the precise harm they have caused or the business excuse for their use. .

among the practices that have been judged per se  violations include price fixing , group boycotts , and market division .

as this report will review , the courts have differed in their approaches to reverse payment settlements in pharmaceutical patent litigation .

the court of appeals for the sixth circuit has held that one reverse payment settlement constituted a per se  violation of the antitrust laws .

the courts of appeals for the second , eleventh , and federal circuits have declined per se treatment to reverse payment settlements , employing a more permissive mode of analysis based upon the traditional rule of reason approach .

this report next reviews the facts and holdings of significant judgments addressing the antitrust implications of reverse payment settlements .

in the absence of explicit congressional guidance , the federal courts have applied general principles of antitrust law to reach varying results with respect to pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements .

it is significant that the different cases considered by these courts have each involved their own , distinct set of facts .

nonetheless , the difference between the per se rule on one hand , and alternative approaches similar to the rule of reason on the other , have arguably contributed to different judicial outcomes .

several options are available for congress .

one possibility is to await further judicial developments .

while the united states supreme court has not yet addressed pharmaceutical litigation patent settlements , it is possible that the highest court may do so in the future .

supreme court review would resolve the arguable split among the courts of appeal with respect to this issue .

continuing case law developments in the lower courts could also lead to an informed consensus on the antitrust consequences of reverse payment settlements .

another option is to regulate the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation in some manner .

in the 112 th congress , s. 27 , titled the preserve access to affordable generics act , would have amended the federal trade commission ( ftc ) act to allow the ftc to initiate a proceeding against the parties to any agreement resolving or settling a patent infringement claim in connection with a drug product .

the legislation would have created a presumption that such an agreement has anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if the anda filer receives anything of value and the anda filer agrees not to research , develop , manufacture , market , or sell the anda product for any period of time .

this presumption of unlawfulness would not have applied if the parties to the agreement demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the precompetitive benefits of the agreement outweigh the anticompetitive effects of the agreement .

in considering whether the settling parties have met that burden , the legislation would have required consideration of ( 1 ) the remaining term of the relevant patent , compared with the agreed upon entry date of the anda product ; ( 2 ) the value to consumers of the competition from the anda product ; ( 3 ) the form and amount of consideration provided to the anda filer ; ( 4 ) the revenue the anda filer would have received by winning the patent litigation ; ( 5 ) the reduction in the nda holder's revenues if it had lost the patent litigation ; ( 6 ) the time period between the date of the agreement conveying value to the anda filer and date of the settlement of the patent case ; and ( 7 ) any other relevant factor .

under s. 369 , in determining whether the settling parties have met their burden of overcoming the presumption of unlawfulness , it would not have been presumed that entry of the anda product would not have occurred until the expiration of the relevant patent or statutory exclusivity .

nor would it have been presumed that the agreement's provision for entry of the anda product prior to the expiration of the relevant patent or statutory exclusivity means that the agreement is pro - competitive , although such evidence may be relevant to the determination .

further , s. 369 expressly did not prohibit a resolution or settlement of a patent litigation claim in which the consideration granted by the nda holder to the anda applicant includes only one or more of the following: ( 1 ) the right to market the anda product prior to the expiration of any relevant proprietary rights ; ( 2 ) a payment for reasonable litigation expenses not to exceed $7.5 million ; and ( 3 ) a covenant not to sue the anda product for patent infringement .

the penalty for violating this provision was to consist of an injunction and other equitable relief , as well as a civil fine not to exceed three times the value received by a party that is attributable to the violation .

s. 27 has not yet been enacted .

another bill , s. 1882 , the fair and immediate release of generic drugs act ( fair generics act ) , would allow any generic firm that prevails in a patent challenge in district court , or is not sued for infringement by a brand - name firm , to share most of the 180-day generic exclusivity that is currently enjoyed by first paragraph iv anda applicants .

in addition , the bill would disqualify any generic firm from entering into a reverse payment settlement ( as defined in the legislation ) from enjoying the 180-day exclusivity .

these modifications to the current rules appear to have been designed to discourage firms from entering into reverse payment settlements .

other alternatives are also possible .

for example , in the 110 th congress , s. 316 , also titled the preserve access to affordable generics act , proposed to outlaw such agreements .

in particular , that bill would amend the clayton act to provide in part: it shall be unlawful under this act for a person , in connection with the sale of a drug product , to directly or indirectly be a party to any agreement resolving or settling a patent infringement claim [in] which — ( a ) an anda filer receives anything of value ; and ( b ) the anda filer agrees not to research , develop , manufacture , market , or sell the anda product for any period of time .

this proposed legislation would have effectively made reverse payment settlements a per se antitrust violation , as the sixth circuit concluded in the cardizem cd case .

that legislation was not enacted .

the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation forms an important issue because such litigation is itself important to our public health system .

our patient population relies upon brand - name drug companies to develop new medicines , but it also relies upon generic firms to increase access to such medications once they have been developed .

the hatch - waxman act provides for patent litigation between these two traditional rivals as a primary vehicle through which these competing demands are mediated .

when concluded in a manner that comports with antitrust principles , such settlements may further the public policy goals of encouraging the labors that lead to medical innovation , but also distributing the fruits of those labors to consumers .

