from 1999 through 2005 numerous reports , articles , studies , and op - ed pieceshave been written touting the importance of public diplomacy as a foreign policy tooland focusing on how the united states government can improve its public diplomacyoperations to help win the war on terrorism .

among the many writings are the 29considered here .

 ( see appendix a for a reverse chronological list of the reportsincluded in this crs review. ) .

of the 29 reports and articles , 11 offer recommendations specifically for u.s.government international broadcasting .

recommendations range from havingstrategic objectives to reorganizing the broadcasting entities to increasing resourcesand using more technologies to focusing on combating jamming .

 ( see table 2. ) .

 ( wp ) leonard h. marks , charles z. wick , bruce gelb and henry e. catto .

"america needs a voice abroad," washington post , february 26 , 2005. http: / / www.washingtonpost.com / wp - dyn / articles / a54764-2005feb25.html ( pdc1 ) public diplomacy council .

call for action on public diplomacy .

january2005 .

http: / / pdi.gwu.edu / merlin - cgi / p / downloadfile / d / 7536 / n / off / other / 1 / name / acallforactiononpublicdiplomacy01-2005prin / ( pdc2 ) public diplomacy council .

"transformation not restoration. .

statementof dissent to call for action on public diplomacy .

january 2005. http: / / pdi.gwu.edu / merlin - cgi / p / downloadfile / d / 7537 / n / off / other / 1 / name / dissent_12-21-04pdf / ( adv1 ) united states advisory commission on public diplomacy .

2004 reportof the united states advisory commission on public diplomacy .

september 28,2004. http: / / www.state.gov / r / adcompd / rls / 36275.htm ( dsb1 ) defense science board .

report of the defense science board task forceon strategic communication .

september 2004. http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / dsb / reports / 2004-09-strategic_communication.pdf ( gao1 ) u.s. government accountability office .

u.s. public diplomacy: statedepartment and broadcasting board of governors expand post - 9 / 11 efforts butchallenges remain .

gao - 04-1061t .

august 23 , 2004. http: / / www.gao.gov / new.items / d041061t.pdf ( 911 ) national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states .

the 9 / 11commission report .

july 22 , 2004. http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / 911 / index.html ( nsfr ) walter r. roberts and barry fulton .

"rebuilding public diplomacy. .

national strategy forum review .

spring 2004. http: / / ics.leeds.ac.uk / papers / vp01.cfm ? outfit=pmt&requesttimeout=500&folder=7&paper=1611 ( pdc3 ) public diplomacy council .

"engaging the arab / islamic world - next stepsfor u.s. public diplomacy. .

summary of public diplomacy forum .

february 27,2004. http: / / pdi.gwu.edu / merlin - cgi / p / downloadfile / d / 6504 / n / off / other / 1 / name / summaryofthefeb27forumdoc / ( rand ) charles wolf , jr. and brian rosen .

public diplomacy - how to thinkabout and improve it .

rand corporation .

2004. http: / / www.rand.org / pubs / occasional_papers / 2004 / rand_op134.pdf ( fpa ) jerrold keilson .

"public diplomacy and u.s. foreign policy. .

greatdecisions 2004 .

foreign policy association .

http: / / www.fpa.org / topics_info2414 / topics_info_show.htm ? doc_id=200548 ( kie ) william kiehl .

"can humpty dumpty be saved ? .

american diplomacy .

november 13 , 2003. http: / / www.unc.edu / depts / diplomat / archives_roll / 2003_10-12 / kiehl_humpty / kiehl_humpty.html ( dje1 ) peter g. peterson and edward djerejian .

a new strategic direction for u.s.public diplomacy in the arab & muslim world .

transcript .

council on foreignrelations .

october 7 , 2003. http: / / www.cfr.org / publication.php ? id=6417 ( dje2 ) advisory group on public diplomacy for the arab and muslim world .

changing minds , winning peace: a new strategic direction for u.s. publicdiplomacy in the arab and muslim world .

october 1,2003. http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 24882.pdf ( usip1 ) richard solomon and sheryl j .

brown .

creating a commoncommunications culture: interoperability in crisis management .

united statesinstitute of peace .

september 12 , 2003. http: / / www.usip.org / virtualdiplomacy / publications / reports / 17.html ( gao2 ) u.s. general accounting office .

u.s. public diplomacy: state departmentexpands efforts but faces significant challenges.gao - 03-951 .

september 2003. http: / / www.gao.gov / new.items / d03951.pdf ( cfr1 ) council on foreign relations .

finding america's voice: a strategy forreinvigorating public diplomacy .

september 2003. http: / / www.cfr.org / content / publications / attachments / public_diplomacy.pdf ( her1 ) stephen johnson and helle dale .

reclaiming america's voice overseas .

web memo #273 .

the heritage foundation .

may 4 , 2003. http: / / www.heritage.org / research / nationalsecurity / wm273.cfm ( her2 ) stephen johnson and helle dale .

how to reinvigorate u.s. publicdiplomacy .

backgrounder #1654 .

the heritage foundation .

april 23 , 2003. http: / / www.heritage.org / research / nationalsecurity / bg1645.cfm ( isd ) talking with the islamic world: is the message getting through ? .

institute forthe study of diplomacy .

working paper .

october 2002. http: / / www.ciaonet.org / wps / sites / isd.html ( usip2 ) barry fulton , ed .

net diplomacy i , ii , and iii .

virtual diplomacy report .

united states institute of peace .

october 2002. http: / / www.usip.org / virtualdiplomacy / publications / pubs.html#vdr ( bro ) john brown .

"the purposes and cross purposes of public diplomacy. .

american diplomacy .

august 15 , 2002. http: / / www.unc.edu / depts / diplomat / archives_roll / 2002_07-09 / brown_pubdipl / brown_pubdipl.html ( cfr2 ) council on foreign relations .

public diplomacy: a strategy for reform .report of a council on foreign relations independent task force .

july 2002 .

 ( pbs ) "public diplomacy , u.s. outreach to arab world. .

onlinenewshour , thewebsite of the newshour with jim lehrer .

february 18 , 2002. http: / / www.pbs.org / newshour / media / public_diplomacy / ( adv2 ) united states advisory commission on public diplomacy .

building publicdiplomacy through a reformed structure and additional resources .

2002. http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 13622.pdf ( dsb2 ) defense science board .

report of the defense science board task forceon managed information dissemination .

september 2001. http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / dsb / reports / mid.pdf ( nwc ) information age diplomacy .

national war college / northwestern universitysymposium .

april 5-6 , 2001. http: / / www.ndu.edu / nwc / activities / public / symposiumwebsite / symposium_main.htm ( cfr3 ) council on foreign relations and center for strategic and internationalstudies task force .

state department reform .

2001 .

 ( hrc ) u.s. commission on national security / 21st century ( hart / rudmancommission ) .

phase i report: new world coming: american security in the 21stcentury ( 1999 ) ; phase ii report: seeking a national strategy: a concert forpreserving security and promoting freedom ( 2000 ) ; phase iii report: road map fornational security: imperative for change ( 2001 ) .

http: / / govinfo.library.unt.edu / nssg / reports / reports.ht .

wp - - leonard h. marks , charles z. wick , bruce gelb and henry e. catto .

"america needs a voice abroad," washington post , february 26 , 2005 .

this editorial by former usia directors is a general call to rebuild u.s. publicdiplomacy .

while it does not make specific recommendations , it does call for theunited states to explain its policies directly and openly ; argues for the importanceof public affairs officers and usia libraries ; states that shutting down usia wasmajor mistake ; and supports the public diplomacy council's recommendation tocreate a u.s. agency for public diplomacy ( see below ) .

pdc1 - - public diplomacy council .

call for action on public diplomacy .

january2005 .

recommendations: establish u.s. agency for publicdiplomacy ; increase public diplomacy staffing overseas by 300% andbudgets for international broadcasting and exchange programs by 400% over fiveyears ; provide long - term resources necessary for global internationalbroadcasting capability ; establish an interagency committee on public diplomacy atthe cabinet level ; and create a public - private partnership "foundation for the globalfuture" to provide permanent off - budget funding for internationalexchanges .

pdc2 - - public diplomacy council .

"transformation not restoration. .

statement of dissent to call for action on public diplomacy .

january 2005 .

this statement of dissent refutes each of the five recommendations made ina call for action on public diplomacy ( see above ) , arguing that the report draws tooheavily on the past .

the dissent emphasizes that understanding what is credible inthe context of other societies is the foundation upon which effective publicdiplomacy is constructed ; that the reference point for u.s. public diplomacy must bethe hopes , aspirations , and fears of foreign citizens ; and that the united states' firstpriority must be observing and listening .

adv1 - - report of the us advisory commission on public diplomacy , 2004 reportof the united states advisory commission on public diplomacy , september 28,2004 .

recommendations: message dissemination have more u.s. government staff employed abroad serve asmessengers of public diplomacy ; expand the london media outreach center's ability tocommunicate with arab press by creating a network of 24-hour messagedissemination and monitoring centers ; model a public diplomacy strategy in a test region throughconcentrated programs , programming , exchanges , andinitiatives ; evaluate the success by measuring publicperception .

coordination bridge disparate public diplomacy mechanisms within the statedepartment by tasking the policy , planning and resources office with overseeingthe strategic planning of all public diplomacy programming andresources .

third party credibility require embassies to maintain networks of individualsinterested in communicating positive concepts on behalf of the unitedstates ; provide electronic products , through the bureau of internationalinformation programs ( iip ) , to support the efforts of individuals interested inadvocating u.s. policies and perspectives .

cross - cultural communications implement the language continuum strategy aggressively tohelp foreign service officers achieve language proficiency , and providecross - cultural and language training for other government personnel and contractorsabroad ; support the administration's efforts to negate certain terroristmessages and convey ideas through the skillful use ofsemantics .

border security fund a significant marketing campaign , either through theprivate sector or the government , to explain visa processes and recruit visitors , andhelp the united states maintain its competitive advantage ; encourage congress to ensure that international citizens notbear the entire costs of new security measures dedicated to visaprocesses ; phase out redundant and duplicative checks based primarily onethnic origin and gender once us - visit is completely functional , and encouragecongress to allow visa waiver program countries sufficient time to incorporatebiometric identifiers in their passports .

exchange programs allocate the resources necessary to develop a comprehensiveexchange alumni database ; encourage the resourcefulness of posts in offering exchangeprograms by requiring the submission of competitive proposals for suchprograms .

centers , corners , virtual consulates , and libraries encourage each american corner with internet access toprovide a virtual consulate website as a start - up page on allworkstations ; fund american centers / libraries wherever security constraintspermit their existence , in order to continue benefitting from the great publicdiplomacy value they provide ; encourage congress to give the secretary of state the authorityto create american presence posts , and thereby expand this concept , by notifying thehouse international relations committee and the senate foreign relationscommittee .

usaid and public diplomacy create , for multiple areas of the globe , director of publicdiplomacy positions in the bureau of legislative and public affairs , as has been donefor the middle east ; continue to enhance efforts to publicize the substantial amountof financial aid that the american people contribute abroad ; continue to coordinate with usaid to better publicize thenumerous contributions america makes to foreign societies .

english language programs seek the support of the private sector to bolster programsdesigned to increase knowledge of the english language around theworld ; continue efforts to reach english teachers through officialtraining programs and exchanges , for better use of government resources and greaterresults from the programs .

private sector encourage individual posts to explore public - privatepartnerships on a local level ; create a means of allowing visitors to overcome restrictionsand take advantage of private sector generosity while on visitorexchanges ; use the small cultural affairs budget as seed money to initiateprojects that ultimately will be self - sustaining ; continue to foster the kinds of internet and media programmingdeveloped by the private sector that exemplify mutually beneficial public - privatepartnerships in public diplomacy .

broadcasting: war on terror grant more resources .

broadcasting: educational programs continue circumventing heavy jamming and reaching chineseaudiences through websites and teaching products that educate users in both theenglish language and american culture .

broadcasting: satellite programs develop satellite television technologies further and expand onrecent successes in making native language programming available via satellitetelevision to missions of viewers in other countries .

internet encourage the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) toactively look for ways to use emerging software developments to expand itsbroadcasting reach over the internet .

hard - to - reach areas continue the bbg development of new transmission methodsto combat jamming .

dbs1 - - department of defense , report of the defense science board task forceon strategic communication , september 2004 .

the president should issue a directive to strengthen,understand , and communicate with global audiences ; coordinate all components ofstrategic communication including public diplomacy , public affairs , internationalbroadcasting , and military information operations ; and provide a foundation for newlegislation for planning , coordination , conduct and funding of strategiccommunications .

the president should establish a permanent strategiccommunication structure within the national security council ( nsc ) and work withcongress to create legislation and funding .

the president should work with congress on legislation toestablish and fund a non - profit and non - partisan [501 ( c ) ( 3 ) hybrid organization suchas rand or the national endowment for democracy] center for strategiccommunication to support the nsc and departments and organizations representedon its strategic communication committee .

the department of state should providea core funding grant for the center .

the president should redefine the role of under secretary ofstate for public diplomacy and public affairs to be both policy advisor and managerfor public diplomacy .

responsibilities should include approving public diplomacyassignments , setting program direction and evaluation , reviewing performance ratingsof the public diplomacy office director and embassy public affairs officers .

allforeign policy initiatives and directives should have a public diplomacy componentapproved by the under secretary .

personnel and funding resources should be tripledand placed under the control of the under secretary .

state department public diplomacy office directors should beraised to level of deputy assistant secretary or senior advisor to the assistantsecretary .

officers promoted to chief of mission or senior foreign service shouldhave at least one tour in a public diplomacy assignment in the department or in aninteragency assignment related to public diplomacy .

the bureau of iip should bedirected by an assistant secretary .

dod's under secretary for policy should act as the dod focalpoint for strategic communication and serve as the dod's principal on nsc'sstrategic communication coordinating committee .

dod's under secretary for policy and the joint chiefs of staffshould ensure that all military plans and operations have appropriate strategiccommunication components , ensure collaboration with dos and with theater securitycooperation plans .

dod should triple resources - - personnel and funding - - available to combatant commanders for dod support to public diplomacy andreallocate information operations funding within u.s. stratcom ( u.s. strategiccommand ) for expanded support for strategic communicationprograms .

gao1 - - u.s. government accountability office .

u.s. public diplomacy , statedepartment and broadcasting board of governors expand post - 9 / 11 efforts butchallenges remain .

august 23 , 2004 .

this report discusses some findings of post - 9 / 11 public diplomacy efforts .

the report includes criticisms , including some by public affairs officers , ofinsufficient time spend on public diplomacy , insufficient public affairs resources ; theamount of time devoted to public diplomacy training is inadequate ; and often theforeign service officers lack foreign language skills .

this report did not list specificrecommendations , but the following were implied in the text of the report: implement an overall public diplomacystrategy ; improve interagency communication and coordinationefforts ; define success and how it should bemeasured ; collect polling data and establish reportingrequirements ; the department of state public diplomacy operation isfragmented among various entities within state and needs betterorganization ; the u.s. government must define itsmessage ; bbg's strategic plan does not , but should , include a single goalor related program objective to gage progress ; bbg's plan needs measurable program objectives to support itsstrategic goals ; u.s. public diplomacy resources need to be expanded to areasof the world thought to breed terrorist activities .

911 - - national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states .

the 9 / 11commission report , july 22 , 2004 .

expand funding for public diplomacy activities , such as information programs , broadcasting , exchanges , scholarships , libraries , and u.s.aid ; clearly identify that u.s. assistance comes from the citizens ofthe united states ; the u.s. should identify what it stands for and communicatethat message clearly ; the u.s. government should join other nations in generouslysupporting a new international youth opportunity fund to improve education andprovide textbooks that do not teach hate , offering a choice of schools other thanmadrassas ; establish a forum for engaging both western and arab / muslimrepresentatives to discuss each culture's needs and perspectives .

this would helpcreate long - term relationships and understanding amongcultures .

nsfr - - walter r. roberts and barry fulton .

"rebuilding public diplomacy .

"national strategy forum review .

spring 2004 .

recommendations: substantially increase public diplomacyresources ; conduct a careful assessment of america's public diplomacyreadiness ; new broadcast programs ( e.g .

radio sawa and al hurra ) haveto be initiated and adequately funded ; better coordination with white house , other governmentagencies , and the private sector is needed .

pdc3 - - public diplomacy council .

"engaging the arab / islamic world - next steps for u.s. public diplomacy. .

summary of public diplomacy forum .

february 27,2004 .

this forum dealt specifically with american public diplomacy in the arab / islamicworld .

its recommendations and comments include: public diplomacy must be more engaged in advising the policycommunity ; increase resources and trained personnel ; elites must lead in creating a civil discourse and in breakingdown stereotypes ; use the potential of radio sawa and al hurratv ; increase foreign language training and knowledge of cultureand history ; create a white house counselor for public diplomacy at thecabinet level ; the djerejian report ( see dje ) should beadopted ; arabs and muslims need to study and understand the unitedstates much more deeply ; break down stereotypes on both sides ; reveal more of u.s.diversity and complexity ; improve personal contact by professionals , especially publicaffairs , political , and economic officers and ambassadors ; strengthen foreign press centers ; send american speakers abroad ; encourage more robust educational exchangeprograms .

rand - - charles wolf , jr. and brian rosen .

public diplomacy - - how to thinkabout and improve it , 2004 .

rand observations: public diplomacy should not come from government alone ; the united states should seek creative talents in the privatesector , business , and academia which could be motivated through a competitivebidding process ; it may be useful to find different modes of communicating bigpicture ideas of public diplomacy through debate and discussion , call - in shows , liveinteraction among different elements of the audience , rather than through the typicalmonologic conveyance of the message ; outsourcing public diplomacy may be helpful to put somedistance between a favorable message and an unfavorable messenger ( i.e .

the unitedstates ) .

fpa - - jerrold keilson .

"public diplomacy and u.s. foreign policy. .

g reatdecisions 2004 .

foreign policy association .

this edition of the annual "great decisions" series offers mostly historicaland background information .

while it refers to recommendations of other reports,it makes relatively few of its own .

among its recommendations and comments are: educational exchange programs areimportant ; the evidence on international broadcast programmingeffectiveness is mixed ; the usia realignment has reduced flexibility and independentaction ; foreign public opinion of the united states has declined evenas financial support for public diplomacy has increased in the last threeyears ; significant investment in number and quality of trained publicdiplomacy officers is needed ; public diplomacy officers need language proficiency andregional expertise and should not be rotated among regions like other foreign serviceofficers ; the united states should create special libraries of key bookson america in accessible libraries , rather than in security - conscious embassylibraries ; the united states should consolidate exchange , cultural , andinformation programs into one agency .

public diplomacy is now lost within overalloperation of the state department ; america should dramatically increase the number ofinternational visitors from the muslim world ; the possibility of policies being profoundly unpopular overseasshould be taken into account when developing the policy ; modifications should beconsidered that might make them less so .

kie - - william kiehl .

"can humpty dumpty be saved ? .

american diplomacy .

november 13 , 2003 .

among kiehl's comments and recommendations: public diplomacy must be proactive , more akin topsychological operations than to public relations ; regional bureaus must include senior public diplomacy officersat least at the deputy assistant secretary level ; establish a new organization for public diplomacy that wouldbe a middle ground between the old usia and the current weak structure [includesorganizational chart] ; amend smith - mundt to lift restriction on domesticdissemination of american international informationalmaterial .

dje1 - - peter g. peterson and edward djerejian .

a new strategic direction for u.s.public diplomacy in the arab and muslim world , council on foreign relations,october 7 , 2003 .

this article presented a question and answer session between the moderator,peter g. peterson of the council on foreign relations at the council on foreignrelations and the speaker , edward djerejian of the advisory group on publicdiplomacy in the arab and muslim world .

in this article , mr. djerejian presentsadvisory group recommendations that the u.s. government: needs strategic coordination at the top - - special counselor tothe president ; should create an office to monitor what is being done and saidabout america and immediately craft talking points to support orrefute ; would benefit by getting the private sector more involved inpublic diplomacy ; should create a corporation for public diplomacy ( modeledafter the council on foreign relations concept ) ; should get embassies more involved in publicdiplomacy ; identify policies that would benefit the people in a region , suchas outreach to high school students ; recognize solving the israeli - palestinian conflict is the centerof most of u.s. public diplomacy problems ; realize that there is a gap between what we stand for and whatwe do .

dje2 - - advisory group on public diplomacy for the arab and muslim world .

changing minds , winning peace: a new strategic direction for u.s. publicdiplomacy in the arab and muslim world , october 1 , 2003 .

this report organizes recommendations under three specific headings:structure , financial and economic resources , and programs .

structure - - the white house should: create a cabinet - level special counselor to the president forpublic diplomacy which would , in consultation with the president , and othergovernment agencies , establish strategic goals and messages , oversee theimplementation of programs that meet the strategic goals , and ensure effectivemeasurement of those programs ; establish a board - - president's public diplomacy experts'board ; reactivate the interagency strategic communications policycoordinating committee to be co - chaired by the under secretary of state for publicdiplomacy as well as a high - level representative from the national securitycouncil .

structure - - the department of state should: emphasize to all its personnel that public diplomacy is ofprimary interest in doing their job ; encourage every employee abroad to participate in publicdiplomacy activities ; provide training on the basics of public diplomacy to everyemployee who serves abroad ; strengthen the role of the under secretary of state for publicdiplomacy to coordinate public diplomacy government - wide and set strategic publicdiplomacy guidance , review country program plans , allocate human and financialresources , monitor public opinion and program results , and play a role inperformance evaluation .

the advisory group is convinced that strengthening theundersecretary's role is essential .

establish an office of policy , plans , and resources within theundersecretary's office to coordinate the development of strategy and strategicguidance , oversee country - specific plans , monitor execution of plans , and assist inallocation and management of financial and human resources ; establish an arab and muslim countries publiccommunications unit under the direction of the undersecretary ; it would workclosely with the office of global communications in the white house and wouldcoordinate the u.s. government's media outreach to arab and muslim nations andpromote 'rapid response' in disseminating messages and reacting and correctinginaccuracies and distortions in foreign media ; find creative ways to measure effectiveness of public diplomacyprograms .

structure - - the u.s. agency for international development should: get the same public diplomacy training as the department ofstate ; publicize that aid is from the unitedstates .

structure - - the department of defense should: be better connected to the other agencies involved in publicdiplomacy and better coordinated with strategic plan .

structure - - the broadcasting board of governors should: be brought under the white house's office of specialcounselor to the president .

financial and human resources - - u.s. public diplomacy: needs a dramatic increase in funding ; needs additional professional staff dedicated to arab andmuslim issues ; should increase funding aidscholarships ; needs a greater concentration of budget on tapping into uses ofthe internet and information technology ; should provide a greater effort to aiding arabs and muslims togain access to u.s. education .

programs - - the u.s. government should: expand english language trainingprograms ; expand the american corners program ; implement a new american knowledge library - - to translatethe best american books and make them available to local libraries anduniversities ; create american studies programs in arab and muslimcountries in collaboration with local universities ; expand the u.s. speaker and specialistprogram ; expand shorter duration exchangeprograms ; thoroughly review the middle east televisionnetwork .

usip1 - - richard solomon and sheryl j .

brown .

creating a commoncommunications culture: interoperability in crisis management .

united statesinstitute of peace .

september 12 , 2003 .

originally this was presented as a speech at the conference on crisismanagement and information technology in helsinki , finland , which focused onways of developing interoperable communications systems that can facilitateinformation sharing during crises .

the speech did not directly address publicdiplomacy .

gao2 - - government accountability office , u.s. public diplomacy: statedepartment expands efforts but faces significant challenges , september 2003 .

recommendations: that the secretary of state: develop and widely disseminate throughout the department astrategy that considers the techniques of private sector public relations firms inintegrating all of state's public diplomacy efforts and directing them towardachieving common and measurable objectives ; consider ways to collaborate with the private sector to employbest practices for measuring efforts to inform and influence target audiences,including expanded use of opinion research and better use of existingresearch ; designate more administrative positions to overseas publicaffairs sections to reduce the administrative burden ; strengthen efforts to train foreign service officers in foreignlanguages ; program into state's assignment process adequate time forpublic diplomacy training .

the department of state's response to this gao report was that it generallyconcurred with the report and intended to implement recommendations and said ithas already begun to do so in some areas .

cfr1 - - council on foreign relations .

finding america's voice: a strategy forreinvigorating u.s. public diplomacy .

september 2003 .

in addition to the following recommendations , this report includes appendiceson state department organizational reforms , a draft mission program plan on publicdiplomacy , and an overview of u.s. international broadcasting .

i .

rethink how the u.s. formulates , strategizes , and communicates its foreign policy .

make the formulation of foreign policy more sensitive to publicdiplomacy concerns ; strengthen the public diplomacy coordinating structure so thatit resembles the national security council ; issue presidential decision directive on publicdiplomacy ; initiate a "quadrennial public diplomacyreview ; " improve u.s. capacity to listen to foreign publics , e.g .

pollingand research ; craft messages highlighting cultural overlaps betweenamerican values and those of the rest of the world .

ii .

build new institutions to bolster public diplomacy efforts create independent , not - for - profit "corporation for publicdiplomacy" as focal point for private sector involvement in publicdiplomacy ; establish an "independent public diplomacy traininginstitute ; " establish a public diplomacy reserve corps ( patterned onfema's disaster - relief model ) .

iii .

improve the practice of public diplomacy through state department reforms , ensure that publicdiplomacy is central to the work of all u.s. ambassadors anddiplomats ; enhance training for u.s. ambassadors ; expand the range of america's messengers abroad .

identifyand develop credible local messengers and increase the use of independent , diverseu.s .

messengers ; foster increasingly meaningful relationships between the u.s.government and foreign journalists ; support voices of moderation in other countries , especiallyamong young people ; adopt an "engagement" approach that involves listening,dialog , debate , and relationship building , as opposed to our traditional "push - down"method ; make better use of satellite broadcasting and theinternet ; create bridges between u.s. society and others using commoncultural pursuits in every genre of art , music , theater , religion , andacademia .

iv .

improve funding and allocation bring public diplomacy funding in line with its role as a vitalcomponent of foreign policy and national security ; build congressional support for publicdiplomacy .

her1 - - stephen johnson and helle dale .

reclaiming america's voice overseas , the heritage foundation , may 4 , 2003 .

recommendations - - the u.s. government should: provide control of the public diplomacy budget and personnelto the under secretary of state for public diplomacy and create reporting channelsin state department from embassy personnel up to the under secretary for publicdiplomacy ; expand academic exchanges and u.s. - supportedlibraries ; reorganize and streamline international broadcasting andeliminate waste ; enhance public diplomacy and public affairs career training atthe state department ; improve inter - agency coordination through the white houseoffice of global communications .

ogc should do more than keep senior politicalleaders on message ; it should ensure that all agencies involved with public diplomacycooperate to do the best job possible to win hearts and minds offoreigners ; adopt a doctrine that would enshrine public diplomacy practicesof emphasizing consistent efforts to explain to foreign publics u.s.policies .

her2 - - stephen johnson and helle dale .

how to reinvigorate u.s. publicdiplomacy , the heritage foundation , april 23 , 2003 .

this article recommends that the bush administration and congress should: recognize that public diplomacy is a long - termeffort ; restore public diplomacy's independent reporting and budgetchannels that were lost during the usia / state merger in 1999 ; return public diplomacy currently dispersed among other statedepartment bureaus into a public diplomacy hierarchy ; strengthen exchange programs and revive overseaslibraries ; reorganize foreign broadcasting to streamline management,eliminate duplicative and ineffective services , and improveprogramming ; enhance public diplomacy career training and increase thenumber of experienced foreign service personnel in state department's public affairsoffice ; strengthen inter - agency coordination through the white houseand define dod communications efforts for use on thebattlefield ; modify outdated legislation , such as the 1948 smith - mundt actthat place irrelevant restrictions on public diplomacyactivities .

isd - - talking with the islamic world: is the message getting through ? .

institute forthe study of diplomacy .

working paper .

october 2002 .

this document is comprised of the text of speakers' statements and oftranscripts of discussions from three sessions .

key comments from the discussionsinclude: it is not enough for u.s. to change its public diplomacy ; it mustchange its foreign policy .

the u.s. must address [arab] peoples' real problems anddo something to change the arab condition ; mutual understanding between american and muslim worldsis the most important first step ; the u.s. must change ( particularly regarding the palestinianissue ) before muslims embrace americans ; examples of what the state department is doing to improvecommunication between the united states and the middle east include live video ontheir website , links with secondary schools , expanded fulbright program , englishlanguage teaching , teacher training , sports and musicexchanges ; much more is needed in the way of resources .

publicdiplomacy resources have been dismantled over the past years ; better coordination between civilian and military publicdiplomacy efforts is needed ; the u.s. should seek and embrace coalition efforts as opposedto unilateralism ; the dialogue between americans and muslims should bebroadened and deepened ; expand exchange programs and fund major exchange programswith the islamic world ; the united states is most successful when americans interactwith foreign citizens in business , education , culture , music , and technology , outsideofficial american foreign policy .

engage in real dialogue ; be more humble ; practice what wepreach ; stop the contradictions between rhetoric andaction .

usip2 - - barry fulton , ed .

net diplomacy i , ii , and iii .

virtual diplomacy report .

united states institute of peace .

october 2002 .

this series of individual articles looks ahead to diplomacy in 2015 .

amongits predictions and recommendations are: state broadcasting will continue as element of publicdiplomacy .

current array of u.s. government broadcasting services is duplicative,expensive , and even counterproductive ; training of diplomats must give greater attention to interactionin cyberspace , public diplomacy , international financial markets , and results - orientedmanagement ; public diplomacy needs to be thought of as at the core offoreign affairs .

the job done well by usia must be carried on at an intensifiedlevel ; exchange programs are important ; u.s. diplomats must have languageskills ; the state department should change the perception that publicdiplomacy generalists are second class citizens in the foreign service officercorps ; the state department should change its culture and personnelsystem to recruit "change agents" ; public diplomacy will be a key element in dealing with newnational security challenges ; public diplomacy requires active engagement with bothdomestic and foreign publics and their representation in civil society , based ontransparency and information sharing ; internet - based technology has a big impact on publicdiplomacy ; effective public diplomacy requires a willingness to search forcommonality through well - funded cultural diplomacy ; americans need to fund , support , and embark on genuinevoyages of discovery - - bilaterally through embassies , at home , and through globalforums ( e.g .

unesco ) ; educational exchanges have become the cornerstone of publicdiplomacy ; international broadcasting is an important element in theconduct of public diplomacy ; traditional diplomacy will increasingly need to besupplemented by public diplomacy ; the department of state needs to follow the example of thedepartment of defense and train and educate its employees to meet the department'srequirements .

bro - - john brown .

"the purposes and cross purposes of public diplomacy. .

american diplomacy .

august 15 , 2002 .

comments and recommendations include the following: a truthful and accurate information campaign , if bothpersuasive and credible , can set the record straight about u.s. policies andintentions ; there is no substitute for long - term educational exchangeprograms .

it is especially important to bring responsible muslim opinion - makers tothe united states ; there is a need for serious , but not solemn , cultural activitiesregarding the united states that would appeal to muslim audiences , especially to theyoung ; adequate funding is necessary .

cfr2 - - council on foreign relations .

public diplomacy: a strategy for reform .

july 2002 .

the council on foreign relations offered the following recommendations: i .

develop a coherent strategic and coordinating framework for public diplomacy issue a presidential directive on publicdiplomacy ; create a public diplomacy coordinating structure led by thepresident's personal designee ; move public diplomacy from the margins to the center offoreign policy making .

ii .

increase customized , "two - way" dialogue , as contrasted to conventional one - way,"push - down" mass communication adopt an "engagement" approach that involves listening,dialogue , debate , and relationship - building and increases the amount and theeffectiveness of public opinion research ; support voices of moderation , with particular attention over thelonger term to the young to empower them to engage in effective debate throughmeans available or created in their societies ; foster increasingly meaningful relationships between the u.s.government and foreign journalists ; craft messages highlighting cultural overlaps betweenamerican values and those of the rest of the world .

iii .

significantly increase private sector involvement broaden use of credible and independent messengers fromdiverse sectors of american life ; create an independent , not - for - profit "corporation for publicdiplomacy. .

iv .

raise the effectiveness of public diplomacy resources initiate state department reforms ( details are included in anappendix to the report ) .

initiate a structured evaluation of diplomatic readiness andprioritized spending through a "quadrennial diplomacyreview ; " establish a quasi - public / private "independent public diplomacytraining institute ; " establish a public diplomacy reservecorps ; use internet - age technologieseffectively .

v. increase public diplomacy resources build congressional support for public diplomacy throughsustained oversight and the formation of a new congressional committeestructure ; bring public diplomacy funding in line with its role as a vitalcomponent of foreign policy and national security ; build a stronger public diplomacy through enhancements in keyareas: foreign public - opinion research , recruiting , training , media studies , programevaluation , significantly expanded field staffing and exchanges , increases in u.s.international broadcasting via the middle east radio network and americanembassy television network , and enhancements of content , marketing , and brandingof multi - language websites .

appendix v deals specifically with the broadcasting board of governors .

the task force supports an independent and well - qualified broadcasting board witha full - time , top - caliber chief executive officer who would report to the current bbgand be empowered to direct and supervise all u.s. nonmilitary internationalbroadcasting activities .

furthermore , the department of state and the bbg shouldstrengthen the secretary of state's role in providing information and guidance onforeign policy to the bbg by clarifying and specifying the secretary's role in makingdecisions on broadcast languages and other foreign policy matters .

pbs - - "public diplomacy , u.s. outreach to arab world. .

onlinenewshour , thewebsite of the newshour with jim lehrer .

february 18 , 2002 .

this series of interviews with four individuals examines the u.s.government's efforts to counter anti - american sentiment in the arab world throughbroadcasts and ad campaigns .

among the speakers' comments and recommendationsare: the united states is not spending or doing enough oninternational broadcasting .

there is no grand strategy or coordinatedapproach ; the united states needs more official representation on theground around the world ; more cultural exchanges are needed ( $1.5 billion budgetsuggested ) ; the united states needs a "salesperson," preferably local or , atleast , people who are close to local sentiment , to sell the u.s.message ; need to know basic facts about arab media consumption andnature of the audience ; any person carrying the u.s. message [to arab world] shouldbe muslim or a native speaker of the language in which they are broadcasting ; there must be a meticulous , careful , methodical selection ofbroadcasters ; help from businesses and governments in the region to get u.s.message across would be useful ; there's been a significant drop in human and material resourcesfor public diplomacy since the cold war .

adv2 - - u.s .

advisory commission on public diplomacy .

building america'spublic diplomacy through a reformed structure and additional resources .

september 2002 .

recommendations: i .

structural reform issue a presidential mandate that public diplomacy has strategicimportance in u.s. foreign policy and significant reform isneeded ; fully implement the white house office of globalcommunications - - coordinate various agencies' efforts and work closely with theunder secretary of state for public diplomacy and publicaffairs ; review the consolidation of the usia into the department ofstate - - the secretary of state should review and make recommendations on training,location , and reporting structure of public diplomacy units at the department ofstate ; integrate congress into public diplomacy efforts - - legislativeauthority for a quadrenniel review of public diplomacy should beprovided ; involve the private sector - - communications consultants , the academic community ( i.e. , colleges offering majors in public diplomacy ) , advertising,and entertainment sectors .

ii .

expanding resources money alone will not fix the problems - - assess the state ofamerica's public diplomacy readiness worldwide ; examine the nation's public diplomacy investment relative toother areas .

dsb2 - - defense science board .

report of the defense science board task forceon strategic communication , managed information dissemination , october 1 , 2001 .

the earlier of two reports done by the defense science board recommends: the president issue a national security presidential directive ( nspd ) on international information dissemination to strengthen , coordinate , assessimpact , and develop strategies ; the nspd should establish an nsc policy coordinatingcommittee ( pcc ) on international information dissemination to be chaired by aperson of under secretary rank to specify who and which agencies will be on thepcc ; the nspd should delegate to the pcc authority to coordinatepublic diplomacy activities including analysis for foreign public opinion,development of strategic themes and messages for long - term and crisis responsecommunications , identification of appropriate media channels , and production ofinformation products ; the secretary of state should support the pcc through adedicated and expanded secretariat in the dos consisting of the current interagencyworking group on international information programs , augmented by an expandedstaff , budget , and executive staff drawing on expertise from dos , dod , jointchiefs of staff , the 4th psyop group , the cia , commercial media , andcommunication entities to facilitate audience research and develop channels andinformation products ; dos should strengthen international information bureau underan assistant secretary , substantially increase funding for the bureau , with much ofthe increase going for contracted products and services ; dos should make theseassets available to support the strategic objectives of the pcc ; dos should modernize and diversify products of theinformation bureau to include expanded use of: internet websites , streamingaudio / video , leased emerging satellite tv and fm radio broadcasts channels,american embassy tv and radio and washington file print services , the foreignpress center by u.s. policymakers and military leaders to communicate with foreignpublics , interactive information networks containing key foreign audiences , jointstate - dod training and increased interagency assignments , and a reserve cadre ofretired , language - qualified state and dod officers available for crisis responsedeployment ; dod should establish an international public informationcommittee to coordinate all dod open information programs carried out under theauthority of the pcc ; the secretary of defense should implement dod's draftguidelines to increase coordination between psyop forces and the commander inchief ( cinc ) / joint forces ( jfc ) staff , revitalize cincs' theater engagement plans,strengthen psyop capability to support the u.s. government's strategic informationprograms , and effectively integrate these programs into the activities of the pccsecretariat ; the secretary of defense should enhance dod's informationdissemination capabilities worldwide in support of the regional cincs theaterengagement plans and in anticipation of crisis response requirements .

in addition,the secretary should make these capabilities available to support u.s. strategic policyobjectives at the direction of the pcc .

enhancements include expanded use of directsatellite fm radio and tv ; additional use of regional magazines such as forum and dialogue ; expanded use of regional internet websites ; and establishment of a publicdiplomacy office within the office of the secretary ofdefense ; the president and his senior national security advisors shouldstrengthen u.s. international information dissemination by 1 ) insisting that civilianand military information capabilities be harnessed to the internet revolution , 2 ) takingfull advantage of commercial media production methods , and 3 ) significantlyincreasing foreign opinion research and studies of foreign media environments andinfluence structures .

nwc - - information age diplomacy .

national war college / northwesternuniversity symposium .

april 5-6 , 2001 .

symposium overview followed by statements by individual speakers .

symposium overview: change is needed in state department culture , i.e .

more openapproach in which innovation trumps caution ; state department change efforts have fallen short due to:inadequate financial and personnel resources , lack of training and strategic planning,and deficiencies in information technology and the mindsets to integrate newtechnologies into the conduct of diplomacy ; public diplomacy should be given higherpriority ; the merger of usia into the state department hasn't beenaccompanied by a fundamental change in the culture ofdiplomacy .

from individual speakers: public diplomacy and information technology must be at thecenter of statecraft ; diplomats need to give much more attention to publicdiplomacy ; the jeffersonian concept of the state department didn'tdistinguish between internal and external functions .

this concept has relevancetoday ; unlike the department of defense , the state departmentpersonnel system is antiquated and doesn't put proper emphasis ontraining ; no government agency is in greater need of reform than thestate department .

it must revamp culture , procedures , and infrastructure and givegreater attention to public outreach ; the under secretary for public diplomacy needs to be at thetable on the first day of a crisis .

public diplomacy is substantive engagement overa long period of time with a broad range of people .

cfr3 - - council on foreign relations and center for strategic and internationalstudies task force .

state department reform .

2001 .

this report was prepared for the incoming bush administration and isbroader in scope than public diplomacy .

the main body of the report states that thestate department is impaired by a professional culture that emphasizesconfidentiality over public diplomacy and public affairs .

among the additional viewsincluded at the end of the report are: merging of usia and the state departmenthasn't enhanced public diplomacy ; and state department leadership should do asmuch as it can to ensure that the talents , perspective , and methodology of formerusia officers aren't lost .

hrc - - u.s. commission on national security / 21st century ( hart / rudmancommission ) .

series of three reports , 1999-2001 .

phase i contains a series of broad conclusions , but no recommendations .

phase ii report: public diplomacy is an important part of americandiplomacy ; the united states should help spread information technologyworldwide ; the united states should employ new technologies creativelyto improve its public diplomacy .

phase iii report: state department was weakened by having many of its corefunctions parceled out to other agencies , e.g .

usia ; tailor public diplomacy to policy goals and integrate theseactivities with other aspects of u.s. diplomacy ; overhaul the u.s. foreign service system , including endingoral exam's blindfolding policy so that applicants could be better matched toparticular cones , e.g .

public diplomacy ; repeal the united states code provisions establishing an undersecretary for public diplomacy and have some of those functions migrate to anassistant secretary - level officer reporting directly to the secretary of state , andothers be folded into the assistant secretary for economic and transnationalaffairs .

