on may 20 , 2002 , the democratic republic of east timor ( timor - leste ) gained its independence , and on september 27 , it became the 191 st member of the united nations .

with the help of the united nations transitional administration , east timor's independence marked the end of three centuries of portuguese rule and 24 years of indonesian control .

timor - leste has many challenges to overcome to consolidate its democracy and develop its economy .

many observers feel that united nations security forces left timor - leste prematurely in 2005 and that this allowed political violence to paralyze the country in 2006 .

president jose ramos - horta called for the united nations to remain in the country for five years in may 2008 citing ongoing concerns over the security situation and the potential for instability to return to the country .

many of the civilians displaced by civil disturbances and strife in 2006 returned to their homes in the 2008-2009 time period .

a group of assassins led by mutineer former major alfredo reinado failed in their attempt to assassinate president jose ramos - horta and prime minister xanana gusmao on february 11 , 2008 .

reinado , who was killed in the failed attempt , was the leader of a group of over 600 former soldiers who had been fired from the army for striking over perceived regional discrimination in april 2006 .

the new leader of reinado's group subsequently surrendered in april 2008 .

although the security situation in timor - leste is "strikingly improved" at present , observers remain concerned that plans to implement security reforms have yet to be accomplished .

this concern stems from the mutiny by security forces in 2006 .

although the timor - leste government no longer faces an armed rebel group , it has yet to move to effectively address the underlying causes of the mutiny by security forces that occurred in 2006 .

a final report issued by the joint indonesian - east timorese truth commission in may 2008 blamed indonesia for atrocities in 1999 .

indonesian president susilo bambang yudhoyono expressed his "deep regret" over the human rights violations .

president ramos - horta urged timor to move on and put the past aside after the report was released .

there is also a degree of concern over government plans in 2009 to withdraw funds from timor's petroleum fund .

timor continues to try to find a way to gain additional economic benefit from the gas reserves in the timor sea though the geography of the seabed , as well as political instability in timor , has made timor less attractive than darwin , australia , as a site for processing the natural gas .

the role of china in timor - leste also increased in 2009 .

china is providing assistance with construction of government buildings and has offered to sell heavy oil power plants and patrol boats to timor - leste .

by the end of 2007 , the government of east timor created the national recovery strategy program , which covers five areas — housing , community trust - building , security and stability , social protection , and local socio - economic development .

the approach to the return , resettlement , and reintegration options for idps is part of this framework .

in june 2009 , the last of the idp camps was being closed .

the government of east timor has stated it will need support through 2009 to complete the decommissioning of the idp camps and provide for returning persons .

in the 1640s , the portuguese began to assert control over east timor .

this colonial presence would last until 1975 when the revolutionary front for an independent east timor ( fretilin ) gained ascendancy over the timorese union party , pushed them out of east timor in a brief civil war , and declared independence on november 28 , 1975 .

indonesia invaded east timor on december 7 , 1975 , and began a period of occupation during which an estimated 100,000 to 250,000 east timorese died .

indonesia's annexation of east timor as its 27 th province was not recognized by the united nations .

under the supervision of the united nations , a national referendum to decide on either autonomy within indonesia or on independence from it was held , under u.n. supervision , in east timor on august 30 , 1999 .

seventy - eight percent of the 98.6% of registered voters who voted opted for independence .

this led to widespread retaliation and destruction by pro - integrationist militias backed by elements of the indonesian military who were in favor of integration with indonesia .

more than 1,300 east timorese were killed , and the displaced included more than 260,000 in west timor and 200,000 in east timor .

seventy percent of east timor's economic infrastructure ( such as housing stock , public buildings , and utilities ) , eighty percent of the schools , and virtually all medical facilities were destroyed by the militias .

to quell the violence and restore order , a u.n. - authorized peacekeeping mission international force east timor ( interfet ) was established ( under australian command ) and deployed on september 20 , 1999 .

australia has continued to play a leading role both in u.n. operations and on a bilateral basis with east timor since 1999 .

events in 2006 led to the deterioration of east timor's internal security situation and the reintroduction of foreign peacekeepers , from australia , new zealand , portugal , and malaysia .

 ( see " chronology " below. ) .

the australian military contingent was the largest with some 1,100 troops in country .

the peacekeepers were deployed at the invitation of the east timorese government .

u.n. security council resolution 1704 of august 25 , 2006 , established the united nations integrated mission in timor - leste ( unmit ) had a civilian component as well as up to 1,608 police personnel and up to 34 military liaison and staff officers .

unmit's mission included supporting the east timorese government in "consolidating stability , enhancing a culture of democratic governance , and facilitating political dialogue among timorese stakeholders in their efforts to bring about a process of national reconciliation. .

the source of the strife of 2006 can be traced to divisions within the dominant fretilin party dating to their period of struggle against the indonesians .

some fretilin elites went into exile while others , including xanana gusmao , stayed behind to fight in the military wing of fretilin , falintil , which he commanded .

one way these divisions manifest themselves is in splits within and between the military and police forces .

the allegiance of most of the military to gusmao appears to have played a role in the creation of paramilitary units within the police .

divisions between the military and the police can be traced to the recruitment process .

many recruited into the military "were xanana loyalists" while a u.n. decision led to over 300 individuals who had earlier served in the indonesian police force in east timor to be hired into the new police of east timor .

in the words of the international crisis group report , "personal and institutional tensions between a president committed to pluralism and a ruling party ( fretilin ) with distinctly authoritarian tendencies , politicisation of the police , lack of any regulatory framework for the security forces more generally and the in - bred nature of a tiny political elite with 30 years shared history allowed matters to get out of control. .

the event that triggered the strife and political turmoil of 2006 can be traced to former prime minister alkatiri's dismissal of 591 members of the 1,500-man military in march 2006 .

those dismissed had protested their conditions and pay and claimed discrimination against members of the force from western districts of east timor .

most of the upper echelons of the military were drawn from the eastern districts , or loro sa'e , while much of the political leadership and the police are from the western districts , or loro munu .

in july 2006 , it was reported that the police had broken into factions , with some taking their weapons to join rebels in the hills .

the march 2006 dismissal of the protesting troops led to rioting , looting , a number of deaths , and the fleeing of tens of thousands of mostly eastern east timorese from the capital , dili , beginning in april 2006 .

alkatiri stepped down in june as a result .

former prime minister alkatiri was accused by his opponents of forming "hit squads," which he denied .

a u.n. investigation found him to have failed "to use his firm authority to denounce the transfer of security sector weapons to civilians. .

former interior minister rogerio lobato was sentenced to seven years imprisonment for authorizing the transfer of weapons to pro - fretilin supporters and a fretilin - linked hit squad .

lobato reportedly had a "frosty" relationship with gusmao and had bought large quantities of arms for the police and had established two paramilitary police units .

one of the leaders of the violent protests of march 2006 , which resulted in the mutiny of soldiers from western districts , was major alfredo reinado .

reinado's support base was drawn from the west .

reinado and 50 of his supporters escaped from prison in august 2006 .

australian forces failed to capture reinado on march 11 , 2007 .

the operation was ordered by the east timor government .

the decision to apprehend reinado was apparently taken after he persuaded a border patrol unit to hand over their assault rifles on february 25 , 2007 .

the government had previously been in negotiations with reinado for killing a soldier while fighting against east timorese army units .

although reinado had not been a major political figure in east timor , he had attracted much support among young men who were increasingly resentful of the foreign military presence in east timor .

reinado was resentful of fretilin for ordering the dismissal of protesting troops .

another dimension of the escalating violence in east timor is the gangs of largely unemployed youth .

unemployment and underemployment is estimated to be as high as 70% in east timor .

with the collapse of law and order in the wake of the may 2006 police and military clashes , gang violence swept through dili , leading to further deaths , the displacement of more dili residents from the capital , and the widespread destruction of property .

many of the dili gangs reportedly view reinado in a positive light .

in addition to the united nations , timor - leste's main external relations are with australia and new zealand , portugal , indonesia , and increasingly with china .

timor - leste would also like to become a member of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) .

