the federal government provides grants for family planning services through the family planning program , title x of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

§§300 to 300a - 6 ) .

enacted in 1970 , it is the only dom estic federal program devoted solely to family planning and related preventive health services .

participation in family planning services by title x clients is , by law , voluntary .

although title x is the only federal domestic program primarily focused on family planning , other programs also finance family planning , among their other services .

these programs include medicaid , the health center program under section 330 of the public health service act , maternal and child health block grants , social services block grants , and temporary assistance for needy families .

in fy2015 , medicaid accounted for 75% of u.s. public family planning expenditures ( including federal , state , and local government spending ) .

in comparison , title x accounted for 10% .

title x is a discretionary program , meaning its funding is provided in and controlled by annual appropriations acts .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) provided $286.479 million for title x in fy2017 , the same as the fy2016 enacted level .

the president's fy2018 budget request includes $286.479 million for title x , the same as the fy2017 enacted level .

the house - reported fy2018 labor - hhs - education appropriations bill , h.r .

3358 , would provide no funding for the title x program in fy2018 .

the house rules committee has announced that h.r .

3354 , the make america secure and prosperous appropriations act , 2018 , would be the legislative vehicle for several fy2018 appropriations bills , including the house labor - hhs - education appropriations bill .

h.r .

3354 , as posted on the house rules committee website on august 16 , 2017 , would provide no funding for the title x program in fy2018 .

as of this writing , an fy2018 labor - hhs - education appropriations bill has not been introduced in the senate .

at the request of opa's office of family planning , the institute of medicine ( iom , now the national academy of medicine ) of the national academy of sciences independently evaluated the title x program and made recommendations in a review of the hhs family planning program: mission , management , and measurement of results ( 2009 ) .

iom found that family planning — "helping people have children when they want to and avoid conception when they do not — is a critical social and public health goal," and that the "federal government has a responsibility to support the attainment of this goal. .

iom argued , for example , that family planning can prevent unintended and high - risk pregnancies , thereby reducing fetal , infant , and maternal mortality and morbidity .

iom also stated that the appropriate use of contraception can reduce abortion rates and cited "ample evidence that family planning services are cost - effective. .

iom made specific recommendations to increase program funding and to improve program management , administration , and evaluation .

among iom's recommendations was that opa's office of family planning "review and update the program guidelines to ensure that they are evidence - based. .

iom noted , for example , that the guidelines required female title x clients , including adolescents , to have pelvic and breast examinations within six months of their initial visit , though "relevant abnormalities are rarely found in adolescents. .

at the time of the iom report , title x program guidelines had not been updated since 2001 .

in response to the iom recommendations , opa released new program guidelines in april 2014 .

the new guidelines draw on systematic literature reviews and existing recommendations from organizations , such as the cdc , the u.s. preventive services task force , the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists , the american academy of pediatrics , the american society for reproductive medicine , and the american urological association .

for example , the new guidelines state that pelvic exams and clinical breast exams are "not needed routinely to provide contraception safely to a healthy client" ( though they may be recommended for some cases , such as inserting an intrauterine device , fitting a diaphragm , cancer screening for nonadolescents , assessing gestational age after a positive pregnancy test , if the client has certain std symptoms , as part of infertility care , or to address other noncontraceptive health needs ) .

opa stated that the new guidelines have "a foundation of empirical evidence and information supporting clinical practice. .

also in response to the iom report , hhs contracted with iom to convene a standing committee to advise the title x program on issues raised by the 2009 report , as well as other emerging family planning issues .

as mentioned , title x grantees can provide family planning services directly , or they can subaward title x funds to other government or nonprofit entities ( subrecipients ) to provide services .

in december 2016 , opa promulgated the final rule "compliance with title x requirements by project recipients in selecting subrecipients. .

it became effective january 18 , 2017 .

p.l .

115-23 ( april 13 , 2017 ) nullified the rule .

the rule would have applied to grantees that make subawards ; it would not have affected grantees that provide all their title x services directly .

it would have added the following language to title x family planning services grant program regulations: no recipient making subawards for the provision of services as part of its title x project may prohibit an entity from participating for reasons other than its ability to provide title x services .

on april 13 , 2017 , the president signed p.l .

115-23 , "providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5 , united states code , of the final rule submitted by secretary of health and human services relating to compliance with title x requirements by project recipients in selecting subrecipients. .

p.l .

115-23 nullified the rule under the congressional review act .

as a result , the rule "shall be treated as though such rule had never taken effect. .

that is , the rule is deemed not to have had any effect at any time .

furthermore , hhs is prohibited from reissuing the nullified rule in "substantially the same form" or issuing a "new rule that is substantially the same" as the nullified rule .

in the december 2016 preamble accompanying the rule , opa explained that some states had taken actions to limit title x participation by certain types of providers .

for example , some states enacted laws to prohibit state and local agencies from giving title x subawards to abortion providers .

some other states had established a priority system for allocating title x subawards , for example by giving preference to state health departments , primary care providers , and community health centers over specialized family planning clinics .

opa argued that "these policies , and varying court decisions on their legality , have led to uncertainty among recipients , inconsistency in program administration , and reduced access to services for title x priority populations. .

the rule would have limited the criteria a grantee could use to restrict entities from title x subawards , disallowing "reasons other than [the entity's] ability to provide title x services. .

the preamble explained that applicants for new and continuing title x grants would be required to describe their criteria for choosing subrecipients .

the preamble stated that , under this rule , hhs would have reviewed these submissions for rule compliance and would have made "every effort to help entities come into compliance , and will award replacement grants to other providers when necessary to minimize any disruption of services. .

supporters of the rule argued that it would have protected funding to specialized family planning providers , such as planned parenthood , and that it would have protected vulnerable individuals' access to family planning services .

critics of the rule argued that states should have the discretion to administer title x funds consistently with state policy , and that the rule would have violated the conscience rights of voters and states that object to public funding of abortion providers .

the law prohibits the use of title x funds in programs where abortion is a method of family planning .

on july 3 , 2000 , opa released a final rule with respect to abortion services in family planning projects .

the rule updated and revised regulations that had been promulgated in 1988 .

the major revision revoked the "gag rule," which restricted family planning grantees from providing abortion - related information .

the regulation at 42 c.f.r .

§59.5 had required , and continues to require , that abortion not be provided as a method of family planning .

the july 3 , 2000 , rule amended the section to add the requirement that a project must give pregnant women the opportunity to receive information and counseling on each of the following options: prenatal care and delivery ; infant care , foster care , or adoption ; and pregnancy termination .

if the woman requests such information and counseling , the project must give "neutral , factual information and nondirective counseling on each of the options , and referral upon request , except with respect to any option ( s ) about which the pregnant woman indicates she does not wish to receive such information and counseling. .

according to opa , family planning projects that receive title x funds are closely monitored to ensure that federal funds are used appropriately and that funds are not used for prohibited activities such as abortion .

the prohibition on abortion does not apply to all the activities of a title x grantee , but only to activities that are part of the title x project .

the grantee's abortion activities must be "separate and distinct" from the title x project activities .

safeguards to maintain this separation include ( 1 ) careful review of grant applications to ensure that the applicant understands the requirements and has the capacity to comply with all requirements ; ( 2 ) independent financial audits to examine whether there is a system to account for program - funded activities and nonallowable program activities ; ( 3 ) yearly comprehensive reviews of the grantees' financial status and budget report ; and ( 4 ) periodic and comprehensive program reviews and site visits by opa regional offices .

it is unclear precisely how many title x clinics also provide abortions through their non - title x activities .

in 2015 , the guttmacher institute surveyed a nationally representative sample of publicly funded family planning clinics .

respondents included 535 clinics that received title x funds .

based on that survey , an estimated 10% of clinics that received any title x funding reported offering abortions separately from their title x project .

in 2004 , following appropriations conference report directions , hhs surveyed its title x grantees on whether their clinic sites also provided abortions with nonfederal funds .

grantees were informed that responses were voluntary and "without consequence , or threat of consequence , to non - responsiveness. .

the survey did not request any identifying information .

hhs mailed surveys to 86 grantees and received 46 responses .

of these , 9 indicated that at least one of their clinic sites ( 17 clinic sites in all ) also provided abortions with nonfederal funds , and 34 indicated that none of their clinic sites provided abortions with nonfederal funds ; 3 responses had no numerical data or said the information was unknown .

title x supporters argue that family planning reduces unintended pregnancies , thereby reducing abortion .

hhs estimates that title x services helped avert 901,838 unintended pregnancies in fy2015 , and the guttmacher institute estimates that title x services helped avert 822,300 unintended pregnancies in calendar year 2015 .

it is unclear exactly how many unintended pregnancies would have ended in abortion ; however , the guttmacher institute estimates that in 2015 , clinics receiving title x funds helped avert 277,800 abortions , including 54,500 abortions among teens .

in contrast , title x critics argue that federal funds should be withheld from any organization that performs abortions , such as ppfa .

they argue that federal funding for nonabortion activities frees up planned parenthood's other resources for its abortion activities .

some critics also argue that if a family planning program is operated by an organization that also performs abortions , the implicit assumption and the message to clients is that abortion is a method of family planning .

in 2015 , 18% of title x clients were aged 19 or younger .

critics argue that by funding title x , the federal government is implicitly sanctioning nonmarital sexual activity among teens .

these critics argue that a reduced teenage pregnancy rate could be achieved if family planning programs emphasized efforts to convince teens to delay sexual activity , rather than efforts to decrease the percentage of sexually active teens who become pregnant .

 ( see crs report rs20301 , teenage pregnancy prevention: statistics and programs . ) .

the program's supporters , in contrast , argue that the title x program should be expanded to serve more people in order to reduce the rate of unintended pregnancies .

the guttmacher institute estimates that in 2015 , title x family planning services helped avert an estimated 188,700 unintended teen pregnancies .

the guttmacher institute estimates that without title x clinics' services , the 2015 u.s. teen pregnancy rate would have been 44% higher .

supporters of expanding family planning services argue that the united states has a higher teen pregnancy rate than some countries ( such as sweden ) where a similar percentage of teens are sexually active , in part because u.s. teens use contraception less consistently .

some also argue that recent declines in u.s. teen birth rates can be explained in part by changes in teen contraceptive use .

by law , title x providers are required to "encourage" family participation when minors seek family planning services .

however , confidentiality is required for personal information about title x services provided to individuals , including adolescents .

opa instructs grantees on confidentiality for minors: it continues to be the case that title x projects may not require written consent of parents or guardians for the provision of services to minors .

nor can any title x project staff notify a parent or guardian before or after a minor has requested and / or received title x family planning services .

the april 2014 title x guidelines state , providers of family planning services should offer confidential services to adolescents and observe all relevant state laws and any legal obligations , such as notification or reporting of child abuse , child molestation , sexual abuse , rape , or incest , as well as human trafficking .

confidentiality is critical for adolescents and can greatly influence their willingness to access and use services .

as a result , multiple professional medical associations have emphasized the importance of providing confidential services to adolescents .

providers should encourage and promote communication between the adolescent and his or her parent ( s ) or guardian ( s ) about sexual and reproductive health .

adolescents who come to the service site alone should be encouraged to talk to their parents or guardians .

educational materials and programs can be provided to parents or guardians that help them talk about sex and share their values with their child .

when both parent or guardian and child have agreed , joint discussions can address family values and expectations about dating , relationships , and sexual behavior .

although minors are to receive confidential services , title x providers are not exempt from state notification and reporting laws on child abuse , child molestation , sexual abuse , rape , or incest .

some minors who use title x clinics have dependent health coverage through a parent's private health insurance policy .

however , for confidentiality reasons , they may not wish to bill family planning or std services to their parent's health insurance .

in one study conducted at 17 title x sites , 4% of family planning visits were by clients who said they had insurance but did not want to use it .

of those , 44% cited confidentiality concerns .

of those citing confidentiality concerns , 39% were under the age of 18 .

according to opa , title x clinics "commonly forgo billing" health insurers to maintain confidentiality .

as for payment of services provided to minors , title x regulations indicate that "unemancipated minors who wish to receive services on a confidential basis must be considered on the basis of their own resources. .

program requirements instruct that "eligibility for discounts for unemancipated minors who receive confidential services must be based on the income of the minor. .

supporters of confidentiality argue that parental notification or parental consent requirements would lead some sexually active adolescents to delay or forgo family planning services , thereby increasing their risk of pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases .

critics argue that confidentiality requirements can interfere with parents' right to know of and to guide their children's health care .

some critics also disagree with discounts for minors without regard to parents' income , because the title x program was intended to serve "low - income families. .

ppfa operates through a national office and 56 affiliates , which operate approximately 600 local health centers .

affiliates participating in title x can receive funds directly from hhs or indirectly from other title x grantees , such as their state or local health departments .

the guttmacher institute found that in 2015 , planned parenthood clinics made up 13% of title x clinics , but served 41% of female title x clients .

in march 2015 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report with data on the obligations , disbursements , and expenditures of federal funds for several nonprofit organizations , including ppfa and its affiliates .

according to the gao report , in fy2012 , hhs reported obligating $18.67 million , and disbursing $19.08 million , to ppfa affiliates through the title x program .

these figures reflected funds that hhs provided directly to these organizations .

they did not include title x funds that reached planned parenthood or its affiliates indirectly through subgrants or that passed through from state agencies or other organizations .

the gao report also showed ppfa affiliates' expenditures of title x funds .

most of these expenditures were identified through audit reports that ppfa affiliates submitted to comply with office of management and budget ( omb ) audit requirements .

expenditures included federal funds provided directly or indirectly to these organizations .

the most recent expenditure data were from fy2012 , when planned parenthood and its affiliates reported spending $64.35 million from the title x family planning services program .

on september 22 , 2015 , the cbo estimated that ppfa and its affiliates receive approximately $60 million annually through the title x program .

