t his report contains two main parts: a section describing recent events and a longer background section on key elements of the u.s. - japan relationship .

under the obama administration , japan and the united states cooperated on a wide range of environmental initiatives both bilaterally through multiple agencies and through multilateral organizations , such as the unfccc , the international energy agency ( iea ) , the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , the clean energy ministerial ( cem ) , the international energy forum ( ief ) , and the east asian summit ( eas ) .

japan was generally regarded by u.s. officials as closely aligned with the obama administration in international climate negotiations in its position that any international climate agreement must be legally binding in a symmetrical way , with all major economies agreeing to the same elements .

however , because of the shutdown of japan's nuclear reactors ( see below ) , international observers raised concerns about losing japan as a global partner in promoting nuclear safety and nonproliferation measures and in reducing greenhouse gas emissions .

president trump's 2017 decision to withdraw the united states from the unfccc paris agreement , an international climate accord designed to reduce global emissions , removed one channel through which the united states and japan cooperated closely .

japanese officials expressed dismay when the united states withdrew from the agreement , with the japanese ministry of foreign affairs calling the decision "regrettable" ; the then minister for the environment had a stronger response , saying , "it's as if they've turned their back on the wisdom of humanity… .

in addition to being disappointed , i'm also angry. .

although japanese officials — including abe — emphasize the importance of acting on climate change both domestically and in coordination with the international community , some experts assess japan's greenhouse gas emissions reduction plan is insufficiently ambitious , particularly in light of japan's expansion of coal power plants .

nevertheless the two countries continue to cooperate on energy issues under a japan - united states strategic energy partnership established in november 2017 .

the partnership focuses on advanced nuclear energy technologies , clean coal technologies , natural gas market development , and energy infrastructure in the developing world .

this effort dovetails with the trump administration's asia - edge ( enhancing development and growth through energy ) initiative , one of the economic and commercial pillars of the administration's indo - pacific strategy announced in july 2018 .

among other things , asia - edge aims to strengthen energy security in the region and grow asian markets for u.s. energy products , particularly liquefied natural gas ( lng ) ; japan is the world's largest lng buyer and has become a destination for u.s. lng exports .

the u.s. - japan alliance has long been an anchor of the u.s. security role in asia .

forged in the u.s. occupation of japan after its defeat in world war ii , the alliance provides a platform for u.s. military readiness in the pacific under the 1960 treaty of mutual cooperation and security between the united states and japan .

about 50,000 u.s. troops are stationed in japan and have the exclusive use of approximately 90 facilities ( see figure 2 ) .

in exchange , the united states guarantees japan's security , including through extended deterrence , known colloquially as the u.s. "nuclear umbrella. .

the u.s. - japan alliance , which many believe was missing a strategic rationale after the end of the cold war , may have found a new guiding rationale in shaping the environment for china's rise .

in addition to serving as a hub for forward - deployed u.s. forces , japan provides its own advanced military assets , many of which complement u.s. assets .

during the 2016 presidential campaign , candidate trump repeatedly asserted that tokyo did not pay enough to ease the u.s. cost of providing security for japan .

in response , japanese and u.s. officials have defended the system of host nation support that has been negotiated and renegotiated over the years .

defenders of the alliance point to the strategic benefits as well as the cost saving of basing some of the most advanced capabilities of the u.s. military in japan , including a forward - deployed aircraft carrier .

the question of how much japan spends , particularly when including the japanese government's payments to compensate base - hosting communities and to shoulder the costs of u.s. troop relocation in the region , remains a thorny area with few easily quantifiable answers .

japan appears to anticipate new demands from the united states , and abe has already stated that japan will no longer cap its defense spending at the customary 1% of gdp .

since the early 2000s , the united states and japan have taken strides to improve the operational capability of the alliance as a combined force , despite political and legal constraints .

japan's own defense policy has continued to evolve , and its major strategic documents reflect a new attention to operational readiness and flexibility .

the original , asymmetric arrangement of the alliance has moved toward a more balanced security partnership in the 21 st century , and japan's 2014 decision to engage in collective self - defense may accelerate that trend .

unlike 25 years ago , the japan self - defense force ( sdf ) is now active in overseas missions , including efforts in the 2000s to support u.s. - led coalition operations in afghanistan and the reconstruction of iraq .

japanese military contributions to global operations like counter - piracy patrols relieve some of the burden on the u.s. military to manage security challenges .

due to the colocation of u.s. and japanese command facilities in recent years , coordination and communication have become more integrated .

the joint response to the march 2011 tsunami and earthquake in japan demonstrated the interoperability of the two militaries .

the united states and japan have been steadily enhancing bilateral cooperation in many other aspects of the alliance , such as ballistic missile defense , cybersecurity , and military use of space .

alongside these improvements , japan continues to pay nearly $2 billion per year to defray the cost of stationing u.s. forces in japan .

 ( see " burden - sharing issues " section below. ) .

u.s. trade and economic ties with japan are viewed by many experts and policymakers as highly important to the u.s. national interest .

by the most conventional method of measurement , the united states and japan are the world's largest and third - largest economies ( china is number two ) , accounting for nearly 30% of the world's gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2017 .

furthermore , their economies are closely intertwined by two - way trade in goods and services , and by foreign investment .

prime minister abe's ldp enjoys a dominant position in the japanese political world .

with its coalition partner , the smaller party komeito , it holds two - thirds of the seats in the lower house of japan's diet , and nearly that proportion of the upper house .

 ( see figure 4 and figure 5 for a display of major parties' strength in japan's parliament. ) .

these margins theoretically give abe's coalition the votes to amend japan's constitution , including the war - renouncing clauses that abe has said he would like to change .

following his september 2018 victory in the ldp's leadership vote , abe said he would like to submit a constitutional amendment proposal to the diet within the coming year .

any attempt to change the constitution would have to surmount formidable political and procedural hurdles .

abe likely would have to overcome opposition from komeito , which is torn between its pacifist leanings and its desire to support the coalition .

decisions about priorities also will take time because there are calls to amend a number of other provisions of the constitution , which was written by the united states during the u.s. occupation of japan in 1946 and has never been changed .

furthermore , any constitutional changes passed by the diet also must be approved by a majority in a nationwide referendum , and many opinion polls show the japanese public to be skeptical about the need for a revision .

from 2007 to 2012 , japanese politics was plagued by instability .

the premiership changed hands six times in those six years , and no party controlled both the lower and upper houses of the parliament for more than a few months .

the abe - led ldp coalition's dominant victories in five consecutive parliamentary elections , in december 2012 , july 2013 , december 2014 , july 2016 , and october 2017 have ended this period of turmoil .

the first event , the 2012 elections for japan's lower house , returned the ldp and its coalition partner , the komeito party , into power after three years in the minority .

since 1955 , the ldp has ruled japan for all but about four years .

abe has benefitted from disarray among japanese opposition parties , which in the fall of 2018 struggled to surpass 10% in public opinion polls ( compared to 40% - 50% for the ldp ) .

some japanese and western analysts argue that another factor contributing to abe's strength is his government's and the ldp's success in managing the japanese media .

according to these sources , the government and the ldp have attempted to influence japanese news outlets through measures such as hinting at revoking licenses of broadcasters , pressuring business groups not to purchase advertisements in certain media outlets , and shunning reporters from critical broadcasters and print publications .

in 2013 , the diet passed an act on protection of specially designated secrets that has been criticized for criminalizing the publication of information that the government had disclosed to the public .

since abe came to power in december 2012 , the nongovernmental organization reporters without borders has moved japan down twenty - one places , to 72 nd place , in its rankings of global freedom of the press .

abe government officials deny that they have attempted to unduly influence the press or restrict press freedoms .

japan's combination of a low birth rate , strict immigration practices , and a shrinking and rapidly ageing population presents policymakers with a significant challenge .

polls suggest that japanese women are avoiding marriage and child - bearing because of the difficulty of combining career and family in japan ; the fertility rate has fallen to 1.25 , below the 2.1 rate necessary to sustain population size .

japan's population growth rate is - 0.2% , according to the world bank , and its current population of 125 million is projected to fall to about 95 million by midcentury .

concerns about a huge shortfall in the labor force have grown , particularly as the elderly demand more care .

the ratio of working age persons to retirees is projected to fall from 5:2 around 2010 to 3:2 in 2040 , reducing the resources available to pay for the government social safety net .

japan's immigration policies have traditionally been strictly limited , closing one potential source of new workers .

