new orleans' location on the gulf coast with water on three sides and below - sea - level terrain makes this densely populated section of louisiana highly susceptible to flooding from hurricane storm surges .

new orleans' flooding threats are not only from the coast but also from the mississippi river and rainfall that gets trapped in the city , known as stormwater .

the system of levees and floodwalls around the city is designed to provide a specified level of protection from riverine and coastal flooding ; where as , massive pumps and drainage canals that flow into lake pontchartrain manage the city's stormwater .

local levee districts maintain the hurricane levees and floodwalls that were built largely by the u.s. army corps of engineers as part of its lake pontchartrain and vicinity hurricane protection project to protect new orleans and the surrounding parishes from a category 3 hurricane .

the sewerage and water board of new orleans is responsible for the city's stormwater management infrastructure .

breaches of the floodwalls protecting new orleans during hurricane katrina were the major contributor to significant flooding in many areas of downtown .

although most of the levee breaches in coastal louisiana were the result of the storm's surge flowing over levees , preliminary evidence suggests that three major breaches in downtown new orleans occurred prior to the floodwalls being overtopped ; that is , the floodwalls failed before their design was exceeded .

the failure of these floodwalls to reliably perform has many stakeholders' speculating about the causes of the failures .

a question central to many of the investigations into katrina - related damage and of concern in rebuilding efforts is: were the levees and floodwalls breached because their design was exceeded , or did they fail due to faulty design , construction , or maintenance ? .

to answer these questions , evidence has and continues to be collected on numerous fronts , including evidence of the height of the storm surge in various locations , and how the levees and floodwalls performed .

technical experts from universities , professional engineering organizations , and the corps are using this evidence to model and explain the performance of new orleans' hurricane protection system .

the findings are likely to shape not only the future design of the hurricane protection system but also plans for rebuilding sections of the city and perspectives on the federal role and responsibility in the city's rebuilding efforts .

moreover , the findings may improve understanding and change perceptions of the level of flood protection and risk in other u.s. cities .

understanding why new orleans' hurricane protection system failed is essential for moving beyond simply making repairs to damaged levees and floodwalls .

knowing why the floodwalls failed is central to assessing the city's vulnerability to storm surge flooding and deciding on how to most effectively combine approaches for managing flood risk during rebuilding efforts ( eg , investing in coastal wetlands loss and hurricane protection infrastructure , requiring flood - proofing in certain areas , and mapping areas for the federal flood insurance program ) .

nonetheless in order to be prepared for the 2006 hurricane season , the corps is having to proceed with immediate repairs of damaged levees and floodwalls using available information and integrating new information as it is available .

one of the causes of failure being discussed is a poor or inadequate design for protecting the city from a category 3 hurricane .

the original project design was to control storm surge flowing into water bodies near downtown by building inlet barriers and canal floodgates .

during the project's construction which began with authorization in 1965 and was ongoing when hurricane katrina made landfall , numerous factors contributed to changing the design of how to protect the city ( eg , including local environmental concerns , changing cost estimates , local flood protection preferences , and litigation ) ; the final design attempted to reduce hurricane - related flooding in the city by increasing the height of levees and floodwalls , in lieu of the barriers and floodgates .

the corps' decision in the mid - 1980s to recommend higher levees instead of the inlet barriers it had recommended in 1965 was shaped by multiple factors , including environmental litigation , project economics , and local preferences .

the corps preferred floodgates to floodwalls along the orleans avenue and london avenue canals .

the decision to not build floodgates , and instead build floodwalls along the canals , was made by the local project sponsors .

the original design and the final design were intended to provide the same level of protection , i.e. , protection from the rough equivalent of a category 3 storm surge .

this report discusses the evolution in the project's design , with specific reference to how and by whom design decisions were made .

the focus is on two major design developments relevant to the current investigations into the floodwall failures in downtown new orleans' during hurricane katrina: ( 1 ) the shift from the barriers at the inlets to lake pontchartrain to higher levees along the lake ; and ( 2 ) the shift from floodgates at the mouth of the city's stormwater outfall canals that drain into lake pontchartrain to higher floodwalls along the length of the canals .

the report includes an appendix summarizing the federal funding history for the lake pontchartrain project .

the analysis contained herein is based on currently available information and is limited in scope .

in summary , the original project design aimed to control storm surge flowing into water bodies around downtown new orleans using inlet barriers and canal floodgates ( in combination with levees ) .

the constructed project , however , attempted to reduce the city's flooding from water bodies affected by hurricane storm surge and wind through higher levees and floodwalls .

the corps' decision to recommend higher levees instead of inlet barriers was shaped by multiple factors , including environmental litigation , project economics , and local preferences .

the corps preferred floodgates to floodwalls along the orleans avenue and london avenue canals .

the decision to not build floodgates , and instead build floodwalls along the canals , was made by the local project sponsors .

the original design and the final design were intended to provide the same level of protection , i.e. , protection from the rough equivalent of a category 3 storm surge .

hurricane katrina's storm surge overtopped and breached new orleans' hurricane protection system .

in addition to causing extensive flood in downtown new orleans , the floodwall failures decreased confidence in the reliability of the existing hurricane infrastructure to protect the city from category 3 and less - severe hurricanes .

confidence in both the reliability of hurricane infrastructure and the level of protection provided by natural and constructed hurricane protection is a factor shaping near - term and long - term investment decisions , as residents and businesses decide whether and how to rebuild .

 ( for an analysis of wetlands restoration opportunities , see crs report rs22276 , coastal louisiana ecosystem restoration after hurricanes katrina and rita , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in the near - term , many are concerned with the level of protection that will be available at the start of the 2006 hurricane season .

by june 2006 , the corps expects to have completed its repairs of the existing infrastructure .

however , the findings from the corps' investigation into the causes of the floodwall failures are not anticipated until june 2006 , raising the question of whether the agency will be able to respond to the findings and improve the floodwalls' reliability when repairing the damaged levees and floodwalls for the 2006 hurricane season in june 2006 .

concerns about levee and floodwall reliability are compounded by concerns about the level of protection provided by the existing infrastructure given new orleans' increasing vulnerability to hurricane storm surge .

land in the city has subsided ; barrier islands and wetlands have been disappearing ; and sea levels have risen .

these factors have raised concerns about the ability of the city's infrastructure to provide category 3 protection .

according to the project justification sheet included in the administration's corps fy2006 budget request , "the project was initially designed in the 1960s , and a reanalysis was performed for part of the project in the mid - 1980s .

continuing coastal land loss and settlement of land in the project may have impacted the ability of the project to withstand the design storm. .

the challenge of protecting new orleans could become even greater .

according to some scientists , higher sea surface temperatures may result in increased hurricane intensity .

climate change concerns and other factors have raised questions about whether both estimates of the likelihood of hurricanes of various strengths and past infrastructure investment decisions based on these estimates need to be re - evaluated .

hurricane katrina has resulted in some questioning why a category 4 or 5 hurricane protection system was not in place for new orleans , and whether it should be part of the rebuilding effort .

the corps currently only has congressional authorization for a category 3 system ; additional congressional authorization would be necessary to build a more protective system .

discussions of category 4 or 5 protection for the city often include the extent to which coastal wetlands restoration may play a role in reducing the city's vulnerability to storm surge and whether some of the regional navigation improvements may increase storm surge vulnerability .

these discussions raise broader policy issues related to the appropriate level of investment to protect against low probability - high consequences events ; to protect against loss of life and economic disruption ; and whether structural storm and flood control measures provide a false sense of security in vulnerable areas like new orleans .

the corps' cost estimates are $1.6 billion to return coastal louisiana's federal levees and floodwalls to pre - katrina conditions by june 2006 , and an additional $3.5 billion to increase protection for new orleans from category 3 to category 5 .

state officials have estimated the cost of category 5 protection and wetlands restoration for all of coastal louisiana as high as $32 billion .

most local stakeholders argue for the inclusion of coastal wetlands restoration in any plan to improve hurricane protection .

neither a consensus nor proposed plans on how to improve hurricane protection for new orleans or costal louisiana in the aftermath of hurricane katrina have emerged .

discussions continue about the advantages and disadvantages of additional infrastructure compared to other policy options , such as protection and restoration of wetlands that attenuate storm surges , buyouts of structures on the most flood - prone lands , flood - proofing structures , and improvements to the flood insurance program .

for a discussion of managing flood risks , see crs report rl33129 , flood risk management and levees: a federal primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

understanding why the hurricane protection system failed in new orleans is essential to moving beyond simply making repairs , to identifying and reducing vulnerabilities in the system , addressing coastal wetlands loss , and rebuilding the city .

nonetheless , the corps is having to proceed with available information in order to perform repairs to the failed floodwalls and other breaches to meet the june 2006 deadline , which marks the start of the hurricane season .

consequently , congressional oversight of new orleans' hurricane protection is likely to continue as the nation grapples with decisions on what type and level of hurricane protection to provide new orleans and other coastal areas around the nation , and who should bear responsibility and costs for protection in coastal , floodplain , and other hazard - prone areas .

 table a - 1 provides the federal funding history for the constructions of the lake pontchartrain project .

this information was provided to crs by the army corps of engineers .

table a - 1 does not include project funding by non - federal project sponsors which are responsible for 30% of construction expenses and 100% of maintenance costs .

the initial work allowance column represents the final enacted amount ; this amount differs from the amount shown for the lake pontchartrain line item in appropriations conference reports due to rescissions and other reductions made by congress .

the corps has some authority to reprogram funds across construction projects during the fiscal year ; the year end work allowance represents the initial work allowance and any reprogrammings that occurred , which are shown in the transferred funds column .

a negative in the transferred funds column indicates funds were reprogrammed away from the lake pontchartrain project during the fiscal year .

beginning with the fiscal year 1994 budget justification , the corps stopped scheduling the orleans avenue and london avenue components of the lake pontchartrain  project as part of its annual budget request .

as shown in table a - 1 , congress provided more than requested for the lake pontchartrain project by the administration .

some of these funds may have been used to construct parallel protection for orleans avenue and london avenue canals ; however , crs was not able to determine the federal funding level for the orleans avenue and london avenue parallel protection based on currently available information .

when hurricane katrina hit , the floodwalls along all three canals were complete ; the canal work that remained to be built was the floodproofing of bridges ( that is , the extension of a floodwall across a bridge to connect with a floodwall on the other side ) and the extension of floodwalls across the front of pumping stations .

