farmers and ranchers have had to adjust to significant changes in the structure and business methods of the livestock and meat sectors in recent decades .

at the farm level , animal production in general and hog production in particular have undergone significant consolidation since 1980 .

beef and pork packing ( slaughtering ) and processing have consolidated rapidly since 1980 into fewer and larger plants .

as an industry consolidates , it can become highly concentrated , with a relatively small number of firms accounting for most production or sales .

the successive stages of cattle and hog production , processing , and marketing also are becoming more carefully managed and aligned , often referred to as vertical coordination or , in its most advanced form , vertical integration , where most stages are owned or financially controlled by a single entity .

some farm constituencies assert that these structural changes have undermined the more "traditional" u.s. system of smaller - scale , independent , family - based farms and ranches ; created closed markets with less price transparency ; eroded farmers' negotiating power ; and contributed to lower prices paid to farmers .

these groups believe that federal officials have not enforced existing laws designed to prevent anti - competitive behavior , and that the laws themselves should be strengthened to better address today's market realities .

others assert that present competition and antitrust policies remain adequate and effective .

they believe that the sector's structural changes are a desirable outgrowth of other factors such as technological and managerial improvements , changing consumer demand , and more international competition .

many of the changes in business relationships along the livestock and meat marketing chain have brought u.s. consumers the ample variety of high - quality , low - priced products they now enjoy , it is argued .

new laws or more aggressive interpretation of existing laws will stifle private investment and innovation , and make the industries less competitive , defenders of current policies argue .

the 2008 omnibus farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) contains a number of animal - related provisions as part of its new livestock title ( title xi ) that may affect how usda is to regulate livestock and poultry markets .

these include provisions that change agricultural fair practices act ( afpa ) definitions of associations and handlers and require usda to issue rules and specify requirements regarding breach of contract and the venue for any litigation .

the farm bill also requires usda to issue an annual report detailing investigations into possible violations under the packers and stockyards ( p&s ) act .

the 2008 farm bill , however , did not include other provisions that were part of the senate - passed version of the farm bill , such as provisions prohibiting ownership among large meat packers , provisions strengthening enforcement authorities over live poultry dealers , and certain changes to the mandatory livestock price reporting program .

these types of competition and marketing issues could continue to be of interest to some members of congress .

other livestock title provisions in the enacted 2008 farm bill include permitting some state - inspected meat and poultry products to enter interstate commerce , just like usda - inspected products ; bringing catfish under mandatory usda inspection ; and modifying the mandatory country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) law to ease compliance requirements affecting meats and other covered commodities .

the enacted bill also contains amendments aimed at further protecting primarily companion animals , which are regulated under the animal welfare act ( awa ) .

for information on these other livestock provisions adopted in the 2008 farm bill , see crs report rl33958 , animal agriculture: 2008 farm bill issues .

market concentration in the cattle and hog sectors has increased sharply in the last two decades , with a few firms now dominating each sector .

the "four - firm concentration ratio," which measures the four largest firms' share of total shipment values , is commonly cited as a summary indicator of concentration and overall structural change in the industry .

as shown figure 1 , the four - firm concentration ratio for cattle and hog slaughter indicates that , over time , the top four firms are accounting for a growing share of the overall market ( based on slaughter volumes ) .

four - firm concentration ratios from 1963 to 2004 rose from 26% to 72% of the cattle slaughtered , and from 33% to 66% of all hogs slaughtered .

continued consolidation and recent mergers could raise these concentration ratios even more , particularly in the beef sector .

although observations about concentration and vertical integration are often ascribed to the meat and poultry sectors as a whole , individual production and marketing segments within these sectors do differ in how they are structured and function .

the following discussion focuses primarily on the beef and pork industries , with some limited information for poultry production focused mostly on broiler meat .

also apparent in the red meat industry in recent decades is the trend toward vertical coordination of production with processing and marketing .

the barkema article has characterized this trend as "supply chains — tightly orchestrated production , processing , and marketing arrangements stretching from genetics to grocery .

supply chains bypass traditional commodity markets and rely on contractual arrangements among the chain participants to manage the transformation of livestock on the farm to meat in the cooler. .

this business model was pioneered in agriculture by the poultry industry , which began to integrate shortly after world war ii .

poultry producers were "the clear leader" in delivering nutritional and convenient products to consumers while at the same time sharply controlling costs , according to barkema .

the hog industry has been closely following in poultry's footsteps .

now typical are contract production arrangements with large integrators who may provide the genetics , pigs and other inputs , and a contracting producer ( farmer ) who provides facilities and labor .

these arrangements take the form of agricultural contracts or agreements between farmers and their commodity buyers that are reached before harvest or the completion of a livestock production stage .

other alternative marketing arrangements also are used .

early in the 110 th congress , a number of bills were introduced to address one or more of these perceived "competition issues" in livestock markets .

both the house - and senate - passed versions of the farm bill ( h.r .

2419 ) contained a number of animal - related provisions , many related to market competition ( especially in the senate version of the bill ) .

the enacted 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) contains a new livestock title ( title xi ) and includes provisions affecting how usda is to regulate livestock and poultry markets .

these provisions change agricultural fair practices act ( afpa ) definitions of associations and handlers and require usda to issue rules and specify requirements regarding breach of contract and the venue for any litigation .

the farm bill also requires usda to issue an annual report detailing investigations into possible violations under the packers and stockyards ( p&s ) act .

the 2008 farm bill , however , did not include other provisions that were part of the senate - passed version of the farm bill , and scaled back much of the language in the senate - passed version aimed at more closely regulating livestock and poultry markets .

not included were senate - passed provisions that would prohibit ownership among large meat packers , strengthen enforcement authorities over live poultry dealers , and make certain changes to the mandatory livestock price reporting program .

these types of competition and marketing issues could continue to be of interest to some members of congress , and may likely resurface during the 111 th congress .

this report will be updated as warranted .

the pickett case , along with several other federal court rulings under the p&s act , including against state restrictions on "corporate" farming , added impetus to the efforts of a number of producer and allied groups that wanted a so - called competition title to be included in an omnibus farm bill .

advocates urged lawmakers to strengthen existing antitrust authorities , to impose more mandates on the executive branch to enforce these authorities , and to provide new contract protections for farmers , among other options .

early in the 110 th congress , senate agriculture chairman harkin had introduced a wide - ranging bill ( s. 622 ) that , he said , would be "the basis for developing a proposed competition title in the new farm bill this year," replacing the 2002 farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) .

s. 622 included many of the provisions not retained in the final version .

also introduced and considered during the farm bill debate were bills by senator grassley that would have prohibited meat packers from owning or feeding livestock , with some noted exceptions ( s. 305 ) ; and that would have established a usda special counsel for competition matters , a deputy attorney general for agricultural antitrust matters in the department of justice , and an agriculture competition task force to examine agricultural competition matters , among other funding and programmatic changes ( s. 1759 ) .

several provisions from these bills were in the senate - passed farm bill .

some of these options had been considered previously .

in legislative activity leading to enactment of the 2002 farm bill , the senate agriculture committee voted in november 2001 to delete a competition title from the omnibus farm bill ( s. 1628 ) , also proposed by chairman harkin .

during subsequent floor action on the bill , the senate did approve a number of individual "competition" amendments .

two such amendments were retained by house - senate conferees in early 2002 in the final version of the bill ( h.rept .

107-424 ) .

one gives producers the right to discuss their contracts with family members and advisors .

the other extends some new p&s act protections to swine producers with production contracts .

conferees also included in the final farm bill a new program requiring many retailers to provide country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) for red meat and several other commodities .

since then , congress twice postponed mandatory meat cool , but it is now being implemented by usda .

in the house , representative boswell , chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on dairy , livestock , and poultry , had introduced the house version of s. 622 as h.r .

2135 .

however , with the exception of a provision on arbitration clauses in livestock and poultry contracts , other elements of h.r .

2135 were not included in the draft bill forwarded to the full committee .

the boswell arbitration provision was further altered during committee markup .

the arbitration provision in the house - passed bill directed usda to establish regulatory standards for arbitration provisions in livestock and poultry contracts .

among other things , such regulations are intended to permit a producer to seek relief in a small claims court , if within the court's jurisdiction , regardless of a contract's arbitration clause .

the house - passed bill contained no other major "competition" language .

the senate - passed version of the farm bill also contained a new title on livestock , marketing , regulatory , and related programs ( title x ) that was based in part on chairman harkin's wide - ranging bill ( s. 622 ) , among other senate provisions .

in the house , although representative boswell had introduced the house version of s. 622 as h.r .

2135 , few elements of h.r .

2135 were included in the draft bill forwarded to the full committee and passed off the house floor .

in fact , a major organizational difference between the house - and senate - passed farm bills is that the senate bill contained a separate livestock competition title , whereas the house bill instead contained a separate title on horticulture and organic agriculture ( title x ) .

the enacted bill included both new titles , but renamed the livestock title as "livestock. .

producers facing fewer buyers for their livestock frequently express concerns about "captive supply," meaning animals that are either owned by , or committed to , a meat packer except for a short period directly before slaughter .

when packers buy fewer animals on the spot ( open cash ) market , reported prices may no longer accurately reflect the preponderance of prices paid , it is argued .

reduced transparency ( i.e. , prices and terms that all market players can view equally ) works to the disadvantage of the far larger number of producers trying to sell their livestock to the relatively few packers who buy them , it is argued .

in the 110 th congress , a bill introduced by senator grassley ( s. 305 ) would have amended the p&s act to prohibit meat packers from owning or feeding livestock "directly , through a subsidiary , or through an arrangement that gives the packer operational , managerial , or supervisory control over the livestock , or over the farming operation that produces the livestock , to such an extent that the producer is no longer materially participating in the management of the operation ... " exceptions would be for arrangements made within seven days before slaughter ; for producer - owned cooperatives that also slaughter their livestock ; and for packers that either slaughter only at one plant or are too small to be covered by livestock mandatory price reporting ( see below ) .

opponents of a packer ownership ban countered that evidence of price manipulation is lacking , and that a ban could reverse many of the efficiency gains made by the livestock industry in recent years through closer packer - producer alliances .

they also cited the results of the recently released rti study of marketing practices ( see discussion in the section titled " gipsa livestock and meat marketing study " ) .

the senate - passed version of the farm bill included a new provision similar in intent to the grassley bill .

it would have prohibited most major packers from owning or controlling livestock more than 14 days prior to slaughter , allowing for some exceptions .

the packer ban would only have applied to packers who are already required to report their prices through the mandatory price reporting law , or packers who slaughter over 120,000 head of cattle each year .

the ban would not have applied to ownership arrangements entered into within 14 days of slaughter of the livestock by a packer ; or to any cooperative or entity owned by a cooperative where the majority of ownership interest is held by active cooperative members ; or to packers not required to report to usda under section 212 of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 ( 7 u.s.c .

1635a ) ; or to a packer that only owns one livestock processing plant .

the provision would have allowed for certain transition rules for packers who already own , feed , or control livestock intended for slaughter on the date of enactment of the act .

the senate would have required that usda promulgate regulations that "prevent discrimination against producers with a smaller volume of business. .

the house version of the farm bill did not include a comparable provision prohibiting packer ownership or control prior to slaughter .

for the enacted 2008 farm bill , the conferees decided to delete senate language that would have prohibited most major packers from owning , feeding , or controlling livestock except within 14 days of slaughter .

several bills in the 110 th congress sought to amend the afpa to address what their sponsors view as inequities in contracting between agricultural producers and those who buy their commodities .

the harkin bill ( s. 622 ) would have prohibited the use of confidentiality clauses in contracts ; required them to more clearly spell out producer obligations ; given the producer three days to review or cancel a contract ; and limited a processor's right to terminate a contract where the producer had made a capital investment of $100,000 or more to satisfy contract requirements .

both s. 622 and a separate grassley bill ( s. 221 ) would have allowed the use of arbitration to settle contract disputes only if both parties consented to it in writing .

sponsors argued that such amendments to the afpa are needed because agricultural consolidation has left producers with so few processor - buyers that some of these processor - buyers can and do impose unfavorable contract terms on the producers , forcing them to either accept or exit the industry entirely .

in the 109 th congress , identical bills by senator enzi ( s. 960 ) and representative pomeroy ( h.r .

4257 ) would have made it unlawful under the p&s act for packers to use forward contracts that are based on a formula price , or that do not contain a firm base price .

the bills also would have limited the size of all contracts to no more than 40 cattle , 30 swine , or equivalent groups of other livestock , and would have required packers to offer contracts for public bidding open to all traders .

senator enzi and other supporters argued that packers now can use formula pricing arrangements to avoid participating in a more transparent open market and to unfairly change the prices they pay producers after a sale is made .

opponents of the various p&s and afpa proposals have asserted that buyers use these and other contracting arrangements to ensure a steady supply of animals ( or other agricultural commodities ) to keep high - capacity plants operating efficiently .

such arrangements also allow for necessary price adjustments for quality , grade , or other market - prescribed factors .

these types of bills would hurt producers too , opponents have argued — again citing the result of the recent rti study ( see section titled " gipsa livestock and meat marketing study " ) — because many of them use contracts or other marketing agreements with packers to limit their own exposure to price volatility and to obtain capital .

chairman harkin's bill ( s. 622 ) also would have significantly altered the afpa to cover crops in much the same way livestock is covered under the p&s act .

more specifically , it would be unlawful under the afpa for any covered person ( i.e. , a dealer , handler , contractor , processor or commission merchant ) to engage in "[a]ny unfair , unjustly discriminatory , or deceptive act , device , or anti - competitive practice in or affecting the marketing , receiving , purchasing , sale , or contracting for the production of any agricultural commodity. .

many of the same types of individual practices now cited under the p&s act as unlawful for livestock buyers would also have been explicitly cited as unlawful for crop buyers , under the proposed new afpa .

the senate - passed farm bill proposed certain changes to afpa , including expanding the definition of "association of producers" to also include general livestock , poultry , and farm groups ; broadening the types of prohibited practices ; and changing the current enforcement provisions to make the law consistent with amendments to create a special counsel for agricultural competition .

the senate version also removed aspects of the law that some producer groups believe have made the afpa less effective — for example , by clarifying civil actions against handlers , including providing for preventive relief , damage , and attorneys fees , and related issues , among other changes ; and requiring usda to promulgate new rules and regulations .

the house bill did not provide for amendments to the agricultural fair practices act .

the enacted 2008 farm bill amends afpa to modify the previous definition of "association of producers" to include organizations with membership exclusively limited to agricultural producers and dedicated to promoting their products .

it also modifies the definition of "handler" ( sec .

11003 ) .

the farm bill conferees narrowed senate language governing contractual arrangements between producers and integrators .

under the conference compromise , a poultry or swine grower — a more limited definition of a contract producer than in the senate - passed bill — has the right to cancel a contract within three business days of execution , unless a later date is specified in the contract .

in lieu of senate language limiting the conditions under which a contractor could require a producer to make additional capital investments , the conference language stipulates that the possibility of such an investment be conspicuously stated in the contract .

chairman harkin's bill , s. 622 ( similarly to s. 2307 in the 109 th congress ) , would have required a new usda office of special counsel for competition matters to investigate and prosecute violations of the afpa and of the p&s act .

this proposal was also adapted from language in a bill introduced by senator grassley ( s. 1759 ) that proposed to establish a usda special counsel for competition matters , a deputy attorney general for agricultural antitrust matters in the department of justice , and an agriculture competition task force to examine agricultural competition matters , among other funding and programmatic changes .

s. 622 also contained language intended to make it easier for producers to prove in a court of law that they were treated unfairly by packers .

sponsors of this proposal said that stronger enforcement authorities were needed in part because gipsa officials have largely failed to enforce existing laws , and pointed to a report by the department's office of inspector general ( oig ) , which concluded that gipsa had not been able to adequately oversee and manage its investigative activities .

 ( see section titled " usda office of inspector general report and gao study ." ) .

in addition to amending the p&s act to include a packer ownership ban , the senate - passed bill would have made other changes to the p&s act to broaden producer rights and protections and strengthen usda enforcement under the act .

among the principal changes was the creation of a new special counsel for agricultural competition at usda to investigate and prosecute violations of competition laws , including the afpa and the p&s act .

the special counsel would also "serve as a liaison between , and act in consultation with , the department of agriculture , the department of justice , and the federal trade commission with respect to competition and trade practices in the food and agricultural sector. .

other proposed senate provisions sought to amend the p&s act to establish new requirements for contracts between producers and processors: for example , strengthening usda enforcement authorities over live poultry dealers , including pullet and breeder hens ; allowing contract growers to discuss contract terms with business associates , neighbors , and other producers ; allowing producers to receive remedy for violations , including litigation costs and attorneys' fees ; and allowing usda to seek outside counsel to aid in investigations and civil cases .

the senate provisions regarding production contracts sought to allow contract producers to cancel a production contract and also would protect contract producers from contract termination or from being required to make business investments , under certain circumstances .

contract producers would be able to cancel a contract within three business days after the contract execution date .

contract producers who have made an investment of $100,000 or more for purposes of securing the production contract with a packer , live poultry dealer , or swine contractor would be given at least 90 days to correct an alleged breach before a contractor can terminate a contract , except under certain circumstances .

a packer , live poultry dealer , or swine contractor would also be prohibited from requiring additional investments of the contract producer during the term of the contract unless the additional investments are offset or agreed to by the contract producer .

the senate bill also provided for producer choice of jurisdiction and venue , and allowed for arbitration to settle disputes , if both parties were to consent in writing .

some proposals that might have made it easier for producers to prove unfair treatment under the p&s act were not ultimately included in the senate - passed bill , although several amendments were submitted and some were debated on the senate floor .

for example , s. 622 included language that would have limited judges deciding court cases under the p&s act from requiring producers to show both individual harm and "competitive harm" to the entire industry ; an amendment to h.r .

2419 was submitted ( harkin , s.amdt .

3667 ) to include this language in the senate farm bill , but was not adopted .

another amendment ( tester , s.amdt .

3666 ) also would have limited p&s act court cases from allowing certain pricing mechanisms in cases where the packer may have a "legitimate business justification" ; s.amdt .

3666 was debated , but voted against when it was brought up during the senate floor debate .

other submitted senate amendments included a proposal to require all forward contracts to have a fixed base price ( enzi , s.amdt .

3691 ) .

a series of amendments ( roberts , s.amdt .

3546 , s.amdt .

3547 , s.amdt .

3548 , and s.amdt .

3549 ) would have changed afpa and p&s act definitions and afpa enforcement requirements , and packer ban requirements in senate - passed version of the farm bill .

these senate amendments were not adopted .

initially , the house farm bill had included a provision on arbitration clauses in livestock and poultry contracts , which evolved from part of the house companion bill to s. 622 ( h.r .

2135 ) , introduced by representative boswell , chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on dairy , livestock , and poultry .

however , the arbitration provision was further altered during committee markup ; other elements of h.r .

2135 were not included in the draft bill forwarded to the full committee and passed off the house floor .

another related proposal that was not adopted in the house farm bill was h.r .

2213 , introduced by representative herseth sandlin , which would have amended the p&s act with respect to livestock producer - packer forward contracts .

the arbitration provision in the house bill directed usda to establish regulatory standards for arbitration provisions in livestock and poultry contracts .

among other things , such regulations are intended to permit a producer to seek relief in a small claims court , if within the court's jurisdiction , regardless of a contract's arbitration clause .

the house bill contained no other provisions amending the p&s act .

several of these provisions were retained in the enacted 2008 farm bill in somewhat modified form , and are intended to give producers additional protections when disputing contract terms .

however , certain senate provisions intended to strengthen usda's oversight and enforcement of the act were deleted , as were senate provisions to give usda stronger enforcement authorities over live poultry dealers under the p&s act , among other changes .

also deleted was a senate provision to establish at usda a new special counsel for agricultural competition to investigate and prosecute violations of competition laws .

in their place , conferees added language requiring an annual report detailing investigations into possible p&s act violations .

the enacted 2008 farm bill amends the p&s act as follows .

the enacted bill requires an annual report from usda on detailed investigations into possible violations of the p&s act ( sec .

11004 ) ; permits poultry and swine producers to cancel their contracts up to three business days after signing , unless a later date is specified in the contract ; requires clear disclosure in contracts of cancellation terms ; requires poultry / swine contracts to contain a conspicuous statement that additional large capital investments may be required during the term of the contract ; contains provisions intended to assist producers deal with contract disputes , including arbitration terms and venue for any litigation ( sec .

11005 ) ; and requires usda to issue rules on such criteria as , for example , the reasonable period of time a producer should be given to remedy a breach of contract before it is cancelled ( sec .

11006 ) .

one issue that is likely to be of interest to some during the 111 th congress is the provision requiring usda rulemaking under the p&s act ( sec .

11006 ) related to alleged practices in the poultry and hog sectors .

per the 2008 farm bill provision , usda must publish regulations within two years to establish criteria in determining ( 1 ) whether an "undue or unreasonable preference or advantage" has occurred in violation of the act ; ( 2 ) whether a live poultry dealer has provided "reasonable notice" to poultry growers of any suspension of the delivery of birds under a poultry growing arrangement ; ( 3 ) when a requirement of additional capital investments over the life of a poultry growing arrangement or swine production contract constitutes a violation of such act ; and ( 4 ) if a live poultry dealer or swine contractor has provided a reasonable period of time for a poultry grower or a swine production contract grower to remedy a breach of contract that could lead to termination of the poultry growing arrangement or swine production contract .

sponsors of this provision claim usda's rulemaking is relevant because they claim that many poultry growers have had their deliveries suspended for reasons that might constitute an undue or unreasonable preference , if other growers are not experiencing the same suspension .

lmpr was first passed in 1999 to address some producers' concerns about low livestock prices , industry concentration , and the availability of accurate market information .

the original authority , title ix of p.l .

106-78 , usda's fy2000 appropriations , lapsed briefly on october 22 , 2004 , but president bush signed legislation ( p.l .

108-444 ) extending the program through september 30 , 2005 , when it again expired .

the program then operated on a voluntary basis , as the 109 th congress considered whether to reauthorize lmpr , for how long , and what if any changes should be made .

taking differing approaches in september 2005 , the house had approved a bill ( h.r .

3408 ) to extend lmpr for five years and to amend hog reporting provisions , while the senate had approved a simple one - year extension ( s. 1613 ) .

in september 2006 , the senate cleared the house - passed version , sending the measure to the president , who signed it into law ( p.l .

109-296 ) on october 5 , 2006 .

during the 110 th congress , some members indicated the need for further changes in lmpr .

the senate - passed version of the farm bill would have established a new program for mandatory daily product information reporting for manufactured dairy products , and amended the current program for swine to authorize , after an economic study , the mandatory packer reporting of wholesale pork product sales ( such as pork cuts and retail - ready pork products ) , along with changes to the reporting times of the afternoon swine report .

the house - passed version did not include any changes or additions to the current mandatory price reporting program .

the enacted 2008 farm bill requires usda to conduct a study of the economic impacts of requiring plants to report pork product sales , focusing on wholesale pork cuts .

it also directs usda to improve electronic reporting and publishing under the program ( sec .

11001 ) .

