border security has emerged as an area of concern for many , particularly after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks .

although recent concerns pertaining to border security may be attributed to the threat of potential terrorists coming into the country , past concerns that centered around drug and human smuggling and the illegal entry of migrants are still important issues .

as the southwest border increasingly becomes a focal point due to its myriad of problems , an issue for congress is how to successfully balance competing strategic goals while balancing the tactical policies to achieve these goals .

the strategic concern rests in a complex question: how do we balance the need for more effective border control with the needs of free trade and economic growth ? .

the tactical concerns focus on balancing increased resources such as an ever - expanding workforce at the border with the use of technology and intelligence without compromising the free flow of commerce and travel .

as congress and administration policymakers seek to achieve balance between the strategic and tactical concerns the southwest border pose , they do so during an unprecedented time of illegal migration across the border .

in an attempt to normalize the flow of needed workers across the border and address the economic imbalances in mexico and other parts of latin america that drive the push incentive structure of migration to the united states , several bills have been introduced that would overhaul the u.s. immigration system and tighten enforcement of u.s. immigration laws in the interior of the country .

traditionally , border management consists of securing the border at ports of entry through the inspections process as well as between ports of entry ( poe ) through the patrolling of the border by the border patrol .

increasingly , border management , particularly along the southwest border , also involves enforcing immigration and other laws well into the interior of the country .

this report discusses border security - related programs and initiatives that have an impact on the southwest border .

the programs and initiatives discussed are presented in a two - dimensional framework: ( 1 ) enforcement efforts at the poe , between the poe and within the interior of the united states ; and ( 2 ) programs and initiatives that facilitate the flow of people and goods across the border versus those initiatives that are geared towards controlling and interdicting people and things that may be a threat to the national security .

the report opens with a discussion of the differences between the southwest and northern border .

it then details the relationship between the united states and mexico , as it pertains to border security .

next , each major control point ( i.e. , inspections , border patrol and interior investigations ) that has a border security - related component is discussed .

the report then focuses on past and current congressional efforts to secure the southwest border .

it concludes with a discussion of some of the issues that are crosscutting to the major areas covered in the report .

an appendix is provided for additional discussion of legislation .

the u.s. border with mexico is approximately 2,000 miles long and is comprised of six mexican and four u.s. states .

it features large tracts of desert land where temperatures average more than 100 degrees for part of the year , includes mountain ranges and rugged terrain , as well as the waters of the rio grande river .

the u.s. border with canada , on the other hand , is more than twice as long as the southwest border and covers seven canadian provinces and 10 u.s. states .

among the northern border's many challenging natural features are vast mountain ranges such as the rockies , the great lakes , many different river systems , and heavy snow and bitter cold temperatures in the winter .

although smaller by some 2,000 miles than its northern counterpart , the southwest border exceeds the northern border with respect to the volume of travelers crossing it .

for example , there were 173 million inspections conducted at southwest land ports of entry in fy2004 , compared to 52 million at northern land ports of entry .

in addition to the volume of traffic at southwest land ports of entry , the southwest border has a longstanding history of illegal migration and human and drug smuggling activities .

on average , the southwest border accounts for over 94% of all illegal alien apprehensions each year .

while efforts have been underway to strengthen both borders , the southwest border efforts focus primarily on stemming illegal migration and human smuggling and interdicting illegal drugs , while the northern border efforts focus on sharing information and streamlining policies between the united states and canada as well as facilitating trade .

prior to the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , many federal agencies and subagencies were responsible for some aspects of border security .

today , dhs is the primary agency that has border security - related responsibilities .

dhs' directorate of border and transportation security includes the u.s. coast guard , the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) and the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , among other agencies .

within cbp is the u.s. border patrol , inspections activities of the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , u.s. customs service and the u.s. department of agriculture .

within ice are the investigative activities of the former ins and u.s. customs service ; detention and removal activities of the former ins ; the federal law enforcement training center ; the transportation security administration ; and the federal protective service .

in 1789 , congress passed legislation that authorized the collection of duties on imported goods .

in a subsequent piece of legislation , congress established the u.s. customs service , which was charged with collecting duties at u.s. ports of entry .

the position of immigration inspectors was formally created in 1891 after congress passed legislation that created the bureau of immigration in the department of the treasury .

due to the increasing complexity of regulating immigration , a new supervisory position was created in the then - bureau of immigration that oversaw the duties of the new immigration inspectors .

prior to the creation of this specialized group of inspectors that were charged with regulating immigration at u.s. ports of entry , customs inspectors were the only presence at the ports of entry .

inspectors regulate people and goods that present themselves for entry at a designated port of entry .

while emphasis on the southwest border tends to be placed on who is seeking entry to the united states , in recent years there has been a growing concern over what is coming into the country .

this section provides a description of the who and what that are present at southwest land ports of entry ( poe ) .

in doing so , the section is divided into two parts: people - related and goods - related inspections .

while this may be a useful construct for the purpose of this report , it is important to note that since the consolidation of the immigration and customs inspections activities into cbp , efforts have been underway to present "one face at the border" and move away from looking at inspections in terms of separate organizational structures for immigration and customs inspections .

while the federal inspections process was codified by congress in the 1700s and 1800s , it was 1924 when congress recognized the need for enforcement measures to stem illegal entries between ports of entry and passed legislation that formally created the border patrol .

prior to the formal creation of a border patrol , the bureau of immigration in the department of labor had maintained a small force of mounted guards on the u.s. - mexico border .

recently , the office of air and marine operations ( amo ) was transferred to cbp .

for the purpose of this report , amo is placed with the border patrol as an entity that monitors the border between the ports of entry .

the bureau of immigration and custom enforcement's ( ice ) is the investigative arm of dhs .

ice is charged with immigration and customs - related investigations in the interior of the country , which includes enforcing policy initiatives aimed at apprehending and deporting foreign nationals who are not authorized to be in the united states as well as interdicting illegal substances and contraband that was brought into the united states from another country .

the activities of ice are an extension of the activities that are conducted at and between ports of entry .

ice has 22 field offices that are located throughout the country , with seven located in the southwest .

in addition to the immigration and customs - related investigative activities , ice also contains the former ins detention and removal program , the federal air marshal service and the federal protective service .

this section discusses selected ice investigative activities , including its initiative to thwart terrorist activities and other illegal acts .

other investigative activities such as countering human and drug smuggling are also discussed as well as ice's detention and removal function .

some of the major issues facing ice stem from the growing number of illegal aliens present in the united states .

while the issues discussed below are not specifically unique to the southwest border region , the southwest border receives a great deal of attention due to the sheer number of illegal migrants that cross it every day and because some of the border communities in the southwest have a large percentage of foreign nationals .

because of this distinction , issues facing ice ( as well as cbp ) are usually focused in the southwest .

while each of the areas above have presented specific policy issues , there are other issues that transcend subject area and apply to the entirety of border security on the southwest border .

the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 mandated the integration of immigration databases .

in addition to integrating data systems that contain federal law enforcement and intelligence information relevant to making decisions on visa admissibility and the removal of aliens , the act also mandated that immigration databases be integrated with other relevant data systems .

cbp officials use several data systems and databases that assist them with identifying aliens who are potentially inadmissible under the ina or otherwise may pose a threat to the country .

cbp officials also utilize several data systems and databases with respect to identifying high - risk commercial goods that warrant further inspection or review .

ice officials also query several different data systems and databases in the course of their duties .

of concern are the numerous data systems and databases that are not integrated or not readily accessible .

recently enacted legislation called for the integration of most of these databases and data systems ; and the 9 / 11 commission also called for similar integration .

several questions are raised when assessing the integration of various data systems and databases: what are the potential difficulties with integrating the various data systems and databases and how can these difficulties be reduced ? .

who should have access to the integrated data system and what is the appropriate level of access ? .

how will the privacy of information contained in the integrated data system be safeguarded ? .

much of the area along the southwest border lacks direct surveillance by border patrol personnel .

recognizing the vulnerabilities posed on the southwest border , starting in 1994 , congress authorized several increases in the number of border patrol agents as well as appropriated funding to enhance technology deployed at the border .

since the terrorist attacks , both the border patrol and inspectors saw a boost in their resources .

despite the concentration of funding and resources at the border , critics contend that more should be done .

for example , concerns about the lack of personnel at the border were expressed in a january 2003 government accountability office ( gao ) report .

gao noted that the former ins would need additional staffing and resources in order to gain control of the southwest border .

according to the border patrol , a needs assessment was conducted and it was determined that 22,000 border patrol agents were needed to secure the border , which would increase the border patrol twofold .

regarding the staffing of the customs functions of cbp , in 1998 the former customs service commissioned pricewaterhousecoopers to develop a resource allocation model ( ram ) to determine the most effective deployment of its inspectors and canine enforcement officers at more than 300 international ports of entry .

the ram report concluded that in order to meet its multifaceted mission in fy2002 , customs staffing needed to be increased by 14,776 positions over the fy1998 base ( 19,428 ) , to bring the total customs staffing to 34,204 positions .

the largest increase would be in the inspector ( 6,481 ) , special agent ( 2,041 ) and canine enforcement officer ( 650 ) positions .

while gao testified in april 2000 that it found some weaknesses ( data reliability issues ) with the ram study , it remains the most comprehensive staffing analysis to date .

since the inspections function of the u.s. customs service was merged with the immigration inspections function from the former ins , it is not known what the appropriate staffing level should be for the various missions under cbp .

as congress continues to exercise its oversight role , the issue of staffing and resources may continue to be of interest .

an option includes requiring that a study be conducted to examine the proper staffing level and amount and type of resources necessary to secure the border .

the adequacy of infrastructure at ports of entry has been a long - standing concern .

the data management improvement act ( dmia ) task force examined infrastructure at land ports of entry in 2002 and 2003 as a part of its report to congress on the entry and exit data system .

the dmia task force asserted in its report that "resources to expand and improve the infrastructure to support growth in workload and staffing have not kept pace , creating infrastructure weaknesses. .

in 2003 , the dmia task force reported the following with respect to the federal inspections area at land ports of entry: 64 ports have less than 25% of required space ; 40 ports have between 25 and 50% of required space ; and 13 ports have between 50 and 75% of the space required .

improving the infrastructure at land ports of entry , however , may prove to be challenging .

for example , the majority of facilities at the nation's land border have limited space .

in most cases , the federal government cannot immediately expand existing facilities due to the adjacent land being owned by other entities .

in addition to the spatial limitations , the federal government faces environmental challenges when it seeks to expand port infrastructure .

according to the dmia task force , "the u.s. environmental protection agency environmental impact and review processes can make build - out lengthy , expensive , and burdensome. .

other issues such as insufficient roadways and lack of coordination among the various agencies that have a stake in the process also hamper efforts to expand port infrastructure .

finally , as resources become more scarce , cbp officials in charge of infrastructure projects at the northern and southwest border may find themselves competing for resources .

past congresses exercised an oversight role by requiring studies on port infrastructure .

the 109 th congress may choose to follow - up on these studies .

the repatriation of some mexican nationals has been a long - standing practice , dating back to the former ins .

in the first part of the 20 th century , there was an active campaign to repatriate mexican nationals who illegally entered the united states .

typically , u.s. immigration officials would turn back qualified mexican nationals to the mexican side of the border .

more recently , however , dhs has piloted two different types of repatriation programs , both aimed at making it more difficult for the illegal alien to return to the united states .

 ( see discussion below. ) .

in an attempt to discourage unauthorized migrants from attempting to re - cross the border when they are returned to mexico , in september 2003 the border patrol instituted a pilot program that airlifted aliens from the arizona border to texas .

the border patrol originally had attempted to reach an agreement with mexico to repatriate aliens to the interior of the country , but when the mexican government declined to participate , the agency instead began to involuntarily repatriate aliens laterally from arizona to texas .

the texas border poses a challenge for would - be border crossers due to the rio grande river and the number of border patrol agents stationed along it .

the border patrol chartered two airplanes in tucson for the pilot program , with an overall cost of $1.3 million .

the lateral repatriation program ran for 24 days in september of 2003 and repatriated over 6,200 unauthorized migrants apprehended in arizona to four cities along the texas border: el paso , del rio , laredo , and mcallen .

according to cbp , the pilot program led to an 18% decline in apprehensions in the tucson sector and led to only one migrant death during the period , compared with 10 migrant deaths during the same period in 2002 .

proponents of the program point to the reduction in apprehensions and the low incidence of migrant deaths in arizona during its operation as proof that the lateral repatriation program is an effective way to discourage unauthorized aliens from immediately attempting to re - enter the country while simultaneously saving lives .

the mexican government objected to the program , claiming that the cities on the mexican side of the border in texas were not equipped to handle the influx of returnees .

additionally , some u.s. lawmakers held that the program wasted taxpayer dollars because it did not solve the problem of unauthorized migration but instead shifted arizona's problem to texas .

reportedly , cbp is no longer conducting lateral repatriations .

in 1996 , congress authorized the ins to create an interior repatriation program to return apprehended unauthorized mexican aliens to the interior of their country .

eight years later , on june 9 , 2004 , the white house announced it had reached agreement with the mexican government to begin implementing the interior repatriation program .

this agreement grew out of the previously mentioned lateral repatriation program , which was unpopular in mexico and featured the involuntary repatriation of mexicans apprehended along the arizona border to the texas border .

the interior repatriation program is a departure from the current practice of returning aliens to the mexican side of the border , and is aimed at reducing the number of aliens who immediately try to cross back into the united states .

due to constitutional constraints in mexico , the apprehended aliens' return to the interior must be voluntary and the willingness of their participation will be certified by mexican consular officers .

during the pilot phase of the program , which ran through september 2004 , 14,058 aliens were repatriated at a cost of approximately $15.4 million .

it remains to be seen whether this program will reduce the recidivism rate of the illegal aliens returned to mexico .

dhs has requested $39 million to fund this program in fy2006 within the ice appropriation .

as discussed above , the border patrol has the authority to repatriate certain mexican nationals .

in its classic form , repatriation was usually done by the border patrol by simply turning the mexican national back to the mexican side of the border .

with the implementation of both the lateral and interior repatriation programs , resources were drawn from ice .

unlike cbp , ice has the resources to detain illegal aliens until they can be repatriated to mexico .

moreover , because ice already has a removal program in place , it also has the resources to transport illegal aliens to their home countries .

recent concerns have emerged over the apparent organizational issues in at least one of dhs' agencies .

in recent months , ice has been faced with a budget shortfall and reports of low morale and persisting conflicts over territory .

similar issues that are now facing ice were evident in at least one of the legacy agencies that was transferred to ice .

the former ins was heavily criticized for not fully enforcing the immigration law , having poor management practices , and lacking accountability , among other things .

in addition to the organizational concerns , questions continue to be raised with respect to the activities of cbp and ice .

while a clear distinction can be made regarding the border functions of cbp and the interior functions of ice , both functions represent a continuum of activities that are interrelated .

certainly questions have been raised pertaining to the feasibility of combining these two functions .

several proposals to restructure ice and cbp have been advanced and include creating a new agency that would contain the immigration enforcement functions ; and consolidating ice and cbp into one bureau .

critics of the status quo contend that by consolidating cbp and ice , coordination and sharing of efforts between the two bureaus would be better facilitated .

moreover , the ease of obtaining information from the counterpart bureau would be strengthened .

these organizational concerns impact the southwest border .

for example , cbp and ice are dependent upon each other to carry out the various initiatives that are unique to the southwest border ( eg , the abc initiative and the interior and lateral repatriation programs ) .

as congress considers the challenges facing ice and cbp and whether another reorganization is necessary , it is faced with the issue of whether a reorganization would improve some of the bureau's inherited longstanding systemic issues , or whether it would mean further unsettling of agencies that are still struggling to obtain stability .

in the past , concerns pertaining to the southwest border centered on the flow of illegal drugs and contraband being smuggled into the country .

while illegal migration has always been an issue at the southwest border , concerns heightened after the september 2001 terrorist attacks due to the potential of terrorists exploiting the border .

the concern regarding the possibility of terrorists exploiting the southwest border is noteworthy .

however , the data suggest that the vast majority of illegal migrants apprehended at the southwest border are mexican nationals who are either seeking employment in the united states or reunification with their families .

congress and the nation have begun a debate on whether current immigration policy is effective in stemming the flow of illegal migration to the united states .

several themes emerge in the discussion .

some believe that the best way to address the flow of illegal migration at the southwest border is to change immigration policy to allow more illegal aliens present in the united states to attain legal status .

proponents of this view contend that the majority of illegal aliens who enter the country do so to work .

for several years , legislation has been introduced that would provide a legal alternative for prospective foreign workers .

supporters argue that such an alternative would help reduce unauthorized migration .

moreover , some employers are eager to have low - cost labor .

critics , however , contend that such a program would likely exacerbate the problem of illegal migration and point to the growth in unauthorized migration following the immigration reform and control act of 1986 that legalized illegal aliens and reformed the guest worker program .

regardless of where one stands on the issue , there appears to be a consensus that immigration interior enforcement , including worksite enforcement , should be an integral part of the policy .

prior to the 2001 terrorist attacks , immigration interior enforcement received under 30% of the former - ins resources .

since the terrorist attacks , ice's resources have increased , partly due to the counterterrorism emphasis and the consolidation of other agencies such as the u.s. customs service .

another critical piece to stemming the flow of illegal migration to the united states is the mexican economy , especially in the "sending regions" of the country .

several studies have shown that the majority of the illegal migrants from mexico come from several economically deprived regions of the country .

while the united states has entered into partnerships with mexico to strengthen their economic growth ( see above discussion on u.s. - mexico relations ) , many believe that more needs to be done to stabilize these communities .

while the discussion in this section and throughout the report has focused on the problems at the southwest border , it is important to note that the same types of issues do not exist at the northern border , primarily due to canada and the united states not having the same "push - pull" factors because of the economies being somewhat equivalent .

in conclusion , as the number of illegal aliens that are present in the united states continues to grow , attention will likely continue to be directed at the border and the enforcement of immigration laws within the interior of the country .

dhs has launched several initiatives aimed at apprehending illegal aliens and dismantling human and drug smuggling organizations .

despite these efforts , the flow of illegal migration continues .

issues such as enforcement of immigration laws and organizational issues such as inter - and intra - agency cooperation , coordination and information sharing continue to be debated .

in the view of some , a more comprehensive approach that addresses the "push factors" of the sending countries and the "pull factors" of the united states , coupled with more effective enforcement of current laws in the interior of the country may once again merit examination .

since 1993 , congress has passed legislation that authorized and appropriated funding to increase border personnel at and along the southwest border .

congress has also passed legislation that was aimed at strengthening resources and technology at the southwest border .

following is a discussion of legislation that has been enacted into law since 1993 .

103 rd congress the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 title xiii , ยง13006 of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) authorized appropriations for fy1995-fy1998 to increase the resources for the then - immigration and naturalization service's ( ins ) border patrol , inspections and deportation programs with respect to apprehending illegal aliens .

the act also authorized appropriations to increase the number of border patrol agents up to1,000 for fy1995-fy1998 .

104 th congress the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) congress began addressing the need for greater border security in the 104 th congress when it passed the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) .

iirira's border security provisions were concentrated at the southwest border and increased border enforcement by authorizing the hiring of 1,000 new border patrol agents each year for fy1997 through fy2001 .

the act called for the deployment of additional border patrol agents to areas that were in proportion to the level of illegal crossings .

the act also authorized an increase in border patrol support personnel by 300 a year for fy1997 through fy2001 .

iirira sought to facilitate legitimate travel to the united states by addressing the long delays at the ports of entry by authorizing the hiring of inspectors to a level adequate to assure full staffing during peak crossing hours for fy1997 and fy1998 .

the act also authorized the attorney general to establish six inspection projects wherein a fee could be charged .

under the act , the projects could be dedicated commuter lanes at ports of entry that would facilitate the speedy passage of frequent border crossers .

in an effort to stem illegal immigration , iirira authorized the expansion of border barriers and authorized the attorney general to acquire and use any federal equipment that was available for transfer in order to detect , interdict and reduce illegal immigration into the united states .

it also authorized appropriations to expand the automated biometric fingerprint identification system ( commonly referred to as ident ) nationwide to include the fingerprints of illegal or criminal aliens who were apprehended .

iirira also had a provision that for the first time required biometrics in one type of travel document .

the act required the secretary of state to issue border crossing cards that have a biometric identifier that is machine readable .

the act required that the biometric identifier must match the biometric characteristic of the card holder in order for the alien to enter the united states .

automated entry and exit data system ( us - visit ) section 110 of iirira required the attorney general to develop an automated data system to record the entry and exit of every alien arriving in and departing from the united states by september 30 , 1998 .

many expressed concern about the potential for such a system to cause long delays at ports of entry .

consequently , congress amended ยง110 of iirira in the fy1999 omnibus consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

105-277 ) by extending the deadline for the implementation of an automated entry and exit data system and by prohibiting significant disruption of trade , tourism , or other legitimate cross - border traffic once the data system was in place .

in june 2000 , congress further amended ยง110 in the ins data management and improvement act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-215 ) by delaying the immediate implementation of the automated entry and exit data system at all ports of entry and requiring the development of a data system that uses available data to record alien arrivals and departures , without establishing additional documentary requirements .

following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , however , congress requested that resources be directed to the immediate development and implementation of an automated entry and exit control system at all ports of entry , as discussed below .

107 th congress in direct response to the september 11 attacks , congress passed several pieces of legislation that impacted border security , including border security at the southwest border .

the usa patriot act the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act of 2001 ( usa patriot act ; p.l .

107-56 ) called for the immediate implementation of the integrated entry and exit data system and that it be interoperable with other law enforcement data systems .

the act required the attorney general and the secretary of state to develop and certify a technology standard that can be used to verify the identity of persons seeking a visa to enter the united states .

both of these mandates ( implementation of an integrated entry and exit data system and the requirement that travel documents contain a biometric identifier ) have direct implications for most foreign nationals seeking entry to the united states at a southwest land port of entry .

the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-173 ) further required the attorney general ( now the secretary of homeland security ) to implement an integrated entry and exit data system .

the act required biometric data readers and scanners at all ports of entry and extended the deadline for border crossing identification cards ( laser visas ) to contain a biometric identifier that matches the biometric characteristic of the card holder .

the act also authorized an increase in the number of immigration inspectors and support staff by 200 per group for each fiscal year from fy2002 through fy2006 .

108 th congress the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 in an effort to implement selected 9 / 11 commission recommendations , congress passed the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) .

the act calls for the secretary of dhs to develop a plan to accelerate the full implementation of an automated biometric entry and exit data system and submit a report to congress on the plan by july 17 , 2005 .

the act requires the integration of the entry and exit data system with other databases and data systems .

it also requires the secretary of dhs to develop and implement a plan to expedite the processing of registered travelers through a single registered traveler program that can be integrated into the broader automated biometric entry and exit data system .

with respect to resources , the act authorizes 2,000 additional border patrol agents each year , fy2006 through fy2010 .

109 th congress the real id act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) the real id act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) contains several provisions that would have an impact on border security - related issues at the southwest border .

in addition to its more general immigration - related border security provisions , the act contains two provisions that are specific to the southwest border .

title iii of the act directs the under secretary of homeland security for border and transportation security to conduct a study on "the technology , equipment , and personnel needed to address security vulnerabilities ... for each cbp field office that has responsibility for u.s. borders with canada and mexico. .

another provision would permit the secretary of homeland security to waive " all laws as necessary" to expedite the construction of barriers and roads along the border .

the impetus for this provision is the construction of a fence in the san diego sector of the southwest border that has been delayed due to legal issues that have been advanced by the state of california .

