transportation congestion most likely will be a major issue for congress as it considers reauthorization of the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act — a legacy for users ( safetea ) , p.l .

109-59 , which is set to expire on september 30 , 2009 .

by many accounts , congestion on the nation's road and railroad networks , at seaports and airports , and on some major transit systems is a significant problem for many transportation users , especially commuters , freight shippers , and carriers .

moreover , trends underlying the demand for freight and passenger travel — population and economic growth , the urban and regional distribution of homes and businesses , and international trade — suggest that pressures on the transportation system are likely to grow in the years ahead .

a number of experts and organizations believe that congestion has reached crisis proportions .

in announcing a new national congestion strategy in may 2006 , then secretary of transportation norman mineta stated that "congestion is one of the single largest threats to our economic prosperity and way of life. .

in a similar vein , the transportation research board ( trb ) currently has congestion on its "critical issues" list as one of the most pressing problems of the transportation system , arguing "if the 20 th century can be called the era of building , the 21 st may be called the era of congestion. .

more recently , in january 2007 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , for the first time , placed transportation financing and capacity on its list of high - risk federal programs and operations .

not everyone agrees that congestion is a major , national problem .

some see it as a minor impediment to mobility , others as an unfortunate by - product of prosperity and accessibility in economically vibrant places .

several environmental groups argue that congestion is less the problem than the over reliance on the cars and trucks that cause it .

indeed , this over reliance on highway transportation , they believe , leads to more important problems , such as suburban sprawl and air pollution .

furthermore , because the problem is geographically concentrated , most places and people in america do not suffer noticeable levels of congestion .

thus , many might question to what extent transportation congestion is a national problem warranting a federal government response .

in uncongested regions , transportation problems are more often to do with basic connectivity of the transportation system , system access , and economic development .

connectivity , system access , economic development , and congestion relief are some of the objectives of national transportation policy that also include mitigating the negative effects of transportation , such as deaths , injuries , and environmental damage .

according to 49 u.s.c .

§ 101 , the national objectives of general welfare , economic growth and stability , and security of the united states require the development of transportation policies and programs that contribute to providing fast , safe , efficient , and convenient transportation at the lowest cost consistent with those and other national objectives , including the efficient use and conservation of the resources of the united states .

to accomplish these objectives , the federal government regulates transportation activities and provides funding to encourage states and local governments to build and operate transportation infrastructure .

since the beginnings of this "federal - aid" system , there have been major debates about how these funds should be distributed and spent .

an underlying tension throughout these debates has been whether to distribute funds to encourage the pursuit of nationally defined transportation goals , such as the building of the interstate system , or to distribute funds equally between the states ( according to a predefined formula ) and allow them to pursue their own objectives .

in safetea , about 90% of highway funds are authorized to be distributed by formula , and states are guaranteed by fy2008-fy2009 a 92% return on money paid into the highway account of the highway trust fund .

because transportation congestion is geographically concentrated , congress has tended to favor a state and local approach to solving transportation congestion in the recent history of the federal surface transportation program .

this has been accompanied by several sizeable boosts in funding for public transit and traffic reduction measures directed to major metropolitan areas in an attempt to curb the negative effects of cars and trucks , including road traffic congestion .

congress also has enacted a patchwork of other programs to deal with congestion at the national level , with some success , but these have generally been relatively modest efforts .

consequently , the flexibility provisions of recent federal laws , and with them the equity provisions that attempt to return to each state the taxes paid by its highway users into the highway account of the highway trust fund , have largely left it to the states , and in some cases metropolitan planning organizations , to decide funding priorities .

the extent to which congress decides congestion is a national problem to be solved by federal dictates , and funding may be a major issue in reauthorization .

congress may decide its current "bottom - up" approach to planning and programming transportation improvements , with some modifications , is the best approach to congestion in the broader scheme of transportation priorities .

conversely , congress may decide that congestion warrants a stronger role for the federal government .

three broad elements of the issue are discussed here: overall levels of transportation spending , the prioritization of transportation spending , and congestion pricing and other alternative rationing schemes that require limited government spending .

although congestion is being experienced throughout the transportation system , including at ports and airports , this report is limited to a discussion of congestion associated with the surface transportation system — highways , public transit , and freight and passenger rail .

because these modes connect with ports and airports , there is some discussion of intermodal issues at these nodes as well , but the report does not discuss congestion in the waterway or airway systems per se .

this report begins by outlining in broad terms some of the issues that congress may face in the reauthorization debate .

this is followed by a brief history of transportation congestion in the united states , and how congress has dealt with the issue in the recent past .

it then goes on to discuss transportation congestion concepts , measures , and trends , followed by information on the national costs of congestion .

the final section lays out some of the major types of congestion remedies that have been proposed by transportation engineers , planners , and policy makers .

most experts agree that surface transportation congestion has grown over the past few decades and , moreover , that the demand for surface transportation services is likely to continue growing over the next few decades .

according to one national assessment of highway congestion by the texas transportation institute ( tti ) , total delay in 437 urban areas increased five - fold between 1982 and 2005 , and delay per peak - period traveler almost tripled .

anecdotal evidence suggests that overcrowding is a growing problem in some major transit systems and that conflicts between freight and passenger rail trains ( commuter and intercity ) are an issue for both .

in the freight rail industry , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) notes that average speeds , one indicator of congestion , are lower now than at anytime since the early 1980s except for the 1997-1998 period following the merger of union pacific and southern pacific .

with dramatic increases in foreign trade , many fear that ports and border crossings have become significant bottlenecks to the flow of commerce .

despite these trends , the question remains as to whether or not congestion is a national problem and , therefore , should be a specific goal of national transportation policy .

although congestion has intensified and spread , congestion is geographically concentrated in major metropolitan areas , at international trade gateways , and on some intercity trade routes .

because of this geographical concentration , most states and localities do not suffer any appreciable transportation congestion directly .

moreover , some argue that even in places with relatively intense congestion problems , it only adds a few extra minutes to daily travel and that many actually enjoy the extra time alone in the car away from the pressures of work and family .

seen in terms of an entire trip , including the time it takes to park and walk to the office , one expert believes the extra time caused by freeway delay is relatively minor .

some even go so far as to suggest that much like a crowded restaurant or nightclub , congestion is a sign of success and its costs must be balanced against the benefits of access to jobs , stores , recreational amenities , etc .

that congested regions provide .

environmental organizations generally argue that road traffic congestion results from an unbalanced transportation system , one that favors cars and trucks , and that urban sprawl , air pollution , and noise , not road traffic congestion per se , should be the focus of national policy .

the alternative view is that transportation congestion is a major problem , national in scope , and , if unchecked , a problem that will intensify and spread over the next 25 years .

many experts point out that although congestion may be highly localized , because transportation is a network that serves the u.s. population in a variety of ways , its economic effects are national .

most obviously , freight movement is largely dependent on a national transportation network in which a bottleneck in one place , such as southern california , may affect businesses and consumers in largely congestion - free nebraska .

moreover , these experts point out the national network effects are becoming increasingly important as supply chains lengthen and become more complex .

similarly , although passenger transportation is mostly a local affair , congestion on roads that service airports and other passenger terminals may also result in inefficient intercity passenger travel , dragging down the productivity of businesses that rely on it for managing far - flung operations .

local congestion may also be thought of as a national issue in that the places where it is found tend to be the hubs of the national economy and its costs , therefore , are not inconsequential in terms of the national economy .

for instance , the 28 metropolitan areas that experienced 40 hours or more of annual delay per peak - period traveler ( as measured in 2005 by tti ) account for more than 45% of total personal income in the united states ( in 2005 ) .

most businesses rely , to one degree or another , on the efficient transportation of people locally , whether it is the transportation of managers to business meetings , workers to work , or customers to places where products are consumed .

research has shown that metropolitan areas with the largest labor markets tend to have the highest productivity .

consequently , when added together , the local costs of congestion , some argue , are significant in national terms .

another commonly expressed view is that given current trends in the supply and demand for transportation the problems of congestion will affect more people and more businesses in the future .

road traffic congestion , for instance , is growing fastest in the smaller urban areas included in the tti study , though admittedly from a small base .

however , research by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) shows a wider problem when it projects future demand on the current highway system .

underlying these trends are broader trends in population and the economy .

for example , the population is expected to reach 364 million by 2030 , an increase of about 20% from 2007 .

over the same period , the cbo projects gdp to increase by about 70% ( in real terms ) .

furthermore , the fhwa predicts that freight movements will nearly double between 2002 and 2035 .

the federal surface transportation program approach to congestion tends to view it as a state and local issue , not as a major national problem .

at least as far back as passage of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act ( istea ) of 1991 ( p.l .

102-240 ) , congress has tended to leave to the discretion of the states , within certain planning parameters , the relative weight to be placed on congestion mitigation vis - à - vis other transportation priorities .

in this regard , many argue that governments and other stakeholders closest to transportation problems are in the best position to craft solutions .

another issue since the 1980s , with the near completion of the interstate system , has been the controversy regarding state payments to and from the highway trust fund ( htf ) , known as the "donor - donee" debate .

this debate focuses on the perceived fairness of the relative size of each state's payments to and receipts from the highway account of the highway trust fund .

increasingly over the years , federal law has attempted to equalize these amounts rather than concentrate funding where needs are greatest .

several new federal programs to tackle congestion nationally have been developed , but , in dollar terms , these have been relatively modest .

because state and local funding flexibility has been a significant feature of federal transportation policy since istea , congress may decide to continue with this approach in reauthorization .

states and localities that suffer major transportation congestion would be free to devote federal and local resources to congestion mitigation if they wish .

similarly , congestion - free locales would be able to focus on other transportation - related problems , such as connectivity , system access , safety , and economic development .

alternatively , congress may want to take a less flexible and , in other ways , more aggressive approach to congestion mitigation .

three basic elements to the problem that congress may want to consider are ( 1 ) the overall level of transportation spending , ( 2 ) the prioritization of transportation spending , and ( 3 ) congestion pricing and other alternative ways to ration transportation resources .

in line with the rapid growth of motor vehicle ownership and travel , federal surface transportation policy for most of the 20 th century focused on road connectivity and capacity , particularly with a view to providing basic access in rural areas and then intercounty and interstate roads .

urban road traffic congestion warranted a certain amount of attention in the early federal - aid highway acts , including the federal - aid highway act of 1956 .

federal transit funding , beginning in the 1960s , was also partly predicated on the argument that it would relieve road traffic congestion .

as the interstate building program neared completion in the 1980s and road traffic congestion was growing apace , federal policy makers began a fundamental reassessment of surface transportation policy .

the result was the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) , p.l .

102-240 .

transportation congestion exists when demand for a transportation facility or vehicle is greater than its capacity and the excess demand causes a significant drop in service quality , such as speed , cost , and comfort , depending on the mode and specific situation .

for example , when too many drivers compete for road space , the result is usually a significant drop in traffic speed but also higher vehicle operating costs and , with bumper - to - bumper , stop - and - go conditions , an increase in driver stress .

in freight railroad transportation , train speeds may suffer when demand begins to reach capacity , and because shippers directly pay for access to rail infrastructure , higher rates theoretically may be another indicator of congestion .

depending on the situation , congestion in public transit may result in vehicle overcrowding — possibly resulting in service denial and reduced passenger comfort — slower vehicle speeds , and higher peak - period fares .

from the viewpoint of a multi - modal passenger trip or freight shipment , the possibility for congestion exists not only within each mode but also in the connections between modes .

poor or overstretched intermodal connections are another part of the transportation system that may damage service quality .

moreover , inefficient intermodal connections may cause problems within a mode as unexpected delays interfere with other trips and shipments farther down the line .

for example , a delayed ship - to - truck transfer in a major metropolitan area may result in the truck traveling during peak - period traffic .

ideally , transportation congestion should be defined and measured from the perspective of the end user — a traveler or a freight shipment .

congestion , therefore , could be measured by the extent to which excess demand slows or otherwise harms a passenger trip or freight shipment from the origin to the destination .

in some situations , such as the transportation of packages by an express carrier , such as ups and fedex , it may be possible for the carrier to collect data and monitor movements for business purposes .

however , in most situations , for public policy purposes , because measuring trips from origin to destination is difficult to accomplish in a large scale and meaningful way , measures of congestion typically focus on service problems within a mode .

moreover , within each mode , many measures of congestion are limited to a specific transportation facility .

this is especially the case in highway transportation .

for example , highway engineers typically refer to speed or level of service ( los ) on a particular road segment .

measurements on these segments are then sometimes aggregated to develop systemwide measures of highway congestion .

mode - specific and facility - specific measures of congestion are not wholly satisfactory indicators of capacity problems in transportation service because they fail to measure aggregate impacts across the whole system .

on the other hand , some transportation experts have noted that the focus on facility congestion instead of the effect of congestion on passenger and freight trips may also overstate its importance .

for instance , freeway congestion may not be as bad as it seems if seen in the context of an entire automobile commute trip , including the time it takes to park and walk to the office .

similarly , it might be true that the effect of freight bottlenecks might not be as bad as is generally believed if seen from the perspective of the entire supply chain .

whether facility - based or trip - based , another criticism of transportation - based congestion measures is that they ignore the land - use context within which travel is taking place .

in transportation planning parlance , they measure mobility but not accessibility .

accessibility explains the seeming paradox of why the most congested places are also the most economically vibrant , even when the congestion is long lived .

manhattan , for example , may be one of the most congested places on earth , but it also provides access to an enormous number of opportunities in terms of homes , jobs , retail outlets , restaurants , recreation , etc .

a study of accessibility in minneapolis , mn , for example , found that while traffic congestion more than doubled between 1990 and 2000 ( measured in annual delay per person ) , access to opportunities by car , in this case the number of jobs , increased more quickly .

seen from this perspective , the performance of the transportation system , in concert with land - use , actually improved in the 1990s rather than deteriorated , as congestion data alone would suggest .

unfortunately , as it stands today , national data do not exist to examine the effects of congestion on accessibility as opposed to mobility .

nor do we have the means to examine the effects of congestion on passenger trips and freight shipments from end - to - end , including the efficiency of intermodal connections .

the transportation congestion measures employed in most instances , including in this report , are both facility - and modally - based , with the inadequacies this entails .

several measures of congestion , particularly in freight rail and public transit , are gross indicators of capacity utilization using aggregate measures across the whole system .

moreover , no measures of intermodal terminal congestion per se exist .

the measures of congestion presented here , nonetheless , represent the best available information today using publicly available data .

the negative effects of transportation congestion are primarily economic .

transportation congestion , particularly road traffic congestion , also causes a good deal of stress in some of those that experience it , as well as a certain amount of environmental damage because of the extra fuel that is used .

congestion may also have a negative effect on road traffic safety , although it is not clear from the available evidence if the damage done as a result of slowing or stopped vehicles outweighs the reduction in crash severity due to lower speeds .

however , the main effects are an increase in direct user costs , particularly the extra time and fuel expended , and a number of economic distortions that decrease productivity and hurt competitiveness .

most of the available evidence on the costs associated with transportation congestion is limited to the effects of road traffic congestion .

little is known about the national costs associated with rail , transit , and intermodal congestion .

hence , if accurate , existing estimates focusing exclusively on the costs of road traffic congestion understate the total cost of transportation congestion to the national economy .

it must also be borne in mind that estimates of the cost of congestion are based on assumptions that are somewhat arbitrary .

time , an important variable in transportation evaluation studies , can be especially hard to value .

the direct user costs of road traffic congestion are the extra time and fuel expended to complete a trip .

in its study of 437 cities , tti estimates that drivers lost 4.2 billion hours to road traffic congestion and wasted an extra 2.9 billion gallons of fuel , at a cost of $78.2 billion .

most of the cost is due to the time lost by travelers .

per traveler , the cost is $710 annually or approximately $3 per work day .

in inflation - adjusted terms , the cost of congestion has risen from $14.9 billion in 1982 ( in constant 2005 dollars ) .

these estimates , however , do not include the cost of unreliability , in that travelers will often budget extra time to make sure they arrive on time , even if it means arriving early .

in addition to direct user costs , there are at least three other types of economic costs associated with congestion : logistics costs — the extra costs associated with businesses having to carry extra inventory as a result of slower and more unreliable transportation .

market scale and accessibility costs — as congestion reduces the area that can be served by a production facility , the reduced demand results in higher unit costs because of lower - scale efficiencies and lower access to specialized inputs .

business cost of worker commuting — the costs associated with attracting and retaining workers and compensating them for higher commuting costs .

there may also be lower labor productivity resulting from the stress of longer or more unreliable commutes .

although not quantified , congestion in other modes also has costs .

as demand for space on the rail system increases , rates may begin to rise , increasing shipper costs .

in addition , railroads have been keen to accommodate generally more lucrative intermodal shipments over bulk shipments .

this is beginning to create significant problems for the movement of bulk shippers in some markets at certain times , as they often have no alternative to moving their goods by rail .

congestion on the rail system may also force more freight to move by truck .

some contend that there are a number of public benefits associated with moving freight by rail , such as less air pollution per ton - mile of freight than trucking .

similarly , congestion and overcrowding in passenger rail transportation and public transportation may divert travelers to other modes .

in urban areas , congested transit service may lead to more single - occupant driving during the peak period , causing more road congestion .

likewise , congested intercity rail transportation might shift a few travelers onto the roads , although it may shift them to intercity buses or airplanes , depending on the situation .

it is commonplace these days to attempt to quantify the costs of congestion and add them together to arrive at a total cost of congestion to the economy , sometimes expressed as a share of gdp .

this approach is particularly common in accounting for the costs of road traffic congestion , as tti does in terms of extra time and fuel , and other researchers have attempted to calculate more comprehensively .

there are , however , some problems with this approach .

these cost estimates are often based on the premise of "free - flowing traffic," which , as discussed above , tends to exaggerate the amount of congestion experienced .

furthermore , total cost estimates suggest that there is a monetary windfall waiting to be distributed to every household , when in reality , eliminating congestion , if it were possible , would only save most travelers a few minutes on peak - period trips .

consequently , a number of experts question the calculation of total costs and suggest that what matters in practical terms is the change in the cost of congestion brought about by a specific feasible projects or act of policy.... as economists would say , we need to change our thinking from total costs to marginal costs .

transportation engineers and planners have devised a large number of potential remedies for congestion .

although it is beyond the scope of this report to evaluate all of these , it is worthwhile discussing some of the major remedies as a basic guide for policy makers .

the many different remedies form three basic strategies for reducing congestion: adding new capacity , operating the existing capacity more efficiently , and managing demand .

this section discusses these strategies and the institutional issues that affect the implementation of congestion remedies .

this is followed by a discussion of rail congestion remedies and intermodalism in freight transportation .

like a number of other public policy issues , transportation congestion can be viewed as a collection of interrelated problems with severe constraints set in a context of continual change .

these types of issues , sometimes called "wicked problems" in some , mostly non - transportation , public policy circles , often seem intractable and typically engender a good deal of frustration that nothing is being done or that what is being done is ineffectual at best or counterproductive at worst .

among other things , these types of problems typically have other characteristics such as no definitive definition ; a wide variety of potential solutions , but intense disagreements about the preferred ones and about what constitutes success ; and , because of intended and unintended consequences , a situation where each solution tends to modify the problem in such a way as to make it manifest in a different form or in a different time or place .

when tackling these types of problems , public policy experts advise that the traditional linear approach , in which data are gathered , analyzed , and a solution formulated and implemented , is not workable .

by contrast , they suggest that "solving" wicked problems is usually an ongoing , complex , and chaotic struggle that often requires incorporating multiple viewpoints and approaches at once .

moreover , these experts note that when working on solutions , policy makers and planners often encounter new dimensions of the problem and , therefore , they must be creative and opportunity - driven .

in terms of transportation congestion , this suggests a few key ideas for policy makers to keep in mind as solutions to this problem are crafted and pursued in the future .

to begin with , there is no one solution that will ever fully solve transportation congestion and that , paradoxically , fully solving the problem may be undesirable because congestion can be a good problem to have in some circumstances and may also be a choice about how to distribute scarce resources .

another key idea is that each solution applied to a dimension of transportation congestion might create other unintended problems along other dimensions that require new creative solutions .

as such , multiple , iterative strategies likely will be needed , including supply - side and demand - side approaches ; approaches that focus on passenger systems and those that focus on freight , highway strategies , and transit strategies ; and those that promise short - term results and some that promise improvement in the long - term .

possibly and most importantly , policy makers and planners should consider that the ultimate goal may not be to reduce or eliminate transportation congestion per se , but to focus instead on improving passenger and freight mobility and accessibility .

