the united states and the other 153 members of the world trade organization ( wto ) have been engaged in a set or "round" of negotiations called the doha development agenda ( dda ) since december 2001 .

the dda's main objective is to refine and expand the rules by which wto members conduct foreign trade with one another .

a critical element of the dda round is the negotiations pertaining to foreign trade in services .

trade in services has been covered under multilateral rules only since 1995 with the entry into force of the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) and the uruguay round agreements creating the wto .

the u.s. services sector is among the world's most advanced , efficient and open , especially in such areas as financial services and telecommunication services .

services are a significant part of the u.s. economy and the source of most u.s. employment .

such is the case also with many other economically advanced countries .

for many years , many in congress and successive administrations have been pressing to make trade liberalization in services a priority in multilateral trade negotiations and a priority in the current round .

in so doing , the united states has sought trade opportunities especially in developing countries for a competitive sector of the u.s. economy .

the u.s. business community considers the dda negotiations in services critical to providing predictability in global markets for services .

furthermore , the outcome of the services negotiations likely will have a significant impact on the credibility of the gats , which remains a fledgling system of rules .

if the negotiations fail , it would be considered by many observers a setback for u.s. trade policy .

congress would have to pass implementing legislation in order for any agreement on services ( or for any agreement reached during the dda ) to become part of u.s. obligations under the wto .

however , before the agreement stage , congress plays a consultative role during the negotiations as required by the legislation granting the president the fast track trade negotiating authority .

under this authority , the president can negotiate trade agreements that would be handled under expedited congressional procedures ( limited debate and no amendments ) .

through consultation , members can try to ensure that the administration fulfills negotiating objectives as set out in trade law and is otherwise protecting u.s. economic interests as the congress perceives them .

the current trade promotion expired on july 1 , 2007 , and will have to be renewed before any dda agreement would receive expedited congressional consideration .

many members of congress consider the services negotiations to be a critical part , if not the most critical part of the dda round .

these members require strong commitments from u.s. trading partners to remove barriers in trade in services as part of an overall trade agreement they could support .

this report is designed to assist the 112 th congress to understand and monitor progress of the negotiations and the major issues that the negotiators are addressing .

the report provides a brief background section on the significance of services to the u.s. economy .

it then explains briefly the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) and the structure and agenda of the services negotiations in the dda round , including u.s. objectives in the negotiations .

the report concludes with a status report on the negotiations and an examination of potential results .

"services" encompass an ever - widening range of economic activities .

according to one definition , services are a diverse group of economic activities not directly associated with the manufacture of goods , mining or agriculture .

they typically involve the provision of human value - added in the form of labor , advice , managerial skill , entertainment , training , intermediation , and the like .

services differ from manufactured goods in that they are intangible , cannot be stored and must be consumed at the point of production ( trips to the doctor , enjoying a meal at the restaurant ) .

however , rapid changes in technology are reducing even these restrictions on services ( computer software that can be stored online , on disks , tape , etc .

 ; accounting services that are provided via the internet ) .

illustrative examples of services include wholesale and retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; banking and insurance ; professional , scientific , and technical services ; education ; arts and entertainment ; health care and social assistance ; food and accommodation services ; construction ; communication ; and public administration .

services are an increasingly significant sector of the u.s. economy .

in 2010 , the service sector accounted for 83% of u.s. nonagricultural payroll jobs , for 65% of u.s. gdp ( up from 55% in 1976 ) .

many services have not only intrinsic value but are also critical to running other parts of large economies .

for example , financial services ( banking , investment , insurance ) are the means by which capital flows throughout an economy from those who have it ( savers , investors ) to those who need it ( borrowers ) .

financial services are often called the lifeblood of an economy .

delivery services are critical to ensuring that intermediate production goods and final end - user goods are available when needed .

distribution services ( retail and wholesale services ) provide the means by which goods are made available to consumers .

inefficiencies in any of these industries could have adverse consequences for the whole economy .

u.s. trade in services , as customarily measured , plays an important role in overall u.s. trade , albeit , a much smaller role than trade in goods .

in 2010 services accounted for 30% of total u.s. exports of goods and services and 17% of total u.s. imports of goods and services .

because most services require direct contact between supplier and consumer , many service providers prefer to establish or must establish a presence in the country of the consumer .

for example , hotel and restaurant services require a presence in the country of the consumer .

providers of legal , accounting , and construction services prefer a direct presence because they need access to expert knowledge of the laws and regulations of the country in which they are doing business and they require proximity to clients .

thus , cross - border services trade data do not capture all of the trade in services .

data on sales of services by foreign affiliates of u.s. - owned companies and by u.s. affiliates of foreign - owned firms help to provide a more accurate , albeit still incomplete , measurement of trade in services .

in 2008 ( the latest year for which published data are available ) , u.s. firms sold $1,137 billion in services to foreigners through their majority - owned foreign affiliates ( compared to $518 billion in u.s. cross - border exports ) .

foreign firms sold u.s. residents $727 billion in services through their majority - owned foreign affiliates located in the united states ( compared to $366 billion in cross - border imports ) .

even these two sets of figures do not capture the total value of trade in services .

two other modes of services delivery are through the temporary movement of consumers to the location of the provider and the temporary movement of the provider to the location of the consumer .

u.s. data on the sales of services via these two modes of delivery are not readily available .

the seeds for multilateral negotiations in services trade were planted more than a quarter century ago .

in the trade act of 1974 , the congress instructed the administration to promote an agreement on trade in services under the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) during the tokyo round negotiations .

the tokyo round concluded in 1979 without a services agreement , but the industrialized countries , led by the united states , continued to press for its inclusion in later negotiations .

by contrast , developing countries , whose service sectors are less advanced than those of the industrialized countries , were reluctant to have services covered by international trade rules .

eventually services were included as part of the uruguay round negotiations launched in 1986 .

during the uruguay round , gatt members agreed to a new set of rules for services , the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) , and a new agency , the world trade organization ( wto ) , to administer the gats , the gatt , and the other uruguay round agreements , known as the marrakesh agreement .

trade scholar geza feketekuty identifies three main challenges to constructing rules for international trade in services: ( 1 ) to target the rules at domestic regulations that are the primary sources of barriers to trade in services ; ( 2 ) to distinguish the legitimate use of regulations to protect the health and safety of residents from the use of regulations to protect domestic service providers from competition ; and ( 3 ) to take into account that most services transactions take place behind customs borders rather than at customs border ( as in the case of like goods trade ) .

in addition to these , one might identify a fourth challenge: technology advances , such as the introduction of the internet , make once non - tradable services , for example consulting , tradable and also have led to the rapid introduction of services products that can be "outsourced" across borders .

all of these challenges suggest a set of rules sufficiently flexible to meet them yet sufficiently rigid to provide meaningful discipline to wto members' activities .

the negotiations on services in the dda have two fundamental objectives .

one objective is to reform the current gats rules and principles .

the second objective is for each member country to refine and expand its schedule of commitments to increase the number of service sectors to be covered and to reduce the limitations on national treatment and market access .

this section examines the evolution of the current negotiations , their structure , and their status .

it also discusses u.s. goals and those of other major trading partners and groups of members .

the wto services negotiations have been going on for more than five years .

however , as with the negotiations in agriculture and non - agriculture market access that have proceeded slowly with missed deadlines and disappointing results .

in july 2006 , wto director - general pascal lamy suspended the entire dda negotiations , including the services negotiations , because member countries could not agree on fundamental modalities for the negotiations in agriculture trade .

he resumed the negotiations in 2007 , continuing to the present .

negotiators from major groups of developed and developing countries worked to nail down the basic elements of a draft text ; however , they failed so far to reach a consensus on the basic negotiating objectives .

this section reviews the main objectives of the united states and of chief trading partners and examines some of the critical issues that have emerged during the negotiations .

there is a general consensus that after more than 10 years the services negotiations have not progressed very far .

one assessment for world bank concluded the offers that many wto members , especially the developing countries , have changed little from the commitments that they made under the uruguay round and do not reflect the actual levels of openness of their services market .

the study indicates that the best offers made to date are , on average , 1.9 times more restrictive than the actual policies .

in other words , wto members have refused to even lock in ( bind ) the trade in services they have in place but instead want to have the option of applying more restrictions on trade in services without violating wto commitments .

the prospects of the negotiations were set back when wto director - general pascal lamy suspended the dda , including the services negotiations , indefinitely on july 24 , 2006 , after a meeting of the g - 6 wto members , consisting of the united states , the european union , japan , australia , brazil , and india , failed to agree on the basic conditions or modalities , for conducting the agriculture and nama negotiations .

although the negotiations resumed in 2007 , progress on the services negotiations remains sluggish at best .

even before the suspension , the services negotiations had not been going well .

several possible reasons can be cited for the lack of progress .

one is the division between developed countries that have advanced services sectors employing highly skilled labor and the developing countries with less - developed services industries .

the former group seeks market opportunities for its services providers and is more willing to open its markets to competition .

the latter group is more protective of its domestic services providers .

the halting progress in the agriculture and nama negotiations in the dda has been a major impediment to the services negotiations .

some developing countries have asserted that they will not improve their offers until the united states and the european union commit to reduce their agriculture subsidies .

the developed countries want commitments from developing countries to reduce the "water" in their commitments , that is , the difference between the liberalization they have agreed to ( bound ) and their actual level of market liberalization .

a third reason could be the complexity of the agenda of the services negotiations and the number of players involved .

"services" includes a broad range of economic activities many with few characteristics in common except that they are not goods .

the trade barriers exporters face differ across services sectors making the formulation of trade rules a significant challenge .

furthermore , services negotiations include many participants .

in addition to trade ministers , they include representatives of regulatory agencies many of whom do not consider trade liberalization a primary part of their mission .

the prospects for the negotiations are difficult to evaluate at this point .

it is not unusual for negotiations to lag as participants wait to place their best negotiating positions on the table until just before crucial deadlines are reached .

several factors will determine if and when the services negotiations will be completed .

one factor is the political will the wto members can muster to overcome the obstacles that plague the negotiations .

another factor is the extent the various participants are willing to compromise on goals in order to reach agreements .

and a third factor is how quickly the issues in agriculture and non - agriculture market access are resolved ; the sooner they are resolved the sooner negotiators can devote their full attention to the services negotiations .

from december 13-18 , 2005 , wto trade ministers held the sixth wto ministerial in hong kong .

the trade ministers were expected to emerge from meeting with modalities that would accelerate the dda negotiations to their conclusion by the end of 2006 .

in the hong kong ministerial declaration , wto members reaffirmed their commitment to complete the services negotiations with special consideration given to the needs of developing and the least developed countries .

annex c to the declaration provides modalities and parameters for completing the negotiations .

in september 2007 , the chairman of the trade in services negotiations began a process to develop a draft text of an agreement and called on member - country negotiators to submit contributions .

however , by the end of 2007 , it was clear that the countries were still sharply divided on basic objectives .

developed countries , including the united states , have argued for member - countries at a minimum to commit to binding their current practices on trade in services .

developing countries , including argentina , argued against such benchmarks and resisted making additional commitments until developed countries commit to greater reductions of subsidies for agriculture .

in july 2008 , wto general director lamy called a ministerial meeting in geneva to again try to hammer out the modalities for the agriculture and nama negotiations .

on july 26 , 2008 , a "signaling" conference was held with 32 representatives , including the united states and two representing the eu .

the conference was designed to ascertain where participants stood in terms of the offers they were willing to make and the expectation they have of their trading partners .

while the conference did bring to light some areas of possible commitment , it did little to move the negotiations ahead .

in 2009 , the wto members held "cluster" meetings to try to provide some momentum with limited results .

there was little accomplished in the services negotiations in 2010 , in part because they remained hostage to the agriculture and nama and negotiations , but also because many of the participants were reluctant to go beyond current levels of liberalization .

in a written question submitted to michael punke as part of his confirmation hearing to become deputy ustr , ranking member of senate finance committee senator charles grassley said , "the doha services negotiations are bogged down .

you'll need a strong services package if you want my support for an agreement. .

