family and work structure most americans' lives .

work provides the principal means by which most families support themselves , and public policies directed at low - income families with children have generally attempted to encourage and support work .

family structure also has become a focus of public policy since an increasing number of children live with a single parent , and poverty rates for such children are much higher than for those in married - couple families .

families with children , regardless of marital status , are at risk of poverty ; child poverty rates are higher than those for the aged or nonaged adults .

moreover , research has shown that poverty has negative consequences on a child's development , which could affect the child's life chances as an adult .

under the definition of nuclear family poverty used throughout much of this report , in 2004 , an estimated 6.8 million families with children were poor , accounting for 17.1% of nuclear families , or family units composed of just parents and their dependent children .

in all , we estimate there were approximately 39.7 million nuclear family units with children in 2004 .

most of these families ( 31.6 million , or 80% ) live in independent households , with no other family members or other unrelated household members .

under the official census bureau poverty definition , taking other family members into account , both in terms of their income and needs , reduces the number of poor families with children to an estimated 5.9 million , and their poverty rate to 14.9% .

figure 1 shows families with children by their incomes , relative to the poverty line .

the lines represent the cumulative percentage of families with children with incomes below a specified level , by family type .

the labeled brackets in the figure indicate the range at which families are considered poor ( below 100% of poverty ) , poor or near poor ( below 125% of poverty ) , economically fragile ( below 150% of poverty ) , or low - income ( below 200% of poverty ) .

the line for all families shows that 17.1% of families with children have nuclear family incomes below 100% of poverty .

about one - fifth of all families with children ( 21.5% ) were either poor or near poor ( with incomes below 125% of poverty ) ; and well over one - third ( 36.4% ) were low - income ( i.e. , had incomes below twice the poverty line ) .

most children live in families headed by either a married couple or a single mother .

it is well known that the likelihood that a child will be impoverished depends greatly on which of these two family types he or she lives in .

in 2004 , just over two - fifths ( 41.8% ) of nuclear families with children headed by a single mother were poor , while only 7.1% of families with children headed by a married couple were poor .

over two - thirds of mother - only families ( 68.8% ) had incomes below twice the poverty line , while just over one - fifth of married - couple families with children ( 22.5% ) fell within this low - income category .

though the likelihood that a family with children will be poor is much greater for those headed by a single mother than those headed by a married couple , married couples with children account for a nontrivial share of poor and low - income families with children .

figure 2 shows that , in 2004 , more than one - in - four poor families with children ( 27.8% ) were headed by a married couple , while married couples accounted for more than four of every ten ( 41.8% ) low - income families with children .

being headed by a married couple is not sufficient for a family with children to escape poverty or low income status .

in 2004 , about 6 million ( 22.5% ) married - couple families with children were low - income , having incomes below twice the poverty line .

a worker's ability to support a family depends upon hourly wages earned , number of hours worked , and family size .

under the official u.s. poverty definition , the poverty income cutoffs , or thresholds by which families are considered to be poor , vary by family size and composition .

full - time , full - year work may not be sufficient , given the parent's wage rate , for a parent to support a family of a given size above poverty , or to secure a modest standard of living at an income level of twice the poverty line .

in the previous sections , we examined the relation of wages and job attachment to family earnings adequacy , as indicated by family income poverty thresholds .

we showed how the ability to support a family is closely related to parents' education and age .

some parent's earnings capacities based on their observed wage rates are too low to support a couple and a single child above poverty , let alone to attain a level of modest income security above twice the poverty line , even if the parent is able to work full - time , full - year .

families headed by a single parent are at a distinct economic disadvantage compared to married couples , in part due to the unavailability of potential added earnings that come when both parents work , but also due to the absence of a second caretaker who can help watch over children , thereby allowing the other parent to work .

adam smith opened the wealth of nations by noting that improvement in labor productivity stemmed from the effects of the division of labor .

smith also noted that different occupations resulting from the division of labor command different wages , with market and institutional forces combining to create these wage differentials .

thus , the division of labor provides the means to an affluent society , but also results in an unequal distribution of the rewards from work .

this report has identified several groups of families with children that are likely to be poor or low - income based on the work of their parents: families headed by a single mother .

given that wage rates of many parents' jobs would leave a family in low - income status , it often takes two parents working for a family's earnings to attain a modest income level , above the low - income threshold of 200% of poverty used in this report .

full - time work for many single parents may be difficult to attain , if safe , reliable and affordable child care is difficult to obtain .

obviously , then , single parent families are at high risk for low - income and poverty .

young families .

the principal earner of families headed by a parent under the age of 25 had median earnings of $11.06 per hour — a wage rate that would classify the three person benchmark family used in this analysis as low - income , but just slightly above the cut - off that would classify the family as economically fragile ( i.e. , 150% of poverty ) , based on full - time full - year work .

the low earnings of these young parents is a logical consequence of being at the beginning of their adult work careers and not yet having accumulated job experience that raises earnings capacity .

in young married - couple families , it may make little economic sense for both parents to work , as child care for young children may be expensive relative to additional earnings that might be obtained .

additionally , many families prefer that a parent stay home to care for and nurture their children , and a parent's labor force withdrawal may be voluntary and temporary .

low income and economic insecurity may be temporary during the early years of family formation , but have implications for family well - being and child development and outcomes , in years beyond .

families headed by a parent without a college degree .

families headed by a parent who lacked a high school degree were likely to be low - income .

median wage rates — even for high school graduates and those with some college , but no college degree — result in the benchmark three - person family being classified in the low - income category , by having earnings below 200% of poverty .

unlike low wage rates caused solely by a lack of job experience , the low - income status for families headed by a parent without a college degree might not be temporary .

social and economic behavior that is considered consistent with "personal responsibility" — such as marriage , work , and education — is not sufficient for a family with a child or children to escape low income .

rates of poverty and low income for single - parent families are higher than in married - couple families .

however , a non - trivial percentage of poor families with children — 28% — were headed by married couples .

wage rates are strongly related to educational status , but in 20% of poor families with children , the principal earner had a college degree .

moreover , even more affluent families with children may be considered economically vulnerable .

based on the earnings of both parents , 27% of married - couple families with children are low - income ; however , based solely on the earnings of the family's principal earner , 39% of such families would be low - income .

thus , the economic well - being of many married - couple families with children is vulnerable to the loss of earnings of the family's second earner .

further , there are reasons that some parents do not or cannot work full - time all year , such as involuntary unemployment , illness , or disability , or the need to take time off for the birth or care of a child or disabled family member .

this analysis has focused on the economic outcomes generated by the labor market .

government policy , of course , also has important implications for the economic well - being and security of families with children , although it will be only briefly mentioned in this report .

government policies that promote full employment while at the same time keeping inflation in check are clearly important to working families .

while a strong economy is necessary to promote family economic security , for many families it is not sufficient .

families may still face economic vulnerability , even when the economy is healthy .

table 3 presents a typology of selected existing government programs ( focusing on federal or federal - state programs ) and how they relate to the economic well - being and vulnerability of families with children .

many of these programs face difficult tradeoffs and competing objectives — such as providing some measure of basic economic security while also promoting personal responsibility .

this is especially true of "safety net" programs that provide assistance to mitigate income loss caused by certain events , but result in inherent undesired behavioral effects , such as work disincentives and marriage penalties .

other policies and programs seek to mitigate the undesired outcomes often associated with safety - net programs , by increasing the financial returns associated with work or providing opportunities to reduce the intergenerational transmission of poverty .

policies to mitigate the risk of earnings loss .

these programs represent the basic two - tiered "safety net" of social insurance programs and need - tested programs .

the social insurance programs base benefits on past earnings , and entitlement to these benefits is earned through work in covered employment .

the caseload and expenditures of social insurance programs are far greater than those of the need - tested programs .

for families with children , the basic contours of the safety net were established in the social security act of 1935 , with the last major additions coming with establishment of medicaid ( 1965 ) , medicare for the disabled , including children ( 1972 ) , and food stamps , made available nationwide in the 1970s .

most recently , this safety net was affected by the welfare reform law of 1996 , which converted aid to families with dependent children , originally established in the 1965 social security act , into a block grant to states that provides time - limited and work - conditioned cash assistance to poor families with children .

policies to raise the financial returns to work .

these are policies to directly raise wages ( eg , minimum wage legislation ) , provide earnings supplements , or reduce the costs of going to work .

minimum wage legislation — like the social security act — dates back to the great depression .

however , the 1990s saw a great deal of expansion of policies in this category , including expansions of the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , which provides a "work bonus" to families with low to moderate earnings , and increased funding for child care , which helps offset the costs of going to work .

policies aimed at family formation .

there has been much recent attention paid to this class of policies .

tax policies , such as the deduction for dependents and the ( partially refundable ) child credit , benefit families based on their number of children .

these policies to some extent adjust families' tax burdens based on family size .

they may also mitigate , to an extent , the fact that employers consider a worker's assumed productivity when striking wage bargains , rather than the number of dependents a worker must support .

the role of cash welfare — cushioning economic hardship when one parent is absent , but thought by some to facilitate single - parenthood — has been controversial .

however , collections of child support for both welfare and non - welfare families , through the federal - state child support enforcement program , have increased dramatically since the mid - 1990s .

recent attention has been paid to so - called "marriage penalties" in the tax code , and very recently marriage promotion and education programs have been introduced .

meanwhile , family planning grants , authorized in 1970 , may have the effect of deferring child - bearing , while adolescent family life ( created in 1980 ) and abstinence education ( enacted in 1996 ) specifically focus on preventing pregnancy among teenagers .

policies aimed at preventing intergenerational transmission of poverty .

as briefly mentioned , poverty among families with children has special consequences , particularly since growing up poor might affect a child's life chances as an adult .

programs such as head start , and title i grants to local school districts for supplementary education and services for disadvantaged children , are intended to help poor children obtain the education needed to escape poverty as an adult .

appendix a .

family living arrangements — effects on income and poverty measurement this report has principally focused on parents and their children .

for this purpose , we focused on parents and their nuclear families as the primary units of analysis .

this approach diverges from that more commonly used , in which all related members of a household are considered a family ; in this report , we define such families as extended families .

additionally , individuals unrelated to nuclear or extended family members may also reside within a household .

figure a - 1 depicts families with children by their family / household living arrangements .

the figure shows , for example , that 91% of married couples with children live as independent nuclear family units , with no other extended family members or unrelated members residing in the household .

in contrast , only about 60% of lone - mother families and just 41% of families headed by lone fathers live as independent nuclear family households .

among married - couple families with children , about 8% live in households with extended family members .

in comparison , about one - quarter of lone - mother families and nearly an equal share of lone - father families live in households with extended family members .

in some of these extended family member households , other nonrelatives may also reside .

about 18% of lone - mother families and more than twice that share of lone - father families ( 41% ) reside in households with unrelated household members ( the top two tiers of each bar ) ; among lone - mother families , 15% live only with unrelated members , and a small fraction ( 3% ) also include extended family members in the household .

among lone - father families , 36% live only with unrelated members , and 5% also include extended family members in the household .

in this report , we considered at times only nuclear family members' income and needs when assessing family economic well - being .

in other instances , extended family members' income and needs were also included in the analysis .

as noted above , some nuclear and related extended families live in households with unrelated members as well .

however , the potential effect of unrelated household members' income and needs on nuclear or extended family well - being may vary to the extent that resources are shared among household members .

in some cases , unrelated household members , such as unmarried partners , may make significant economic contributions to the nuclear family co - residing in the household .

in other cases , the sharing of economic resources among unrelated household members may be minimal .

however , there is no clear means of determining the extent to which unrelated household members share income and represent a joint economic unit .

in this analysis , we excluded unrelated household members' income and needs when considering family economic well - being .

the effect of family living arrangements on poverty status can be illustrated by a closer examination of the families as economic units under various family configurations and income - sharing arrangements .

figure a - 2 illustrates the effects of family living arrangements and the treatment of income and needs on family economic well - being , relative to poverty .

the figure is for families headed by lone mothers .

the figure shows that overall , 41.8% of families headed by lone mothers are poor , if just their immediate nuclear family's needs and income are counted for purposes of determining poverty status .

however , if all related household members' income and needs are considered , the poverty rate of lone - mother families drops to 35% — the official census bureau poverty rate ( which considers all related family members as the economic unit for poverty determination ) .

if the economic unit is expanded to include all unrelated household members , the poverty rate for lone - mother families falls to 29.9% .

it should be noted , however , that for purposes of income and poverty determination , official census bureau statistics do not combine unrelated household members' income or needs .

it was shown earlier in this appendix that about 60% of lone - mother families live as independent nuclear family households , absent any extended related family members or unrelated household members .

among these families , an estimated 37% are poor .

their poverty status is the same under all three poverty definitions: poor based on nuclear family income ; poor based on extended family income ; and poor based on household income .

roughly 22% of lone - mother families live with other extended family members only .

among these families , an estimated 51% are poor based on their immediate family income .

however , when the income and needs of other related household members are taken into consideration , their poverty rate drops to about 23% — less than half the rate when only immediate nuclear family income was considered , and a rate below that of lone mothers who live as independent nuclear families ( 37% ) .

in part , the nuclear family poverty rate ( 51% ) of lone mothers in such living arrangements may be so high because they live with extended family members who help provide for their support ; this support is not counted in determining the 51% poverty rate but is evidenced by the 23% poverty rate .

if these lone mothers were living independently , their poverty rate might not be as high as 51% , but it also might not be as low as the 37% among lone mothers currently observed to be living independently ; some would likely work and earn more than they do when living with extended family , or would seek to qualify for government assistance in the absence of extended family income support .

the right - most set of clustered bars in figure a - 2 depict the poverty status of lone mothers living with only their children and at least one unrelated household member .

as noted above , about 15% of lone mothers live in such households .

when only her immediate nuclear family income and needs are taken into account , about 46% of these lone - mother families would be considered poor .

however , if all unrelated household members are considered and their income counted for purposes of determining poverty , the poverty rate among these lone - mother families falls to 14.8% — well below the poverty rate of lone mothers living independently in nuclear families with no extended or unrelated household members .

in these households with unrelated members , the extent to which household income is shared among members is uncertain .

crs estimates that about 1 million lone mothers , ( approximately 65% of 1.6 million lone - mother families living with unrelated household members ) may be in cohabiting relationships with a man .

in some cases , unmarried partners may share economic resources and responsibilities much in the same way as married couples do .

appendix b .

data table .

