traditionally accepted principles of international law state that the sovereign powers of a nation include the power to exclude alien persons and property .

however , in most cases , so as to be mutually beneficial to commerce , nations usually do not fully exercise this power of exclusion .

sometimes a nation writes the restraints into its domestic law .

for example , clause xxx of the magna carta has the following provision: all merchants , if they were not openly prohibited before , shall have their safe and sure conduct to depart out of england , to come into england , to tarry in , and go through england , as well by land as by water , to buy and sell without any manner of ( evil tolts ) by the old and rightful customers , except in time of war ; and if they be of a land making war against us , and be found in our realm at the beginning of the wars , they shall be attached without harm of body or goods , until it be known unto us , or our chief justice , how our merchants be entered therein the land making war against us ; and if our merchants be well entreated there , theirs shall be likewise with us .

treaties and other forms of bilateral and multicultural agreements have also restricted foreign persons and property .

for example , the greek city - states formed agreements which allowed the reciprocal entry of and ownership of property of foreigners from other contracting states .

the united states has through the years accepted both kinds of restraint .

the american colonies were formed to realize profits for their english and continental investors .

after the war of independence , the new government moved quickly to resolve the outstanding foreign claims so as to assure creditworthiness and to provide a favorable climate for foreign investment .

the jay treaty , for example , stated that the new united states government would compensate the british for any property which had been seized or destroyed and for unpaid debts caused by the revolution .

in his report on manufactures in 1791 , alexander hamilton urged the new nation to keep investment open to foreigners .

it is not impossible that there may be persons disposed to look with a jealous eye on the introduction of foreign capital , as if it were an instrument to deprive our own citizens of the profits of our own industry ; but , perhaps , there never could be a more unreasonable jealousy .

instead of being viewed as a rival , it ought to be considered as a most valuable auxiliary , conducing to put in motion a greater quantity of productive labor , and a greater portion of useful enterprise , than could exist without it .

hamilton's ideas prevailed .

during the 18 th and 19 th centuries , foreign capital contributed enormously to the nation's development .

as the nation grew , its roads , bridges , canals , banks , and finally railroads were largely financed by state bonds sold overseas .

the erie canal , the first american canal to achieve commercial success , was made possible by the first state bonds to be quoted on the london market , in 1817 .

europe was eager for investments such as these , and a group of anglo - american banking houses were established in london — led by baring brothers — which specialized in american finance .

they bought up entire issues for resale in england .

in their eagerness for foreign capital , american states and private enterprises sent their agents to europe .

generals and congressmen turned to bond selling.... by the middle of the 19 th century , foreigners held half of the federal and state and one - quarter of the municipal debts .

the 1849 california gold rush sparked even more foreign investment .

it is also interesting to note that american real estate was quite popular with foreign investors .

europeans acquired substantial holdings in such states as new york , maine , florida , west virginia , and iowa .

the state of texas granted an english company 3 million acres in payment for building the state capitol building in austin .

some of the titled europeans , including the german baron von richthofen and the british earl of dunraven , attempted to create baronial estates in the west .

at the turn of the century , with the invention of the automobile and the increasing importance of oil , foreign oil companies , such as royal dutch shell , began buying american properties .

however , world war i made a drastic change in the influx of foreign capital into the united states .

the creditor countries of europe sold many of their american holdings in order to supply their wartime needs .

in just a few years , the united states shifted from a debtor to a creditor nation , a position which it retained for a number of years .

throughout the nation's history , there has been criticism of foreign investment in the united states .

when the first and second banks of the united states were created in 1791 and 1816 , their organic statutes barred the election of aliens as directors .

the know - nothing party advocated discriminatory taxation of foreign capital as early as the 1850s .

the alien land law of 1887 prohibited aliens from owning land in federal territories .

during the 20 th century congress passed a number of statutes aimed at restricting foreign investment in certain industries such as shipping , aviation , and communications .

nevertheless , by the early 1970s foreign investment in the united states began to rise dramatically , and since then there has been frequent congressional debate as to whether there should be more restriction on investment by foreign citizens in american businesses .

federal constitutional provisions may be interpreted as legal validation of federal statutes restricting investments by foreigners ; other constitutional provisions have to be adhered to by the states in imposing additional restrictions on foreign investment .

the federal government is a government of limited powers .

there is no express constitutional provision permitting the regulation of foreign investment in the united states .

thus , other federal powers mentioned in the constitution must be looked at to justify such regulation .

three constitutional bases for such legislation are the federal powers over immigration and naturalization , the federal power to regulate interstate and foreign commerce , and the power to provide for the national defense .

congress has the exclusive power to establish naturalization and citizenship requirements and to admit and expel aliens .

that the government of the united states , through the action of the legislative department , can exclude aliens from its territory is a proposition which we do not think open to controversy .

jurisdiction over its own territory to that extent is an incident of every independent nation .

it is a part of its independence .

if it could not exclude aliens , it would be to that extent subject to the control of another power... .

the united states , in their relation to foreign countries and their subjects or citizens , are one nation , invested with powers which belong to independent nations , the exercise of which can be invoked for the maintenance of its absolute independence and security throughout its entire territory .

congress has also been held to have the power to regulate the conduct of alien residents and to prescribe the conditions for their admission and residency .

thus , it is arguable that congress can condition entry and residency of an alien upon his or her not acquiring investments in the united states .

although this might be an extreme condition to apply , no federal case appears to suggest limits to congress's ability to place substantive conditions upon entry and residency of aliens .

congress also has the exclusive power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states. .

the commerce clause would appear to give congress the power to restrict the use of instrumentalities of interstate commerce to transact the sale or exchange of property to a foreign citizen or to the representative of a foreign citizen .

finally , congress's power to "raise and support armies" would also appear to be a constitutional basis for restricting foreign investment in the united states .

if it is determined that foreign investments impair national preparedness in the event of an emergency , it appears that prohibition of foreign investments could on this basis be construed as constitutional .

further , it should be noted that the federal government has exclusive authority over foreign relations .

in the case zschernig v. miller , the supreme court held unconstitutional an oregon statute which provided for the escheat to the state of property which would otherwise pass to a nonresident alien unless the laws of the foreign nation had reciprocal rights for united states citizens .

the oregon statute required the local probate courts to inquire into: the type of governments that obtain in particular foreign nations — whether aliens under their law have enforceable rights , whether the so - called "rights" are merely dispensations turning upon the whim or caprice of government officials , whether the representation of consuls , ambassadors , and other representatives of foreign nations is credible or made in good faith , whether there is the actual administration in the particular foreign system of law any element of confiscation .

the court found the oregon statute to be unconstitutional because it infringed upon the exclusively federal authority over foreign relations .

on the other hand , it has been stated that: the imposition of any significant investment controls would likely violate both the spirit and the letter of more than forty bilateral treaties regulating trade and investment relations , many of which laws have been signed within the last ten years , as well as derogating our commitment to the oecd code of liberalization of capital movements .

the treaties mentioned in the above quotation are treaties of friendship , commerce , and navigation which grant foreign countries the right to enter , trade , invest , or establish and operate businesses in the other signatory country .

thus , any foreign investment statute would need to take into account those friendship , commerce , and navigation treaties to which the united states is a signatory .

further , treaties such as the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) among the united states , canada , and mexico provide for foreign investment opportunities .

chapter 11 of nafta requires each party to "accord to investors of another party treatment no less favorable than it accords , in like circumstances , to its own investors with respect to the establishment , acquisition , expansion , management , conduct , operation , and sale or other disposition of investments. .

other constitutional provisions may be interpreted to protect foreigners from certain acts of state and local governments .

because the due process and equal protection clauses of the fourteenth amendment to the united states constitution apply to persons instead of to citizens , these provisions guarantee that states cannot abridge the rights of foreign nationals within the united states .

the supreme court has in the past voided state laws which establish classifications in government actions solely on the basis of citizenship .

in doing so , the court has stated that a classification based solely upon citizenship or nationality is inherently suspect and subject to strict scrutiny .

for example , in graham v. richardson the court held that state laws which denied welfare benefits to resident aliens who had not resided in the united states for a required number of years were unconstitutional because they deprived these persons of equal protection of the laws .

under traditional equal protection principles , a state retains broad discretion to classify as long as its classification has a reasonable basis [citations omitted] .

this is so in "the area of economics and social welfare" [citations omitted] .

but the court's decisions have established that classifications based on alienage , like those based on nationality or race , are inherently suspect and subject to close judicial scrutiny .

aliens as a class are a prime example of a "discrete and insular" minority [citations omitted] for whom such heightened judicial solicitude is appropriate .

accordingly , it was said in takahashi , 334 u.s. at 420 , that "the power of a state to apply its laws exclusively to its alien inhabitants as a class is confined within narrow limits. .

as mentioned in the takahashi case in the above quotation , a state must be careful in applying state laws exclusively to aliens .

this case challenged a california statute which barred the issuance of commercial fishing licenses to persons ineligible for citizenship .

the supreme court held that this statute violated the fourteenth amendment's equal protection clause and the federal laws concerning citizenship .

citizenship has also been rejected as a legitimate classification concerning membership in a state bar , complete bans on employment of aliens in the state civil service system , and the granting of educational benefits to aliens .

yet , the supreme court has limited the application of these protections in other cases , one concerning a new york statute limiting appointment to the state police force to united states citizens , and another concerning a new york statute forbidding certification of a non - citizen as a public school teacher unless the person had evidenced intent to become a citizen .

therefore , there appears to be an exception to the general rule that a classification based on citizenship is subject to strict judicial scrutiny in situations where the classification relates to an essential governmental , political , or constitutional function .

in such situations the less strict , rational basis test may be applied .

from this discussion it may be concluded that state laws restricting investments by at least resident aliens may come under strict judicial scrutiny .

yet , it must be remembered that , in contrast to the states , the federal government has broad authority over naturalization and immigration .

for reasons long recognized as valid , the responsibility for regulating the relationship between the united states and our alien visitors has been committed to the political branches of the federal government .

since decisions in these matters may implicate our relations with foreign powers , and since a wide variety of classifications must be defined in the light of changing political and economic circumstances , such decisions are frequently of a character appropriate to either the legislature or the executive than to the judiciary .

the supreme court has held , for example , that aliens can be denied medicare coverage and that the federal government can deny a visa to a marxist invited to speak on world communism .

the power of congress to exclude aliens from the united states and to prescribe the terms and conditions on which they enter is virtually absolute and is an attribute of the sovereignty of the united states .

four major federal statutes which have an impact upon foreign investment in the united states are information - gathering and disclosure statutes , instead of actual restriction statutes .

one of these statutes is the international investment and trade in services survey act of 1976 .

congress intended this act: to provide clear and unambiguous authority for the president to collect information on international investment and united states foreign trade in services , whether directly or by affiliates , including related information necessary for assessing the impact of such investment and trade , to authorize the collection and use of information on direct investments owned or controlled directly or indirectly by foreign governments or persons , and to provide analyses of such information to the congress , the executive agencies , and the general public .

the president by executive order delegated responsibility under this act for studying direct investment to the commerce department and portfolio investment to the treasury department .

the act directs the president to conduct a benchmark survey of foreign direct investment in the united states every five years .

amendments to the act in 1990 direct the president to publish for the use of the general public and federal agencies periodic information concerning foreign investment , including information on ownership by foreign governments of united states affiliates of business enterprises the ownership or control of which by foreign persons is more than 50% of the voting securities or other evidence of ownership of these enterprises , as well as business enterprises the ownership or control of which by foreign persons is 50% or less of the voting securities or other evidence of ownership of these enterprises .

the 1990 amendments also provide that the president may request a report from the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) of the department of commerce of the best available information on the extent of foreign direct investment in a given industry .

another federal statute having an impact upon foreign investment in the united states is the foreign direct investment and international financial data improvements act of 1990 .

the purpose of this act is: to allow the department of commerce's bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) access to information collected by the bureau of the census ( census ) .

this access will improve the accuracy and analysis of bea's reports to the public and to congress on foreign direct investment in the united states .

this act , among other requirements , adds chapter 10 to title 13 of the united states code to provide that the bureau of the census shall exchange with the bureau of economic analysis of the department of commerce any information that is collected under the census provisions and under the international investment and trade in services survey act that pertains to a business enterprise operating in the united states if the secretary of commerce determines that the information is appropriate to augment and improve the quality of the data collected under the survey act .

the data improvements act of 1990 also requires that other reports be prepared by the secretary of commerce and the comptroller general and submitted to congressional committees .

the bureau of the census may provide business data to the bureau of economic analysis and the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) if the information is required for an authorized statistical purpose and the provision is the subject of a written agreement with that designated statistical agency or its successors .

the third of these information - gathering and disclosure statutes is the agricultural foreign investment disclosure act of 1978 .

this act has the following two major requirements: ( 1 ) any foreign person who acquires or transfers any interest , other than a security interest , in agricultural land must submit a report to the secretary of agriculture not later than 90 days after the date of the acquisition or transfer ; ( 2 ) any foreign person who holds any interest , other than a security interest , in agricultural land on the day before the effective date of this act must submit a report to the secretary of agriculture not later than 180 days after the effective date of the act .

the fourth statute is also a disclosure statute .

it is known as the domestic and foreign investment improved disclosure act of 1977 and is a requirement added to the foreign corrupt practices act of 1977 .

this provision amended section 13 ( d ) of the securities exchange act of 1934 to require that anyone who acquires 5% or more of the equity securities of a company registered with the securities and exchange commission must disclose certain specified information , including citizenship and residence .

hearings indicate that this statute is directed at foreign investors in order to improve the ability of the federal government to monitor foreign investment in the united states .

all of the statutes discussed above are information - gathering and disclosure in nature .

there are not across - the - board , blanket restrictions on foreign investment in the united states .

instead , over the years congress has believed that certain industries which could affect national security should have limits on foreign investment .

these industries include the maritime industry , the aircraft industry , banking , resources and power , and the various businesses which are parties to government contracts .

the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) is a multi - member board headed by the secretary of the treasury .

cfius may review any "covered transaction," defined as any merger , acquisition , or takeover by or with a foreign person which could result in foreign control of any person engaged in interstate commerce in the united states , for its possible impact upon national security .

factors to be considered in determining the impact upon national security are numerous and include domestic production needed for projected national defense requirements , the capability and capacity of domestic industries to meet national defense requirements , the control of domestic industries and commercial activity by foreign citizens as it affects the capability and capacity of the united states to meet the requirements of national security , and the potential effects of the proposed or pending transaction on united states international technological leadership in areas affecting united states national security .

if the committee determines that the acquiring party is an entity controlled by a foreign government , the committee shall conduct an investigation of the transaction as a national security investigation .

