on march 9 , 2009 , president barack obama signed executive order 13505 , "removing barriers to responsible scientific research involving human stem cells. .

the obama executive order permits the secretary of hhs through nih to "support and conduct responsible , scientifically worthy human stem cell research , including human embryonic stem cell research , to the extent permitted by law" and directed nih to review existing guidelines and "issue new nih guidance on such research" within 120 days of the date of the executive order .

the obama decision allows scientists to use federal funds for research using the many human embryonic stem cell lines that have been created since the bush 2001 policy .

the obama policy also eliminates the need to separate federally funded research from research conducted with private funds on cell lines that were previously ineligible for federal funding under the bush policy ; this often required building new but duplicative laboratories under the bush policy using funds that could have been spent on associated research .

draft nih guidelines were released on april 23 , 2009 .

final guidelines were issued on july 6 , 2009 .

the obama decision allows scientists to use federal funds for research on stem cell lines "that are posted on the new nih registry or they may establish eligibility by submitting an assurance of compliance" with the july 2009 guidelines .

president obama also issued a memorandum on scientific integrity directing the head of the white house office of science and technology policy "to develop a strategy for restoring scientific integrity to government decision making. .

shortly after the 2009 guidelines were issued , opponents of human embryonic stem cell research brought suit in federal court arguing that federal funding of such research was barred by the dickey amendment .

although federal funding of embryonic stem cell research was briefly enjoined by a preliminary injunction between august 23 and september 9 , 2010 , the united states court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit ultimately rejected that argument and allowed federal funding of human embryonic stem cell research to continue under the 2009 guidelines .

on january 7 , 2013 , the supreme court denied the plaintiffs' petition for review and let the d.c .

circuit's opinion stand .

the obama executive order revoked the bush administration presidential statement of august 9 , 2001 , limiting federal funding for research involving human embryonic stem cells , and executive order 13435 of june 20 , 2007 , "which supplements the august 9 , 2001 , statement on human embryonic stem cell research. .

president george w. bush had announced on august 9 , 2001 , that for the first time federal funds would be used to support research on human embryonic stem cells .

however , the bush decision limited funding to research on 21 stem cell lines that had been created prior to the date of the august 2001 policy announcement .

in contrast , as of january 8 , 2013 , a total of 200 stem cell lines are listed in the new nih stem cell registry .

legislation introduced but not passed in the 111 th and 112 th congresses would have codified the obama stem cell policy , preventing reversal by future administrations .

however , even if such legislation had been enacted , the use of federal funds for the derivation of new human embryonic stem cell lines would still not be permitted as long as the dickey amendment remains in effect .

the amendment states federal funds cannot be used for the creation of human embryos for research purposes or for research in which human embryos are destroyed .

this report provides background information on stem cell research and its potential applications as well as a history of federal policy decisions related to research on human embryos and stem cells .

most cells within an animal or human being are committed to fulfilling a single function within the body .

in contrast , stem cells are a unique and important set of cells that are not specialized .

stem cells retain the ability to become some of the more than 200 different cell types in the body , and thereby play a critical role in repairing organs and body tissues throughout life .

the term stem cells is often used in reference to these repair cells within an adult organism , but a more fundamental variety of stem cells is found in the early - stage embryo .

embryonic stem cells have the ability to become all the different types of cells found in the human body .

this section discusses background , history , and potential applications of stem cell research .

legislation introduced in the 111 th and 112 th congresses would have codified the obama stem cell policy and prevented reversal by future administrations .

in addition , the legislation would have banned funding for reproductive human cloning , and required that stem cell lines meet ethical guidelines established by the nih and that the guidelines be reviewed every three years .

there was no further action on such legislation during the 111 th congress or the 112 th congress .

the table below depicts action during the 109 th and 110 th congresses on human embryonic stem cell research legislation .

