the 109th congress is considering legislation to reauthorize and amend programs that werecreated or revised in the 1996 welfare reform law .

 ( 1 ) early in the 109th congress , the senate finance and health,education , labor , and pensions committees approved and reported their welfare reauthorizationlegislation ( respectively , s. 667 and s. 525 ) .

neither bill has yet seenaction in the full senate .

in the house , a welfare reauthorization proposal ( h.r .

240 ) , introduced by the houserepublican leadership , has also failed to reach the floor .

on november 18 , 2005 , the house passed its budget reconciliation bill ( s. 1932 ) , which includes welfare reauthorization legislation similar to that which passed the house in2002 and 2003 .

 ( the house - passed version of s. 1932 is h.r .

4241 asamended and approved by the house. ) .

welfare reauthorization legislation was not included in thesenate - passed reconciliation bill .

this report compares the welfare reauthorization policies proposed in the senate committeebills with those included in the house - passed budget reconciliation bill .

it is not a comparison ofwelfare provisions in the house and senate reconciliation bills .

 ( such a comparison , which displayshouse - passed welfare provisions with corresponding "no provision" entries for the senate - passedversion of reconciliation , is available from the congressional research service upon request. ) .

the original funding authority for the block grant of temporary assistance for needyfamilies ( tanf ) , the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) , abstinence education,and transitional medical assistance ( tma ) under medicaid expired on september 30 , 2002 .

fundingand program authority for tanf , mandatory child care , abstinence education , and tma have beencontinued by special temporary extension legislation since then , with the latest extension set toexpire on december 31 , 2005 .

ccdbg discretionary funding has been provided , absentauthorization , in annual appropriation bills .

also included in "welfare reauthorization" legislationhave been initiatives to create a responsible fatherhood grant program , revise the child supportenforcement program , amend child welfare programs , and make some changes to supplementalsecurity income , as well as create new "superwaiver" authority .

most of the welfare reauthorization provisions approved early in 2005 have counterparts inthe house budget reconciliation bill .

there are notable exceptions .

s. 667 ( the financecommittee bill ) would extend the abstinence education state grant program and revise and extendtma through fy2010 , whereas the house budget reconciliation bill includes none of thoseprovisions .

further , the house reconciliation bill , unlike the senate committee bills or the earlierhouse republican leadership welfare reauthorization bill ( h.r .

240 ) , includes someadditional provisions that would reduce spending , including proposals to reduce federal matchingfunds for state child support enforcement programs and to revise foster care and adoption assistanceeligibility rules to negate a court ruling that expanded eligibility for these programs in certain states .

table 1 summarizes what provisions are included in the senate committee bills and thehouse reconciliation bill .

note that when provisions are included in both , they still may differsignificantly in their details .

these differences are the subject of the remainder of this report .

table 1 .

welfare reauthorization provisions included in senatecommittee bills and house budget reconciliation bill source: congressional research service ( crs ) .

table 2 provides a detailed comparison of welfare and related provisions in the two senatecommittee bills ( s. 667 and s. 525 ) and the house budget reconciliationbill .

for the senate proposals , the table notes both the bill and section numbers .

the house budgetreconciliation bill is organized by titles reflecting each house committee's legislative changes .

thewelfare and related proposals are found both in title ii , from the education and workforcecommittee , and title viii of the bill , from the ways and means committee .

in most respects , thecommittees reported identical legislative language .

in those cases , table 2 provides both sectionreferences for identical provisions .

in cases where the two committees reported different provisions,the table separately indicates the education and the workforce and ways and means provisions .

the house budget reconciliation bill is an omnibus bill that includes many provisionsunrelated to welfare reform programs .

those provisions are not discussed in this report and notshown on the table .

further , s. 667 makes a number of changes to the earned incomeand child tax credits .

the tax provisions of s. 667 are also not addressed in this report orshown on the table .

table 2 .

comparison of current law with s. 667 / 525 and the house budget reconciliation bill welfareprovision .

