the reading first program was authorized as part of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) through the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ) .

the nclba was signed into law on january 8 , 2002 , and will expire at the end of fy2008 ( including the automatic general education provisions act one - year extension ) .

it is expected that the 110 th congress will consider legislation to extend the authorization of the esea as amended by the nclba .

the nclba included three new reading programs: reading first , early reading first , and improving literacy through school libraries .

the nclba also reauthorized the william f. goodling even start family literacy programs .

this report focuses on the reading first program .

reading first was drafted with the intent of incorporating scientifically based research on what works in teaching reading to improve and expand k - 3 reading programs to address concerns about student reading achievement and to reach children at younger ages .

the reading first program includes both formula grants ( states are allocated funds in proportion to the estimated number of children , aged 5 to 17 , who reside within the state from families with incomes below the poverty line ) and targeted assistance grants to states .

for the first two years of the program , 100% of funds , after national reservations , was allocated to states as formula grants .

states then competitively award grants to eligible local educational agencies ( leas ) .

leas that receive reading first grants shall use those funds for the following purposes: selecting and administering screening , diagnostic , and classroom - based instructional reading assessments ; selecting and implementing a learning system or program of reading instruction based on scientifically based reading research that includes the essential components of reading instruction ; procuring and implementing classroom instructional materials based on scientifically based reading research ; providing professional development for teachers of grades k - 3 , and special education teachers of grades k - 12 ; collecting and summarizing data to document the effectiveness of these programs ; and accelerating improvement of reading instruction by identifying successful schools ; reporting student progress by detailed demographic characteristics ; and promoting reading and library programs that provide access to stimulating reading material .

leas may use reading first funds for the prime time family reading time program ; for training parents and other volunteers as reading tutors ; and for assisting parents to encourage and provide support for their child's reading development .

there has been considerable debate in the field of education research on the value of different research methodologies , and on what types of research should receive priority for federal dollars .

many researchers argue that the type of research that is appropriate varies with the question that is being asked .

however , many have also argued that scientifically - based research ( sbr ) , and randomized controlled trials ( rcts ) in particular , are the "gold standard" in research .

rct research protocol requires random assignment — with participants assigned randomly to either an experimental group that receives the treatment under investigation , or a control group that does not .

rcts are viewed by many as the most credible way to verify a cause - effect relationship , when the rct study employs a well designed and implemented methodology with a large sample size .

nevertheless , rct studies do not necessarily provide a one - size - fits all solution to all educational research needs .

a crs report analyzing rcts included a summary of some of the potential limitations of putting too much emphasis on rcts: ... rcts are occasionally seen as impractical , unethical , requiring too much time , or being too costly compared to other designs that also seek to assess whether a program causes favorable outcomes .

finally , there is wide consensus that rcts are particularly well suited for answering certain types of questions , but not others , compared to other evaluation research designs .

for example , rcts typically do not assess how and why impacts occur , how a program might be modified to improve program results , or a program's cost - effectiveness .

rcts also typically do not provide a full picture of whether unintended consequences may have resulted from a program or indicate whether a study is using valid measures or concepts for judging a program's success .

many of these kinds of questions have been considered to be more appropriately addressed with observational or qualitative designs .

three groups representing different reading programs filed separate complaints with ed's oig , asking that the reading first program be investigated .

the three groups that filed complaints are dr. cupp's readers and journal writers , success for all , and the reading recovery council of north america .

in response , the oig has conducted several audits of the reading first program .

it issued its first report on the federal reading first program , specifically on reading first's grant application process , in september of 2006 .

in addition , several audits of state reading first programs have been issued , and audits have been conducted on ed's administration of the reading first program and on the rmc research corporation's reading first contract .

these three reports essentially validated many of the concerns that had been raised in complaints filed with the oig .

ed concurred with the oig's recommendations in all three reports and has addressed the recommendations .

the house committee on education and labor has held two oversight hearings on reading first .

the first hearing was held on april 20 , 2007 .

witnesses at the hearing included ed's inspector general , john higgins ; the director of the reading first program ( until september , 2006 ) , chris doherty ; and three members of the committee on reading assessments ( roland good , edward kame'enui , and deborah simmons ) .

the focus of the hearing was on the administration of reading first under doherty's leadership and on connections of the three panelists who had served on the committee on reading assessments to the dibels assessment program .

the purpose of the second hearing , held on may 10 , 2007 , was to receive testimony from the secretary of the u.s. department of education , margaret spellings , on the reading first program and on the student loan program .

on may 9 , 2007 the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions issued a report indicating that four out of five reading first technical assistance ( tac ) directors had financial ties with publishers while serving as tac directors .

in its conclusion , the report notes that the chairman's investigation reveals that four reading first technical assistance center directors — subcontractors to the department — had substantial financial ties to publishing companies while simultaneously being responsible for providing technical assistance to states and school districts seeking guidance in selecting reading programs that would help them secure federal grants .

these findings are troublesome because they diminish the integrity of the reading first program .

congress should act to ensure that future conflicts of interest are identified and addressed .

the report agreed with all of the oig recommendations .

in addition , it recommended that congress adopt new requirements regarding financial disclosure to prevent future conflicts of interest by federal employees and others involved in the administration or implementation of k - 12 education programs , as well as those providing technical assistance .

h.r .

1939 ( mckeon ) , the reading first improvement act , was introduced on april 19 , 2007 , and referred to the house committee on education and labor .

this legislation establishes procedures for setting up a reading first advisory committee and potential subcommittees .

it would prohibit one entity or individual from nominating a majority of the committee or subcommittee members .

the bill would also require ed to establish stronger conflict - of - interest procedures and provide guidance on how the advisory committee and any subcommittees are to review and provide feedback on state applications , as well as ensure decisions are well - documented and available to the public .

the legislation would also prohibit ed from providing a contract or subcontract for program evaluation to any entity that received a contract or subcontract to implement any aspect of reading first .

additionally , it would require conflict - of - interest screening by contractors and subcontractors of all employees involved in the contract or subcontract .

