the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) act of 1965 was enacted to help preserve , develop , and ensure access to outdoor recreation resources .

a main goal of the law was to facilitate participation in recreation and strengthen the "health and vitality" of u.s. citizens .

the law sought to accomplish this goal by "providing funds" for federal land acquisition and for federal assistance to states for outdoor recreation , including for recreation planning , acquisition of lands and waters , and development of recreation facilities .

the law created the land and water conservation fund in the treasury as a funding source to implement its outdoor recreation goals .

currently , the fund receives $900 million annually under the lwcf act , but these credited monies cannot be spent unless appropriated by congress .

the level of annual appropriations has varied widely since the origin of the fund in 1965 .

this authority for the fund to accrue $900 million annually is scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2018 .

while the lwcf act initially did not specify the authorized level of funding , the law has been amended several times to specify and provide increasing levels of authorizations .

the authorization was raised to $900 million for fy1978 , and has remained at this level .

the fund accrues revenues of $900 million annually from three specific sources , including the federal motorboat fuel tax and surplus property sales .

the fund accumulates the majority of its revenues from oil and gas leases on the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

the lwcf receives additional money ( beyond the $900 million ) under the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( gomesa ) , and these appropriations are mandatory .

the authority for the lwcf to accrue revenues under gomesa does not have an expiration date .

under gomesa , the fund accrues revenue from certain ocs leasing , and these monies can be used only for grants to states for outdoor recreation .

these mandatory appropriations had been relatively small through fy2017 , but are estimated to have increased substantially in fy2018 and to remain relatively high at least over the next decade .

of current debate is whether to reauthorize provisions of the lwcf act beyond september 30 , 2018 , and alter the operation of the fund .

alterations under discussion include whether to permanently reauthorize the lwcf act , make all or a portion of the appropriations under that law mandatory ( rather than discretionary ) , direct monies to be used for particular purposes provided for in the lwcf act , or amend the law to authorize the fund to be used for different purposes .

these questions are being debated by authorizing committees and during consideration of the annual interior appropriations legislation .

perennial congressional issues include ( 1 ) deciding the total appropriation for federal land acquisition , determining the level of acquisition funds for each of the four agencies , and identifying which lands should be acquired ; ( 2 ) deciding the level of funding for the state grant program ; and ( 3 ) determining what , if any , other purposes should be funded through lwcf and at what level .

the primary context for debating these issues traditionally has been the annual interior appropriations legislation .

the lwcf is not a true trust fund as is generally understood in the private sector .

for instance , the fund is credited with revenues totaling $900 million annually under the lwcf act , but these credited monies cannot be spent unless appropriated by congress , as noted .

further , interest is not accrued on the accumulated unappropriated balance that has been credited to the lwcf .

while some supporters assert that the lwcf was originally intended to be a revolving fund , whereby the money would be maintained in an account separate from the general treasury that could accrue interest , this has not been the case .

although the lwcf act has been amended , the fund's basic purpose has not been altered .

over time , notable amendments have raised the authorization ceiling and mandated that offshore oil and gas leasing revenues should make up any shortfall from other specified financing sources .

from fy1965 through fy2018 , about $40.0 billion has been credited to the lwcf under both the lwcf act and gomesa .

less than half that amount — $18.4 billion — has been appropriated , leaving an unappropriated balance of $21.6 billion in the fund .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

appropriations from lwcf have been made for three general purposes: ( 1 ) federal acquisition of land and waters and interests therein ; ( 2 ) the stateside grants for recreational planning ; acquiring recreational lands , waters , or related interests ; and developing outdoor recreational facilities ; and ( 3 ) related purposes .

each year , congress determines the total appropriations from the fund , and the amount provided for each of these three general purposes .

through authorizing and appropriations legislation , hearings , and other debates , congress is considering an array of issues related to the lwcf .

several of these issues are summarized below .

there are differing opinions as to the optimal level of lwcf appropriations .

the lwcf has broad support from resource protection advocates , many of whom seek stable and predictable funding through consistent levels of appropriations .

most of these advocates seek higher appropriations in general .

for instance , for several years the obama administration proposed appropriations of $900 million for lwcf .

some advocates have specific priorities , such as higher acquisition funding for one of the four federal agencies , the state grant program , or a particular site or area .

advocates of higher federal land acquisition funding promote a strong federal role in acquiring and managing sensitive areas and natural resources .

in contrast , there is broad opposition to the lwcf based on varied concerns , with opponents generally seeking reduced levels of funds for lwcf .

some opponents seek to reduce the size of the federal estate and minimize further federal acquisition of land either generally or at specific sites , especially in the west , where federal ownership is already concentrated .

other concerns involve preferences for private land ownership or state and local ownership and management of resources , potential impacts of federal land ownership on uses of private lands , and reduced local tax revenues that result from public ownership .

for instance , the house committee on the budget has supported reducing the federal estate and giving state and local governments more control of resources within their boundaries .

others have sought lwcf reductions as part of a broader focus on reducing the federal deficit .

under the lwcf act , the authority for the lwcf to receive $900 million in revenues annually is scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2018 .

congress is debating whether to extend this authority , and if so whether to authorize a short , long , or permanent extension .

many lwcf advocates favor relatively long or permanent extension , on the assertion that the program has been successful across the nation for more than 50 years in protecting valuable lands and resources and providing lands and infrastructure needed for public health , recreation , and tourism .

they contend that continuity and stability of the land protection and recreational opportunities that lwcf supports are important national goals , and ones that will help communities to attract businesses , new residents , and tourists .

they note the sufficiency of lwcf's dedicated funding stream for supporting the program .

some proponents of a short - term extension or of expiration assert that the lwcf currently has sufficient funds to meet the nation's land acquisition and recreation needs for many years to come .

they point to the relatively large balance of unappropriated monies in the lwcf that congress could appropriate , as well as to the substantial levels of mandatory funding that are anticipated under gomesa for the stateside program .

for others , structural reforms of the program would be needed before a long - term extension might be viable , such as to direct funding away from federal land acquisition and to other activities , such as maintenance of federal lands and facilities or programs that support states .

others favor depositing the ocs revenues in the general fund of the treasury ( rather than in the lwcf ) to support federal activities generally or specific priority programs .

some advocates of higher lwcf funding seek partial or full permanent appropriations of monies under the lwcf act .

for instance , the obama administration proposed $900 million for lwcf for fy2017 through a combination of discretionary ( $475.0 million ) and mandatory ( $425.0 million ) appropriations .

further , the obama administration proposed amending current law to appropriate mandatory funding of $900 million annually beginning in fy2018 .

as attributes of the mandatory approach , advocates cite the certainty and predictability of program funding generally and in particular in fostering the ability of agencies to undertake multiyear , large - scale , and collaborative acquisitions .

they also note the existence of a dedicated funding stream for lwcf at the authorized level of $900 million and the original intent of congress that revenues to the fund be used for the lwcf act's purposes .

questions include how to offset any new permanent appropriations and how to allocate permanent appropriations among different lwcf programs and purposes .

proponents of discretionary appropriations support retaining congress's authority to determine annually the level of funding needed for lwcf overall and for the various program components .

they note that through the discretionary process , the need for lwcf appropriations can be assessed in comparison with other natural resource programs and broader governmental needs .

this approach also has been valued as providing recurring opportunities for program oversight .

for instance , the house committee on the budget has supported keeping land acquisition funding as discretionary to allow for regular oversight .

there are differing opinions as to how lwcf funds should be used .

some members and others have asserted that maintaining ( and rehabilitating ) the land and facilities that federal agencies already own should take priority over further acquisitions .

for instance , in an opening statement , the chair of the senate committee on energy and natural resources expressed interest in shifting "the federal focus away from land acquisition , particularly in western states , toward maintaining and enhancing the accessibility and quality of the resources that we have. .

some cite the deferred maintenance needs of the agencies as a higher priority than acquisition , and one that requires funding through additional sources , including lwcf .

as an example , the trump administration did not initially seek funding for individual acquisitions by agencies in fy2019 , asserting that at a time when doi has "billions of dollars in deferred maintenance , land acquisitions are lower priority activities than maintaining ongoing operations and maintenance. .

supporters of retaining a strong lwcf role in acquisition cite a continued need to preserve iconic resources and provide additional opportunities for public recreation and other land uses .

they assert economic benefits of federal land ownership and improvements of federal land management through consolidation of ownership .

in addition , since federal agencies cannot use lwcf funds for maintenance , some supporters of this priority favor more funding to other accounts that can be used for maintenance while retaining the lwcf for acquisitions .

such accounts are within the land management agency budgets as well as within the department of transportation ( for roads ) .

while the public has access to most federal lands , some areas have limited access or are unavailable to the public .

this is sometimes the case because private or state lands , or geographical features such as mountains or rivers , limit or block public access .

proponents of enhanced recreational access have sought to amend the lwcf act to set aside a portion of funding for federal acquisitions for access purposes .

the focus has been on acquisition of lands and interests ( eg , easements and rights of way ) that support recreational access for hunting and fishing , among other recreational pursuits .

proponents cite insufficient opportunity for recreating in some areas and broader health , economic , and other values of recreating on public lands .

opposition to such a set - aside could relate to concerns about the extent of federal land ownership , preferences for prioritizing lwcf for other purposes , or satisfaction that the agencies are sufficiently prioritizing recreational access .

according to blm , for instance , "nearly 100 percent of lwcf funding over the past several years has been used for projects that enhance public access for recreation. .

for the forest service , 39 of the 40 acquisitions completed in fy2014 with lwcf funding provided improved access or legal access where none existed , according to the agency .

however , the extent to which agencies prioritize acquisition funding for recreational access might vary among all agencies and from year to year .

one area of congressional focus has been the level of funds for the stateside program .

in some years , congress and / or the administration have not supported funds , or have supported relatively low levels of funds , for new stateside grants .

cited reasons have included that state and local governments have alternative sources of funding for parkland acquisition and development , the current program could not adequately measure performance or demonstrate results , the federal government supports states through other natural resource programs , and large federal deficits require a focus on core federal responsibilities .

stateside supporters contend that the program contributes significantly to statewide recreation planning , state leadership in protection and development of recreation resources , and long - term outdoor recreation in areas that are readily accessible to communities .

they see the program as a way to help fiscally constrained local governments and leverage state and local funds for recreation .

further , advocates assert that investments in recreation save money in other areas ; for instance , they say that these investments promote healthier lifestyles and thus save health care expenditures .

some prefer state acquisition ( and development ) of lands with lwcf funds over federal acquisition of lands .

whether to amend the lwcf act to specify a percentage or dollar amount of the appropriations for the stateside program , and if so , the optimal level , are under debate .

the level of discretionary funding for the stateside program is likely to be of continued interest in part due to the substantial increase in mandatory funds for the program under gomesa , beginning in fy2018 .

another issue under consideration is whether to change the way that funds are apportioned to the states .

under the traditional state grant program , a portion of the appropriation is to be distributed equally among the states , with the percentage varying depending on the total amount of appropriations .

further , the secretary of the interior has discretion to apportion the balance based on need , and population has been the biggest factor in determining need .

since fy2014 , congress has approved a portion of the state grant funds for a competitive grant program .

the extent to which the state grant program should be competitive , and the criteria that should be used in any competitive program , are of ongoing interest .

another focus has been which , if any , purposes other than federal land acquisition and stateside grants should be funded through the lwcf .

as discussed above , whether to use the fund for maintenance has been under examination .

some seek to channel lwcf funding to an array of land protection purposes .

for instance , the george w. bush administration sought lwcf funds for cooperative conservation programs through which federal land managers partner with other landowners to protect natural resources and improve recreation on lands under diverse ownership .

the obama administration also supported the use of lwcf funds for other purposes , although generally fewer than the bush administration .

some proposals seek to enhance funding for programs that benefit states , with a shift of resources from federal lands to state grant programs .

still other proposals would provide lwcf funding to a more diverse programs and activities .

a factor in the debate has been the unappropriated balance in the fund , and whether to allow these funds to be used for broader purposes beyond those currently authorized .

traditional fund beneficiaries and others have expressed concern about expanding the uses of appropriations , particularly if that expansion is accompanied by reductions in the amount available for federal land acquisition or state grants .

