kishore mahbubani , formerly a senior official in singapore's ministry of foreign affairs andtrade , stated that history will view the eas as the real beginning of the pacific century .

 ( 3 ) the eas is viewed asimportant not only because of its implications for regional trade but more importantly for itspotential importance as an indicator of china's rising geopolitical importance .

it is also of importancebecause the positions of regional states relative to china and the united states were brought intoperspective as the diplomacy surrounding the summit unfolded .

the eas is viewed as potentiallyof strategic importance because many believe that it could form the basis of a future east asiancommunity , which might make collective agreements on trade or even security affairs without u.s.input .

as such , regional states have sought to be included in the summit so that they will not beexcluded from any future east asian community .

the united states has not played a role in the eas process nor was it invited to attend .

whatis of concern to some analysts is that this appears to be a potential challenge to americaninvolvement in the region .

some fear that by shifting emphasis from apec , an organization in whichthe united states has played a leading role and which encompasses the broader pacific rim , to anannual east asia summit , in which the united states is not a participant , america's overall positioncould become relatively less influential and the united states could potentially be excluded frompreferential trade agreements .

though president bush attended the apec gathering in busan , southkorea in november 2005 , that gathering is being viewed by some as "trumped" by the december2005 eas meeting .

 ( 4 ) apec , however , is primarily a trade and economic organization .

a major strategic consideration isthat apec includes taiwan whereas the eas does not .

 ( 5 ) .

the kuala lumpur declaration on the east asia summit , of december 14 , 2005 , madeseveral key declarations which are listed below .

"... we have established the east asia summit as a forum for dialogue on broadstrategic , political and economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of promotingpeace , stability and prosperity in east asia. .

"... the efforts of the east asia summit to promote community building in thisregion will be consistent with and reinforce the realization of the asean community , and will forman integral part of the evolving regional architecture. .

"... the east asia summit will be an open inclusive , transparent and outwardlooking forum ... with asean as the driving force ..." the eas will focus on "fostering strategic dialogue and promoting cooperationin political and security issues ... promoting development , financial stability , energy security,economic integration and growth eradicating poverty and narrowing the development gap in eastasia ..." ( 32 ) the summit has highlighted a number of evolving geopolitical dynamics in the region .

it hasbeen observed that key outcomes of the summit are that asean "successfully projected its politicalcentrality in a wider region fast becoming a function of the economic weight of china and india,"and those within asean plus three who advocated a more inclusive membership were able to bringindia , australia , and new zealand into the group .

 ( 33 ) it has been reported that japan , singapore , and indonesia workedto broaden membership to include india , australia , and new zealand .

 ( 34 ) such additions are thoughtto partially offset the influence of china within the group .

it was also observed that while the unitedstates did not participate , "its influence remains directly and via regional allies. .

while media reportsdid focus on the eas as a new asian bloc they also pointed to conflicts within the region,particularly the sino - japanese conflict , that may limit future regional cooperation .

 ( 35 ) some analysts haveobserved that rather than bringing asia together under chinese leadership the eas may have moreclearly defined asian rivalry and regional geostrategic divisions .

 ( 36 ) russia , which had observerstatus at the eas , also is reportedly seeking to become a full member at the next eas meeting .

 ( 37 ) the group plans to holdits second summit in the philippines in 2006 .

 ( 38 ) .

some have asked why the united states should be concerned with an eas that has yet todemonstrate that it will be a threat to american influence in asia .

others argue that it will lead toa reduction in influence that would limit america's ability to promote its values or look after itsinterests whether they be economic or strategic .

to some , america's preoccupation with iraq hasbeen a distraction that has led it to underestimate the importance of evolving geopolitical dynamicsin asia including the eas .

 ( 39 ) the focus on the eas comes at a time when apec is generally perceived to have lostmomentum .

there is an increasing perception that apec , which has 21 members and wasestablished in 1989 , is disintegrating into regional and bilateral blocs and that it does not have theleadership necessary to meet future challenges .

some feel that a return to apec core issues of tradeliberalization and the reduction of trade barriers is the best way for apec to regain itsmomentum .

 ( 40 ) australia , which played a key role in the development of apec , will be the 2007 chair of apec.a question is whether the united states should take additional measures to strengthen apec .

somesuggest this would also keep taiwan from becoming increasingly isolated .

to some , the key question concerning the eas is whether china's leadership "will be benignor will it be aimed - - or be perceived by the u.s. as being aimed - - at limiting or replacingwashington's ( and tokyo's ) influence in the region. .

 ( 41 ) china's actions through the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) , which includes china , russia , kazakhstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan , and kyrgyzstan , areviewed by some as challenging america's regional presence .

 ( 42 ) the sco asked in july2005 for a timetable for the withdrawal of u.s. coalition forces in central asia .

 ( 43 ) china's potentialopposition to america presence in a region that it may increasingly see as within its sphere ofinfluence may portend future negative postures relative to american forces elsewhere in asia .

developing a constructive relationship with china is generally viewed as the most significantforeign policy challenge for the united states in asia , and possibly the world , in the years ahead.how the united states reacts to china's bid to position itself more centrally in asia , as demonstratedby the eas , is an important component of this challenge .

a policy approach that seeks to continueto foster the peaceful rise of china appeals to many .

 ( 44 ) some feel that it is important that american policy on the eastasia summit , or a potential future east asian community , not be interpreted by china as an effortto contain china but rather as a policy initiative to demonstrate that america seeks to remain anactive and constructive actor in asian multilateral affairs and that it supports the constructiveintegration of china into regional and world affairs .

