the davis - bacon act of 1931 , as amended , requires , inter alia , that construction contractsentered into by the federal government specify minimum wages to be paid to the various classes oflaborers employed under those contracts .

 ( 2 ) minimum wages are defined as those determined by the secretaryof labor ( a ) to be prevailing ( b ) in the locality of the project ( c ) for similar crafts and skills ( d ) oncomparable construction work .

the concept of wage was expanded in 1964 to include a fringebenefit component .

the act has a coverage threshold of $2,000 and above .

in addition to direct federal construction contracts , the davis - bacon prevailing wage"principle" has been written into a series of federal program statutes .

the act is supplemented bythe 1934 copeland "anti - kickback" act ( which requires weekly reporting of wages actually paid andan affirmation from employers that any deductions from wages due to employees have been proper ) ,and by federal overtime pay and health and safety standards statues .

further , some states haveenacted "little davis - bacon" acts within their respective jurisdictions .

the issues surrounding the act have changed little through the years .

does the act protectworkers , help stabilize the construction industry , and serve the federal contracting community ? .

oris it anti - competitive , preventing flexible workforce utilization ? .

has it been administeredeffectively , and if not , can it be administered in an equitable fashion ? .

is there sufficient objectiveinformation concerning the act to allow for fair assessment of the statute and its impact ? .

the davis - bacon act is a federal statute .

it does not have any direct impact uponnon - federal construction or wage rates .

in so far as it ensures that persons employed on federalcontract work receive not less than the prevailing wage , the act could have a ripple effect uponnon - federal construction and / or other work .

 ( 3 ) is the davis - bacon wage a union wage ? .

and , does the act mandate that union wages be paidon federal contract construction projects ? .

it may be a union wage - - where the union rate isdetermined to be the locally prevailing wage .

but it need not be the union rate .

it depends upon therate that the department of labor ( dol ) finds to be prevailing in an area .

if the union rate prevails,then the union rate becomes the davis - bacon wage .

if another rate ( a non - union wage ) prevails , thenthat rate becomes the davis - bacon rate .

a great deal depends upon the processes and proceduresof the department of labor which administers the act .

does the davis - bacon act inflate the cost of federal contracts ? .

theoretically , it should not .

the department of labor reviews the conditions under which public ( federal ) construction occurs,determines the "locally" prevailing wage , and then applies that wage to federal projects .

but thedavis - bacon rate need not be the actual rate paid , since the market may require a higher rate in orderto recruit employees .

thus , the davis - bacon wage may be a floor and not necessarily the wage paid .

what is meant by locality ? .

traditionally , the department observes the wage rates paid onseveral classes of construction ( i.e. , residential , public buildings , highways , and heavy construction ) for each jurisdiction ( normally a county unit ) across the united states .

it is usually upon that unitthat locality is based .

perhaps the most frequently asked question concerning the davis - bacon act is the following: how much money could we save ( the taxpayer and the government contractor ) if the davis - baconact were repealed or modified to narrow its scope ? .

many have claimed to have an answer , but thereis little empirical evidence available .

the short answer would seem to be that no one really knows .

does the davis - bacon act , in fact , save money for the federal construction consumer ? .

it may - - butthat question is similarly open .

after nearly three - quarters of a century , why is the literature on davis - bacon of such dubiousvalue ? .

first , given the number of projects covered by the act ( and their diversity ) , it is nearlyimpossible for an independent scholar to review the act's administration and to assess its impact .

second , there is the availability of basic documentation .

how much information has actually beenpreserved ? .

third , assuming that the data are available , securing such documentation ( and access toadministrative personnel ) may be problematic .

if one assumes that documentation exists , that the analyst is granted access to it , that all ofthe parties are cooperative , and that the means , financial and other , are available for such anundertaking , the analyst is left with a fourth complication .

he or she is comparing something thatdid happen with something that in fact , for whatever reasons , did not happen .

in the absence of adavis - bacon requirement , would the contract have gone to the same contractor ? .

if so ( or if not ) ,would it have been managed in the same way ? .

did the act have any impact upon the wages actuallypaid or upon workforce utilization ? .

without davis - bacon , would different workers have beenemployed - - and would they have been paid different rates ? .

these same questions confront a public agency in its efforts to investigate davis - bacon'simpact .

for a public agency , the task is no less massive than it would have been for a privatescholar .

and , in the public sector , there may be other constraints .

simply put , how much fundingand staff time could ( or should ) be devoted to an investigation of the davis - bacon impact onconstruction that is already in place ? .

what political or policy concerns may come into play ? .

one might like to be able to say , forthrightly , that a change in the statute could have apositive or a negative impact .

however , the state of current exploratory research would probablybe insufficient to justify just an assertion .

 ( 4 ) .

historically , it is not entirely clear why it was necessary for the franklin rooseveltadministration to have suspended the act .

only very limited documentation concerning thesuspension appears to be available .

for the more recent administrations ( those of richard nixonand george w. h. bush ) , it is also difficult to define precisely their rationales - - though the bushadministration acted in response to particular events .

the case of george w. bush , of course , is stillunfolding .

the materials , here , are presented as something of an historical sketch .

on february 1 , 1993 , president william clinton issued executive order no .

12836 , revokingexecutive order no .

12818 , and restoring the use of project labor agreements in public ( federal ) construction .

it provided , inter alia , that the "heads of executive agencies shall promptly revoke anyorders , rules , or regulations" impeding such project labor agreements .

 ( 54 ) the wall street journalreported that mr. clinton has "pleased his political supporters in organized labor" by revoking theprohibition on project labor agreements .

but it continued: "the so - called project - agreement orderwas issued in the heat of the presidential campaign by george w. bush last october 23 after theassociated builders and contractors , a trade group for 16,000 nonunion construction companies hadthreatened not to endorse his bid for re - election. .

 ( 55 ) on march 6 , clinton issued proclamation no .

6534 , providing that the bush suspension bewithdrawn and that the davis - bacon act be fully restored .

 ( 56 ) "within 15 days,according to clinton's proclamation , davis - bacon's requirements will be back in force in the affectedareas for all direct federal construction and for federally - assisted construction. .

 ( 57 ) .

on august 29 , 2005 , florida and the gulf coast were hit by hurricane katrina .

the resultwas one of the greatest natural disasters in the history of the united states .

gradually , the impactof the hurricane was assessed .

diverse public and private funding was made available to the areasaffected , while thousands of people were displaced from their homes , often to other states .

"year after year," observed representative george miller , ranking democrat on the housecommittee on education and the workforce , "republicans have tried to erase this law [thedavis - bacon act] .. .

but they do not have the votes in congress to do it. .

 ( 58 ) the hurricane , however,may have made a difference , for the washington post headlined , in an issue of september 10 , 2005 , "in the floods , parties' agendas surface. .

 ( 59 ) there had been large pockets of poverty in the new orleans area .

when the announcementwas made to vacate the city as the storm approached , the poor apparently had few resources uponwhich to rely .

further , a lack of transportation may have been critical and , perhaps as important , thelack of a destination .

after the storm passed , many poor remained amid the ruins of a once thrivingcity , still without resources , but now without homes or jobs .

it was reported that on wednesday , september 7 , when budget director joshua boltenbriefed house republicans on the president's supplemental spending request , "conservativelawmakers urged him to lift the wage rules" tied to davis - bacon .

 ( 60 ) that same day,representatives tom feeney , jeff flake , and marilyn musgrave organized a letter to the president,urging him to use his presidential power to waive davis - bacon requirements .

temporary suspension of davis - bacon will help avoidcostly delays that impede clean - up and reconstruction efforts along the gulf coast .

time is of theessence and any action that can be taken to expedite this process need [sic] to be,' statedfeeney .

feeney went on to state general arguments against davis - bacon and concluded that the act oftenresults in "driving up costs" of construction .

 ( 61 ) in the letter to the president , signed by 35 members of the house , the concept of a "nationalemergency" was affirmed .

it was also stated that compliance with the wage processes of thedavis - bacon act could delay reconstruction ( "... often a delay of two weeks...." ) and that the act's"regulations effectively discriminate against contractor employment of non - union and lower - skilledworkers" and "can even raise total construction costs by up to 38%. .

the letter reviewed the pasthistory of davis - bacon suspensions and closed , "faced with the massive rebuilding challengesahead , we respectfully urge you to make a presidential proclamation to suspend davis - bacon untilour country is once again whole. .

 ( 62 ) on september 8 , 2005 , president bush suspended the davis - bacon act as it relates tospecific segments of the country ( i.e. , to portions of florida , alabama , mississippi , andlouisiana ) .

 ( 63 ) hespecified both the act and "the provisions of all other acts providing for the payment of wages , whichprovisions are dependent upon determinations by the secretary of labor" under the davis - baconrules .

the suspension would continue "until otherwise provided. .

 ( 64 ) .

representative charlie norwood praised the president for his "quick action to strip awayunnecessary bureaucracy that may hamper our ability to recover...." davis - bacon rules "are onerousand drive up the cost of any project to which they are applied...." the nation , he stated , "can't affordthat kind of inefficiency , red tape , and inflated costs when we have an entire region to rebuild,largely at taxpayer expense. .

 ( 65 ) the daily labor report , quoting the president , suggested thatsuspension "will result in greater assistance to these devastated communities and will permit theemployment of thousands of additional individuals...." ( 66 ) or , as representative feeney stated: "lots of people inlouisiana are willing to go to work tomorrow , and the market will set the wage...." ( 67 ) organized labor opined that the president's order "would allow contractors to paysubstandard wages to construction workers in the affected areas. .

john sweeney , afl - ciopresident , explained: "employers are all to eager to exploit workers .

this is no time to make thateasier. .

sweeney stated: "taking advantage of a national tragedy to get rid of a protection forworkers that corporate backers of the white house have long wanted to remove is nothing less thanprofiteering. .

edward sullivan , president of the building and constructions trades department,likened the effect to "legalized looting. .

 ( 68 ) the new york times editorialized , "by any standard of humandecency , condemning many already poor and now bereft people to sub - par wages - - thusperpetuating their poverty - - is unacceptable. .

 ( 69 ) .

somewhat anticipating the president's action , representative flake introduced the "cleanupand reconstruction enhancement act ( care act ) " on september 7 , 2005 .

the flake bill ( h.r .

3684 ) would , whenever a "major disaster" has been proclaimed under the staffordact , automatically suspend the davis - bacon act for one year in the area of concern .

a companionbill ( s. 1817 ) was subsequently introduced by senator jim demint ( r - sc ) .

in the wake of the president's action , several bills were introduced that would have had theeffect of overturning the president's davis - bacon proclamation: h.r .

3763 ( georgemiller ) , h.r .

3834 ( pallone ) , and s. 1739 ( kennedy ) .

 ( 70 ) senator barbara boxerintroduced a two - pronged bill ( s. 1763 ) , first , to give employment preference toworkers who have been displaced by hurricane katrina ; and second , to restore the impact of thedavis - bacon act in the areas in which it had been suspended .

in addition to legislation dealing specifically with the davis - bacon act , two bills seemed tochallenge administration policy in that regard .

representative miller introduced h.res .

467 : a bill "[r]equesting that the president transmit to the house of representatives information inthis possession relating to contracts for services or construction related to hurricane katrina recoverythat relate to wages and benefits to be paid to workers. .

the bill was referred to the committee oneducation and the workforce - - where , ultimately , it was rejected by a vote of 25 to 20 .

 ( 71 ) a separate measure , butof similar content ( h.res .

488 ) , had been introduced by representative stevelatourette ( r - oh ) and had been forwarded to the committee on transportation and infrastructurechaired by representative don young ( r - ak ) .

 ( 72 ) finally , h.j.res .

69 was introduced byrepresentative miller , the impact of which would have been termination of the national emergencydeclared by the president and reinstatement of the davis - bacon act .

gradually , conditions in the gulf region became clearer and , in that context , a movement wasdiscerned for re - institution of the davis - bacon act .

in late september , some 37 republicans "signedon to a letter" to president bush urging that his proclamation be rescinded .

in a more varied appeal,latourette stated: "when you suspend davis - bacon , you also suspend the copeland anti - kickbackprohibitions" of the act "so you have no more certified payrolls. .

for those who are "... worriedabout profiteering and other things , reinstating davis - bacon is a good idea. .

 ( 73 ) in late october , about 20 republicans reportedly attended a meeting with white house chiefof staff andrew card at the office of speaker dennis hastert .

card was described as "more thanreceptive" to suggestions from those supportive of davis - bacon and acknowledged that "they weren'tsaving any money" through the suspension .

 ( 74 ) on october 25 , according to one report , card calledrepresentative latourette to invite him to a meeting at the white house the following day - - october 26 .

during the white house meeting , card was quoted as having said , according tolatourette , that "there appeared to be no savings garnered from suspending the davis - baconact. .

 ( 75 ) on october 26 , 2005 , word began to surface that a change of policy was in the works , and,by late afternoon , it seemed to have been confirmed .

the bush administration , the daily laborreport stated , would reinstate on november 8th - - just two months after its suspension - - the"davis - bacon act prevailing wage requirements for reconstruction projects in the hurricane - batteredgulf coast region. .

the article continued , quoting labor secretary elaine chao , that "[u]pon reviewof current conditions in the declared areas , the administration will reinstate davis - bacon...." ( 76 ) under the circumstances,the suspension - related bills became moot .

