each year , the president is required to submit a comprehensive federal budget proposal to congress no later than the first monday in february .

once it is submitted , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) analyzes the proposal using its own economic assumptions and estimation techniques .

then , the house and senate budget committees each develop a budget resolution after reviewing the president's budget , the views of other committees , and information from cbo .

differences between the houses are supposed to be resolved by april 15 , but this deadline is rarely met .

although it is not binding , the resolution provides a framework for subsequent legislative action on the budget ( eg , annual appropriations bills ) .

this report provides information on medicaid and state children's health insurance program ( schip ) budget issues for fy2007 .

it will be updated to reflect relevant activity until the president's fy2008 budget is released .

the president's fy2007 budget contains a number of proposals that would affect medicaid and schip .

some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each of the proposals , this report provides: background information ; a description of the proposal based on available information ; and a list of relevant congressional research service ( crs ) reports .

the proposals generally are presented in the order in which they appear in the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) fiscal year 2007 budget in brief .

the description of each proposal includes hhs and cbo estimates of its cost or savings in fy2007 and over the fy2007-fy2011 period .

these estimates are summarized in table 1 .

crs staff contact information by medicaid and schip topic area is provided in table 2 , at the end of the report .

on march 9 , 2006 , the senate budget committee reported a budget resolution , s.con.res .

83 , which was subsequently amended and passed by the senate on march 16 .

the resolution did not include reconciliation instructions for the senate finance committee , which has jurisdiction over medicaid and schip .

it did include a deficit - neutral reserve fund for the uninsured , and a march 8 senate budget committee document indicates that it included funding for four of the president's medicaid and schip proposals: tma extension ( $523 million over five years ) ; vaccines for children proposal allowing health departments to provide vaccines ( $715 million ) ; cover the kids initiative ( $874 million ) ; and schip funding boost in 2007 and 2008 ( $225 million ) .

on march 29 , 2006 , the house budget committee reported its own budget resolution , h.con.res .

376 , which was subsequently amended and passed by the house on may 18 .

the resolution did not include reconciliation instructions for the house energy and commerce committee , which has jurisdiction over medicaid and schip .

the report accompanying the resolution as reported by the house budget committee ( h.rept .

109-402 ) indicates that spending levels for medicaid and schip were based on cbo's baseline projections under current law and policies , and that no reduction in medicaid was assumed .

although no agreement was reached by the house and senate on a fy2007 budget resolution , current law spending for medicaid and schip is unaffected .

as entitlement programs , their spending levels are based on the underlying benefit and eligibility criteria established in law ( in the case of schip , these criteria include a statutory annual funding cap ) .

however , legislation that would increase medicaid or schip spending above current law could encounter procedural roadblocks in the house or senate if funding is not assumed in a budget resolution or in a "deeming resolution. .

the annual appropriations process also provides an opportunity for congress to place limitations on the availability of federal funds for specified medicaid and schip activities .

for example , when the house reported its proposal for fy2007 labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations on june 20 , 2006 ( h.r .

5647 , h.rept .

109-515 ) , it included a provision that would prohibit hhs from using any of the funds in its fy2007 budget to implement the president's proposal to phase down or reduce provider taxes below 6% through administrative action .

annual l - hhs - ed appropriations also regularly contain restrictions that limit — for one year at a time — the circumstances under which federal funds can be used to pay for abortions .

before the 109 th congress adjourned , it passed two bills that addressed a variety of medicaid and schip issues , including some of the proposals in the president's fy2007 budget .

as described earlier , h.r .

6164 requires a redistribution of certain unspent fy2004 and fy2005 schip funds to delay state shortfalls in fy2007 .

in addition , h.r .

6111 prevents the president's provider tax proposal from being implemented via administrative action and extends expanded tma requirements through june 30 , 2007 .

h.r .

6111 also addressed medicaid issues that were not part of the president's budget , including technical corrections to the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) and fy2007 dsh allotments for hawaii and tennessee .

