on may 31 , 2006 , the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) announced fy2006 allocations of federal homeland security assistance to states and urban areas .

that assistance was made available through the following three programs: the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) , which is designed to fund state homeland security strategy activities to build first responder and emergency management capabilities to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism and catastrophic events ; the law enforcement terrorism prevention program ( letpp ) , which focuses on law enforcement and public safety activities to prevent terrorist attacks through such activities as intelligence gathering , information sharing , and target hardening ; and the urban area security initiative ( uasi ) , which is designed to fund designated high - threat , high - risk urban - area activities to prevent , protect against , and respond to terrorist attacks and catastrophic events .

the programs provided funds to address planning , operations , equipment , training , and exercise needs of states and high - threat , high - density urban areas .

the purpose of the set of programs was to help recipients build and sustain first responder and emergency management capabilities to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks and catastrophic events .

the usa patriot act guarantees each state an amount of 0.75% of total shsgp and letpp appropriations .

the remaining appropriation and the appropriation for uasi grants were allocated at the discretion of the department of homeland security .

this crs report explains the fy2003 through fy2006 administrative guidance that governed the three homeland security assistance programs , discusses the changes to dhs requirements for grant applications and subsequent reporting by recipients , describes the dhs grant allocation methods , and identifies pertinent oversight questions that may be of interest to congress .

almost immediately after dhs announced the fy2006 allocations , some states and urban areas , and their congressional delegations pointed out reductions in grants as compared to fy2005 .

some members of congress raised questions about the suitability of the methods dhs used to allocate the grants , and they pursued those questions in congressional oversight hearings .

the dhs method for allocating the discretionary shsgp and letpp amounts has evolved since the department's inception in march 2003 .

before fy2006 , the department allocated the shsgp and letpp remainders in direct proportion to state population .

it allocated uasi grants , however , using the following indicators of risk: credible threat , presence of critical infrastructure , vulnerability , population , population density , law enforcement investigative and enforcement activity , and the existence of formal mutual aid agreements among jurisdictions .

beginning in fy2006 , however , dhs allocated the discretionary amounts available through all three programs based on departmental assessments of risk and the effectiveness of the recipients' proposed solutions to their identified homeland security needs .

 ( see appendix for time lines for each of the three programs. ) .

the three programs that provide homeland security assistance to states and urban areas are governed by law and by an evolving framework of administrative documents .

the administrative guidance is embodied in homeland security presidential directives 5 ( february 28 , 2003 ) , 7 ( december 17 , 2003 ) , and 8 ( december 17 , 2003 ) ; the national strategy for homeland security ; the national preparedness goal ; capabilities - based planning tools ( december 17 , 2004 ) ; national preparedness guidance ( december 2005 ) ; and annual homeland security grant program guidance and application kits ( november 2002 ; november 2003 ; december 2004 ; december 2005 ) , which detail federal , state , local , and non - federal entities' responsibilities to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks and catastrophic events .

the annual program guidance requires applicant states and urban areas to describe their homeland security objectives , goals , first responder and emergency management capabilities , and need for federal homeland security assistance .

the most immediately pertinent guidance is discussed below .

when dhs was established and its initial assistance programs for state and urban area governments were created , only two documents were required to support assistance applications—a state homeland security strategy and a follow - up categorical assistance progress report .

criteria for the strategy were established by the new department , but the progress report was carried over from the department of justice ( doj ) along with programs that were transferred from doj into the new department of homeland security .

in fy2003 , dhs required states and urban areas to submit an equipment budget worksheet with their grant applications .

the worksheet was to list the equipment to be purchased , the number of items , the estimated total cost , and the first responder entity that would receive the equipment .

in fy2004 , however , dhs stopped requiring the equipment budget worksheet .

in the dhs appropriations act of fy2006 , approved on october 18 , 2005 , congress gave the dhs secretary the discretion to require additional reports from assistance recipients .

pursuant to that discretionary authority , dhs currently requires the following documents from states and urban areas: a state homeland security strategy ; a program and capability enhancement plan ; an investment justification ; and a categorical assistance progress report .

the required contents of each of these four documents are shown in table 1 , and they are discussed below .

in fy2006 , dhs allocated the discretionary portions of shsgp and letpp grants and all uasi grants on the basis of two factors: risk and effectiveness .

dhs defines risk as a function of three variables: threat—"the likelihood of a type of attack that might be attempted" ; vulnerability—"the likelihood that a terrorist would succeed with a particular type of attack" ; and consequence—"the potential impact of a particular attack. .

dhs calculates two kinds of risk: asset - based risk , which uses threat values derived from the u.s. intelligence community's assessment of threats to specific critical infrastructure , and geographic - based risk , which uses values based on inherent risks associated with geographic areas , taking into account such factors as international borders , terrorism reports and investigations , and population density .

dhs describes its approach to asset - based risk as follows: the asset - based approach uses strategic threat estimates from the intelligence community of an adversary's intent and capability to attack different types of assets ( such as chemical plants , stadiums , and commercial airports ) using different attack methods .

dhs analyzes the vulnerability of each asset type relative to each attack method to determine the form of attack most likely to be successful .

additionally , dhs estimates the consequences that successful attacks would have on each asset type , including human health , economic , strategic mission , and psychological impacts .

this analysis yields a relative risk estimate for each asset type , which dhs applies to a given geographic area , based on the number of each asset type present within that area .

the department explains its complementary "geographic - based risk calculations" as follows: the geographic - based approach allows dhs to consider general characteristics of a geographic area mostly independent of the assets that exist within that area .

first , dhs evaluates reported threats , law enforcement activity ( using federal bureau of investigation and immigration and customs enforcement terrorism case data ) , and suspicious incidents reported during the evaluation period .

next , dhs considers vulnerability factors for each geographic area , such as the area's proximity to international borders .

lastly , dhs estimates the potential consequences of an attack on that area , including human health ( eg , population , population density , transient populations ) , economy ( eg , percentage of gross domestic product , total agriculture sales , international cargo value ) , strategic mission ( eg , defense industrial base ) , and psychological impacts. .

table 2 below , presents state and urban area assets that dhs considered in the risk model for its grant allocation method .

as can clearly be seen in table 2 , all but two asset types—road interstate bridges and road interstate tunnels—apply both to states and to urban areas .

table 3 , below , presents what dhs calls the "geographic attributes" that the department uses in its geographically based risk analysis .

in december 2003 , president bush issued hspd - 7 , a directive on critical infrastructure identification , prioritization , and protection which established a national policy for federal departments and agencies to identify and prioritize u.s. critical infrastructure and key resources and to protect them from terrorist attacks .

dhs is responsible for establishing a risk management framework to coordinate the federal effort .

the framework is supported by a comprehensive , national asset inventory—the national asset database ( nadb ) .

dhs's office for infrastructure protection ( ip ) is responsible for assessing the risk to the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources .

in july 2004 , ip requested states to submit critical infrastructure and key resources information .

between july 2004 and july 2005 , states identified and provided ip with data for 48,701 assets .

dhs used the nadb in its fy2006 grant allocation methods' asset - and geographic - based risk assessments ; however the nadb was not the only list of assets that dhs used in its assessments .

state and urban area investment justifications ( as part of their hsgp grant applications ) were evaluated on five effectiveness criteria: relevance—the relationship of the federal investment to the working principles of the national preparedness goal .

it is also evaluated through the investment relationship to the national priorities , tcl , state and urban area homeland security goals and objectives , and program and capability enhancement plan initiatives .

regionalization—the investment's ability to communicate , plan , and collaborate across first responder and emergency management disciplines and jurisdictions to use limited resources for regional homeland security solutions .

the investment encourages states and urban areas to coordinate preparedness activities within and across jurisdictional boundaries by sharing costs , pooling resources , sharing risk , and increasing the value of their preparedness investments through collaborative efforts .

sustainability—the investment's ability to sustain a target capability once the goal of the investment is achieved through the identification of funding sources beyond the current grant cycle .

implementation approach—the investment's demonstration of the appropriate in - place combination of personnel , resources , and tools to manage the investment .

it addresses priorities and delivers desirable results through appropriate expenditure of any requested funding .

impact—the investment's effect on risk , threat , vulnerability , and consequences of catastrophic events the applicants might face .

dhs used a peer review process to determine state and urban area investment justification effectiveness .

the department states: in fy06 , more than 100 peer reviewers read the investment justifications and worked independently to determine a preliminary effectiveness score before convening in panels to discuss the findings of their review , develop final scores , and provide comments on each submission .

the reviewers evaluated submissions based on specific criteria , including relevance , regionalization , sustainability , implementation approach , and impact .

each submission was reviewed and scored in two different ways , resulting in an average score for the individual investments and an overall score for the submission .

dhs combined the average score of the individual investments with the overall submission score , as determined by the peer review panel , to determine the final effectiveness score .

combining of risk and effectiveness .

in order to allocate federal homeland security assistance based upon relative risk and anticipated effectiveness scores , dhs grouped applicants into four categories: higher risk—higher effectiveness ; higher risk—lower effectiveness ; lower risk—higher effectiveness ; and lower risk—lower effectiveness .

dhs states that it targeted federal assistance to applicants with the greatest risk , while still funding "significant efforts undertaken by applicants in presenting effective solutions. .

each state's and urban area's final funding allocation was determined by combining its risk and effectiveness scores , with two - thirds weight applied to risk , and one - third weight applied to effectiveness .

possible oversight issues .

since dhs's inception , congress has given the department complete discretion in determining the risk and effectiveness factors used in allocating uasi funds .

additionally , congress has given dhs discretion in determining the factors used to allocate the remaining shsgp and letpp total appropriations following the allocation of the guaranteed amount of 0.75% of total appropriations .

oversight of dhs' risk - based methodology and risk - based distribution formulas may address the weights given to risk and effectiveness factors , specific threats to key assets and critical infrastructure , and plausible consequences to identified threats .

issue: who should identify the risk and effectiveness factors to be considered ? .

dhs has adopted allocation methodologies as explained above , and they may be the most appropriate .

dhs has opted to use two categories for risk factors , asset types and geographic attributes ( see tables 2 and 3 ) .

there are other approaches and factors .

examples of risk factors could include threats , homeland security capabilities , population , critical infrastructure assets , and transportation assets .

in order to accurately assess the risk factors , one would need to evaluate the threats to the population , critical infrastructure , transportation , and the like , and determine the consequences of threats .

additionally , effectiveness factors such as the homeland security capabilities to prevent , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks , and natural and technical disasters would need to be assessed .

the methods of threat and vulnerability assessment suggest a variety of factors that might be used in devising risk - based funding approaches for allocating homeland security assistance to states and urban areas .

the dhs inspector general's report on the nadb states that ip's data request to states generated an "abundance of unusual , or out - of - place , assets" whose criticality is not readily apparent .

examples of "out - of - place" assets cited include a psychiatry behavioral clinic , an ice cream parlor , a sears auto center , and an apple and pork festival .

additionally , the report identifies inconsistencies when comparing state - by - state asset totals .

the dhs inspector general states: several of dhs' protection programs utilize information from the nadb to help allocate resources .

however , in light of the variation in reporting between various sectors and states as well as the lack of detailed information on sites , we are not confident that the nadb can yet support effective grant decision - making .

issue: what risk and effectiveness factors are most appropriate ? .

issue: how did dhs determine what asset types and geographic attributes to use , and how are these weighted in a state's or an urban area's risk assessment ? .

issue: what weight did dhs give to nadb assets , and what other sources did dhs use in determining asset risks ? .

in considering risk and effectiveness factors , a question arises of what criteria to use when assessing potential risk - based formula variables .

risk factors include threats , the entity threatened , and the consequences of the threat to the specified entity .

the agreement of potential risk and need factors is usually considered against the following criteria: validity—do the factors serve as measures or indicators of threats , the vulnerability of the potential target , or potential consequence if catastrophe strikes the target ? .

for example , does higher population density indicate greater vulnerability to an attack involving a weapon of mass destruction ? .

what attributes associated with densely populated areas ( eg , numbers of law enforcement personnel on duty , the presence of sensors , cameras , and other technology ) could reduce the validity of the factor ? .

relevance—what is the relationship between the factors and the identified items or characteristics ? .

is the relationship straightforward , or is it murky ? .

for example , the total number of vehicles traveling through a mid - city tunnel would probably not be pertinent to a consideration of the risk of a hazardous material accident .

the number of commercial trucks carrying hazardous material , however , would be more relevant .

reliability—the quality of the source of the information used in a risk assessment process is relevant .

for example , population data from the u.s. census bureau are generally regarded as reliable and are used in a variety of formulas for allocating aid grants .

timeliness—the currency of the data affects the quality of the discussion on potential risks .

for example , daily intelligence reports that provide information on current terrorist threats would be considered more timely than monthly or quarterly reports .

availability—if the validity of a risk factor is to be widely accepted , data used in a formula as a variable may need to be readily and publicly available .

intelligence information that has been classified by the federal government and not shared with state and local officials would fail to satisfy this criterion .

additionally , dhs requires states and urban areas to identify first responder and emergency management capability enhancement and sustainment needs in the program and capability enhancement plan .

the plan is part of their hsgp applications .

as noted earlier , states and urban areas are required to submit investment justifications that detail how federal assistance would address identified homeland security needs and how the assistance would address state and urban area counter - terrorism - related capabilities .

the investment justifications are then evaluated through a peer review process ( administered by booz allen hamilton ) .

the peer review process , the justifications , and the identified effectiveness are not publically available .

additionally , the effectiveness factors are not identified by dhs ; instead states and urban areas are required to determine their individual needs and display how federal assistance would meet the needs .

dhs also has to rely on information from other agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and may not be able validate or confirm the information used in their state and urban area risk assessments .

issue: how should the risk and effectiveness factors be evaluated ? .

issue: is dhs able to validate and confirm the reliability of asset types and geographic attributes it receives from other federal entities ? .

dhs has elected not to use a 100% risk - based formula for allocating the remainder of shsgp and letpp total appropriations , and not to use a 100% risk - based allocation for uasi .

instead , dhs has developed a two - part approach to determining state and urban area allocations .

this approach consists of a dhs risk assessment and the state's and urban area's justification of need for funding .

critics may argue that by not allocating strictly on risk and by including a needs portion to the distribution method , dhs has not addressed criticisms , as from the 9 / 11 commission , in its 2004 report , which advocate a purely risk - based allocation of homeland security funding .

in this viewpoint , by coupling effectiveness with risk , dhs may be providing funding to states and urban areas that do not have a high risk of terrorism .

conversely , by allocating funding based on both risk and effectiveness , proponents could argue that dhs is addressing not only terrorism risks , but also a state's and an urban area's capability to address those terrorism risks .

the issue of risk - and effectiveness - based funding is being raised in oversight of fy2006 state allocations .

issue: has dhs compared a 100% risk - based methodology against a risk and effectiveness methodology ? .

if , so how does it change state and urban area allocations ? .

in the fy2006 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

109-90 ) , congress mandated that gao conduct an analysis of the threat and risk factors dhs used to allocate shsgp , letpp , and uasi grant funds , and report on the findings by november 17 , 2005 , which was prior to dhs's completion of its fy2006 hsgp guidance .

gao , using data and information available at the time , reviewed dhs allocation methodologies to determine ( 1 ) how dhs measured risk , ( 2 ) what risk factors were included in the methodologies and why , ( 3 ) how the risk factors were used for assessing risks for the purposes of allocating fy2006 hsgp funds , and ( 4 ) how dhs determined which risk factors had the greatest weight in the risk analysis portion of the methodologies .

gao determined that dhs's risk analysis focused on terrorism , and briefed congressional committees on the results of its analysis .

gao did not issue a public report , however , due to security classification of the data used in the analysis .

gao was not required to validate the methodologies , but to analyze them and report to congress on its findings .

in december 2004 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued a "final information quality bulletin for peer review. .

the bulletin is applicable to all federal departments and agencies and establishes government - wide guidance on enhancing the practice of peer - review of government scientific information .

omb states that peer review can increase the quality and credibility of the scientific information developed by the federal government .

"peer review" is characterized as ...one of the most important procedures used to ensure that the quality of published information meets the standards of scientific and technical community .

it is a form of deliberation involving an exchange of judgements about the appropriateness of methods and the strength of the author's inferences .

peer review involves the review of a draft product for quality by specialists in the field who were not involved in producing the draft .

the bulletin defines "scientific information" as factual inputs , data , models , analyses , technical information , or scientific assessments .

omb requires each federal agency to subject scientific information to peer review prior to dissemination .

the bulletin provides broad discretion in determining what type of peer review is appropriate and what procedures should be employed to select appropriate reviewers .

if dhs's fy2006 hsgp allocation methodologies were defined "scientific assessments" of terrorism risks , gao's review of the methodologies could be considered an independent peer review .

conversely , gao's review may not have been complete if gao was not given access to all the information used in dhs's allocation methodology or if dhs had not completed the assessment methods .

issue: should dhs arrange an independent peer review of its allocation methodologies prior to disseminating the grant application guidance and determining state and urban area allocations ? .

