congress' ongoing interest in america's strategic and defense relationships in the asia - pacific region was reflected in a september 2006 house international relations subcommittee on asia and the pacific hearing on america and asia in a changing world .

that hearing sought to review the main strands of u.s. policy in the asia - pacific , with the goal of conducting a net assessment of current and future strategic prospects in the region .

this report , which focuses on america's strategic and defense relationships in the asia - pacific region , is written to assist congressional decision - makers concerned with such issues .

it is also written as a companion piece to crs report rl33653 , east asian regional architecture: new economic and security arrangements and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

former chairman jim leach of the house subcommittee on asia and the pacific observed that "it is in asia where the united states will face its largest geopolitical challenges in the years ahead. .

he also noted that "maintaining a robust overseas military presence has historically been a key element of the united states national security policy in the asia - pacific. .

this forward presence promotes regional stability and "has been maintained by successive u.s .

administrations , all of which have emphasized the linkage between our network of alliances and friendships to a regional environment in asia conducive to confidence in economic growth. .

the united states established a number of bilateral defense alliances with key asian states in the 1950s as it was positioning itself to contain communist expansion in asia in the period following world war ii and the korean war .

despite periods of drift , these alliance relationships provided support and assistance to the united states through the cold war and during the war in vietnam .

the circumstances under which these alliances were forged have changed dramatically .

the fall of the soviet union , the post - cold war world , the asian financial crisis , the rise of china , and the emergence of violent islamist extremists have all done much to significantly alter the geopolitical landscape of asia .

a survey and assessment of the united states strategic and defense relationships in asia may be of use given important shifts in the geopolitical dynamics of asia .

such a review has led to several key shifts in the positioning of u.s. asia - pacific based forces including the anticipated shifting of some 8,000 marines from okinawa to guam , the reduction and repositioning of u.s. forces in south korea away from the demilitarized zone dividing the peninsula , and an increase of additional naval and air forces on guam .

most regional states continue to welcome the positive role that the united states can play in promoting regional security but some are beginning to hedge against what they perceive as an increasingly distracted and insufficiently engaged american power .

regional states' geographic proximity to china and rapidly expanding trade ties with china are , when combined with perceptions of american inattention , shifting regional states' perceptions of the long term role of the united states in the region .

a recent study on the united states and asia suggests that "washington must actively re - engage if it is to maintain its influence" in the region .

the united states' relative lack of attention to asia comes at a time when the correlates of power are shifting not only with regard to china but elsewhere in asia as well .

friction in the sino - japanese relationship as well as in north korea - japan relations is prompting japan to develop its military capabilities and play a more assertive role in international affairs .

india is developing rapidly and may as a result play an increasingly influential role in asian and world affairs .

south korea may be developing capabilities that look to strategic scenarios other than those involving north korea at a time when its alliance relationship with the united states is increasingly strained .

indonesia appears to be emerging from a lengthy period of economic and political instability as an increasingly effective democratic nation .

these developments present both challenges and opportunities to the united states .

several key strategic issues in the asia - pacific region are potentially of concern to u.s. decision makers .

these developments include the rise of china , continuing potential for interstate conflict , the struggle against islamist militancy , and asia - pacific arms expenditures .

american military forces in asia fall under one of two military commands , the u.s. pacific command and u.s. central command which are two of nine unified combatant commands and two of five regional commands .

 ( see figure 1 , below. ) .

while the asia - pacific falls under pacific command , parts of south and central asia are part of central command .

figure 1 illustrates the geographic division of responsibility for u.s. regional commands .

an assessment of america's regional alliance and security relationships reveals that there are some areas for concern and that efforts to restructure these relationships , while generally moving in the right direction , need to continue to adjust to the shifting geopolitical realities of asia .

some regional observers have remarked that the united states is increasingly insecure , not only as a result of the post 9 / 11 environment but also because of a "china threat" and a concern that america's presence and role in asia is declining .

this perceived american vulnerability and uncertainty about america's future role in asia is leading some asian analysts to predict that the united states will enter into a "new phase of inner absorption , if not increasing isolationism. .

such perceptions undermine america's leadership position in asia and may encourage regional states to look less to the united states as a guarantor of regional security .

another asian perspective is concerned with rising american primacy and an exercise of american power that it is increasingly moving away from a multipolar approach .

from this perspective , american primacy post 9 / 11 has led america to engage multilaterally not as a "meeting of the minds" but as "a means or process" for "engineering consent. .

regional states are , according to some , uneasy with the external posture and focus of the united states .

"many of our closest allies in the region are uncomfortable with the manner in which the administration has exercised america's extraordinary primacy in world affairs , so much so that one can imagine a range of scenarios in which even our friends in asia resist future washington initiatives. .

regional experts have also expressed concern that ongoing operations in iraq , as well as other developments in the middle east , have led to a lack of attention to key developments in asia .

u.s. policy options to strengthen america's strategic position in asia can be grouped into ideological , military , diplomatic , cultural , and economic subject areas .

by placing further emphasis on developing relations with like minded democratic nations in asia , the united states could potentially both secure its interests in asia and promote america's system of government .

such a policy clearly defines the different foreign policy approaches of the united states and china .

this could positively affect regional public perceptions of the united states but could also alienate foreign governments that would prefer the united states not become involved in what they perceive as the internal affairs of their countries .

such a policy could do more to reemphasize america's alliances with democratic regional states such as australia , new zealand , japan , south korea , and india .

it could also do more to reach out and support the expansion of democracy in regional muslim states such as indonesia .

more u.s. - funded development resources could be channeled into the promotion of democracy in regional developing countries .

debate in this area can be viewed as focusing on the proper balance between promoting democracy and balancing that against american geopolitical considerations in the region .

many have come to the conclusion that the war against radical islamist extremists is a war of ideas .

as such , a policy response that not only attacks terrorists and denies them sanctuary but one which also seeks to shrink the political space in which they operate could prove effective .

this could be achieved through expanded support of moderate regional muslim states and aid programs targeted at muslim majority areas in non - muslims states , such as the southern philippines and southern thailand , to help the alienated and disadvantaged in these countries become more integrated .

policies that promote the economic well - being of these states could also do much to positively affect the disposition of those who might be otherwise become alienated and disaffected .

it is a sense of alienation , disaffection , and grievance that appears to be a key prerequisite for recruitment into terrorist organizations .

an initiative aimed at educating the next generation of muslim and other leaders from the region would send a positive signal .

funding for exchanges with mid - level and senior - level representatives from academia , the military , the ngo community as well as cultural leaders could also enhance understanding .

similarly , expanded funding for american students , faculty , and practitioners to gain more in - depth understanding of regional muslim states , societies , languages , and cultures would better inform the american policy community in the years ahead .

analysts have argued that it is in the interests of the u.s. to augment the capabilities of allies to better handle potential future threats .

this view emphasizes the need to develop combined arms interoperability with regional allies to develop the capability to work together .

there is growing concern among some over a technology gap between the united states and its treaty and security partners in asia .

others take the view that asymmetrical warfare provides opportunities for allies and friends to work with the united states in a range of ways that does not necessitate that america's security partners be on the same technological footing as the u.s .

initiatives to restructure american forces in asia , particularly in japan and korea , are intended to place america's alliances on a more sustainable footing designed to provide greater flexibility while lessening tensions in america's regional alliance relationships .

greater coordination among allies in the area of conflict prevention could help promote stability in the region .

further developing economic and trade ties with allies could also strengthen the bonds between the u.s. and its allies .

many non - allied regional states such as singapore are increasingly valuable partners in the region .

existing military exchanges , combined and joint training and exercises , and arms sales all play a key role in developing military to military ties that can develop closer working defense relationships with countries that share strategic concerns .

initiatives such as the anti - terror cooperation programs , the proliferation security initiative , and the maritime security initiative have done much to develop closer defense cooperation between the united states and regional friends as well as allies .

exploring ways to improve these programs and expand into new areas of cooperation could further strengthen working defense relationships .

some observers are of the opinion that changes in policy or new initiatives to address regional concerns that america is focused elsewhere in the world could do much to positively shift regional perceptions .

increased participation in regional multilateral fora , ( such as signing the asean treaty of amity and cooperation and / or joining the east asia summit ) increased foreign aid , expanded diplomatic representation in the region , and expanded educational exchange programs could send positive signals to regional states .

new or expanded programs to address non - military issues such as trade , health issues ( including aids and avian flu ) , disaster assistance , human trafficking , and poverty alleviation may be constructive ways to demonstrate america's commitment to and engagement with the region .

such programs could address negative public opinion of the united states in the region and thereby create a political atmosphere that would be more open to closer defense and strategic cooperation with the united states .

the strategic and defense context in asia is largely defined by regional trade and economic ties .

the east asia economic summit was the first significant post world war ii grouping in east asia without significant american involvement .

this , and a perception that there is declining energy behind the apec process , has led some to see an emerging bifurcation of east asian and trans - pacific frameworks .

renewed emphasis on apec as a constructive economic group , as well as renewed emphasis on engagement with asean and existing regional bilateral trade initiatives , could do much to strengthen america's position in asia .

the united states could place new emphasis on coordination with regional countries to ensure fair access to energy resources .

there are signs of increasing competition to secure energy resources and trade routes that are critical to sustaining economic development , particularly in india and china .

developing a cooperative regional approach to maintain the free flow of energy resources could do much to alleviate potential concerns , or even rivalry , over access to these strategically vital resources .

