on march 8 , 2006 , then u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) rob portman announced and notified congress of the administration's intent to negotiate a free trade agreement ( fta ) with malaysia.. at the time , then ustr portman indicated that he thought the negotiations could be completed "within a year. .

the first round of negotiations was held june 12-16 , 2006 , in malaysia with at least five rounds anticipated .

since then , eight separate rounds of talks have been held .

a proposed ninth round of talks were postponed until after president barack obama's inauguration .

if and when the negotiations are completed , the proposed fta will have to be submitted to congress for consideration if it is to go into effect .

conserted efforts to complete the negotiations of the free trade agreement ( fta ) before the end of the bush administration were unsuccessful as talks foundered on a number of key issues .

these include malaysia's government procurement policies ( which give preferential treatment to bumiputera - owned companies ) , market access for u.s. companies into malaysia's services sectors ( in particular , financial services ) , provisions for intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection , and market access for u.s. exports of automobiles and agricultural crops .

during a media roundtable discussion in december 2008 , u.s .

ambassador to malaysia james keith indicated that there were 23 trading issues still to be resolved in the negotiations .

the fta negotiations continued to be a controversial topic in malaysia in 2008 .

an ad - hoc meeting of senior government officials reconfirmed its support for continuing fta negotiations on certain topics , including government procurement , competition policy , intellectual property rights , and labor conditions .

however , some issues – such as rice imports – remained off the table .

in addition , the financial crisis in the united states apparently raised some concerns in malaysia about discussions over opening up malaysia's financial markets to u.s. companies .

also , various interest groups in malaysia – including an organization representing malaysia's small and medium - sized enterprises ( smes ) – reiterated their call for the malaysian government to terminate the fta negotiations , claiming that the proposed agreement would do irreparable harm to thousands of malaysia's smes .

in november 2008 , tony pua of parti tindakan demokratik ( democratic action party , or dap ) , a major opposition party , suggested the government prepare a "white paper" outlining the details of the fta negotiations to be presented to malaysia's parliament to assure that the negotiation team was abiding by the agreed government policies .

the future status of the proposed fta were further complicated by israel's military operation in gaza .

after israel launched "operation cast lead" on december 27 , 2008 , various political figures and interest groups in malaysia called for a boycott of u.s. products and the suspension of the fta talks to protest u.s. support for israel's military operations in gaza .

on january 12 , 2009 , malaysia's minister of international trade and industry , muhyiddin yassin , said that fta talks with the united states were temporarily being stopped until the ministry received further instructions from malaysia's cabinet .

minister muhyiddin added that malaysia would not be hasty to conclude the fta negotiations at a time when the united states was supporting "israel's cruelty to palestinian people. .

there have been some indications from the obama administration about its intentions regarding the u.s. - malaysia fta negotiations .

following the u.s. presidential elections , minister muhyiddin stated that the malaysian government had been informed by representatives of the incoming obama administration that negotiations would recommence sometime after the inauguration .

there have also been signals from president obama that workers rights and environmental issues will play a more prominent role in trade negotiations during his administration .

in his announcement to nominate ron kirk as u.s. trade representative , then president - elect obama stated , "as a leader , negotiator , and principled proponent of trade , ron will help make sure that any agreements i sign as president protect the rights of all workers , promote the interests of all americans , and preserve the planet we all share. .

at one time , there were to be three rounds of talks in 2008 , to be held in january , july and november , respectively .

in the end , only two rounds of talks were held ( in january and july as planned ) , but the third round of talks were postponed at the request of the united states .

following the failure to complete fta negotiations in 2007 , there was a perception in malaysia that the bush administration did not see relations with malaysia or the conclusion of fta negotiations as a priority .

during a press interview in december 2007 , ambassador keith was asked if the failure of u.s. secretary of state condoleezza rice to attend asean meetings , as well as the "low - level delegation" sent by the united states to malaysia's 50 th national day celebrations , was an indication that malaysia had "moved down the list of priorities for the u.s. state department. .

ambassador keith reassured the press of the u.s. commitment to the region and to malaysia , pointing to the passage on september 17 , 2007 of house resolution 518 commemorating malaysia's 50 th anniversary as evidence .

on december 30 , 2007 , u.s. assistant trade representative barbara weisel confirmed that "the u.s. continues to seek to conclude the agreement by this summer , which we believe is achievable…" weisel also said that the bush administration would seek an "appropriate vehicle" to obtain congressional approval of the proposed fta once the negotiations were completed .

over the last three years , several issues have emerged as difficult topics in the negotiations .

the main topics still to be resolved include intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection , market access for u.s. automobiles and agricultural goods in malaysia , trade in services , and government procurement policies .

the proposed u.s. - malaysia fta is of interest to congress because: ( 1 ) it requires congressional approval ; ( 2 ) it would continue the past trend toward greater trade liberalization and globalization ; ( 3 ) it may include controversial provisions ; and ( 4 ) it would affect certain trade flows that would , in turn , affect u.s. businesses or farmers , particularly import - competing industries and those exporting to malaysia .

among the initial responses to the ustr's 2006 fta announcement were a statement by senator max baucus welcoming the agreement , and statements by representatives jim kolbe and dan burton hailing the launch of the negotiations .

the national association of manufacturers indicated that it has been a leading advocate of an fta with malaysia , and a u.s. - malaysia free trade agreement ( fta ) business coalition was organized on march 8 , 2006 .

objections to the proposed fta have come from some malaysian and u.s. labor unions , farmers , fishermen and academics .

malaysia plays into u.s. interests through its economy and trade ; its role in countering radical islamic organizations ; the example it sets as a democratic secular muslim state ; its position as a member of asean , asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , and other multilateral fora ; its shared interest in dealing with a rising china ; and the common goal of securing a safe shipping channel through the strait of malacca .

a u.s. - malaysia fta was part of the bush administration's strategy to press for regional and bilateral trade initiatives in order to "ignite a new era of global economic growth through free markets and free trade. .

in a broader sense , the proposed fta would be a step toward realization of apec's "bogor vision," under which the united states and apec's other 21 members are working toward "free and open trade in the pacific. .

at the 2006 apec meetings , the united states proposed that apec consider forming a free trade area of the asia pacific that would accomplish this goal .

with the doha round of multilateral trade talks under the world trade organization ( wto ) encountering problems , some see ftas as a plausible alternative .

when announcing the proposed negotiations , the ustr listed four major goals associated with a u.s. - malaysia fta .

these were: ( 1 ) to create new opportunities for u.s. manufacturers , farmers , and service providers ; ( 2 ) to strengthen u.s. competitiveness and generate high - paying jobs ; ( 3 ) to strengthen u.s. economic partnerships in the region ; and ( 4 ) to advance broader u.s. strategic goals .

other benefits mentioned for the proposed fta included: ( 5 ) to cement a vibrant u.s. - malaysia economic relationship ; ( 6 ) to increase u.s. exports ; ( 7 ) to diversify u.s. exports ; ( 8 ) to increase investment ; ( 9 ) to increase the sharing of knowledge and know - how between u.s. companies and malaysian companies ; ( 10 ) to enhance economic growth and job creation ; and ( 11 ) to lower costs and create more competitive companies .

in malaysia , the ministry of international trade and is leading the negotiations .

the ministry lists as its fta objectives to: ( 1 ) seek better market access for malaysian goods and services ; ( 2 ) further facilitate and promote bilateral trade and investment flows as well as economic development ; ( 3 ) enhance the competitiveness of malaysian producers and exporters through collaboration ; and ( 4 ) build capacity in specific targeted areas thorough technical cooperation .

the ministry also views the proposed fta as comprehensive and covering liberalization of the goods and services sector ; trade and investment promotion and facilitation activities ; investment protection ; economic and technical cooperation programs ; and having appropriate flexibility to facilitate development objectives .

the ministry also noted that it would seek "flexibility and longer phase - in periods for sensitive sectors. .

several malaysian industries have been generally supportive of the proposed fta , principally because they believe that they will benefit from greater access to the u.s. market .

among these industries are clothing and textiles , ceramics , lumber , rubber and consumer electronics .

in addition , malaysia hopes the fta will increase inward foreign direct investment ( fdi ) from the united states and other nations because of malaysia's improved access to the u.s. market .

a u.s. - malaysia fta would also improve u.s. access to the economies of southeast asia .

malaysia already has ftas with indonesia , brunei , singapore , the philippines , and vietnam under the asean free trade area , and asean is nearing completion of an fta with india .

it has ftas with south korea and pakistan , an economic partnership agreement with japan covering most goods trade , a partial fta with china , and it is negotiating ftas with australia and new zealand , and discussing an fta with india .

on april 19 , 2007 , chile and malaysia announced they would start negotiations on the establishment of a bilateral fta in june , with the first round of talks held in kuala lumpur .

when announcing the initiation of fta negotiations , the ustr indicated that via the proposed fta , the u.s. government is hoping to further build the broader relations with a country that has been on the "forefront of asia's economic transformation and is a leader in the region and beyond. .

the ustr hoped that this fta would strengthen u.s. cooperation with malaysia in multilateral and regional fora , reinforce a strong u.s. - asean relationship , and advance u.s. commercial and strategic interests in asia .

as a moderate , democratic muslim nation , malaysia plays a strategic role in u.s. foreign policy .

in 2005 , prime minister abdullah urged muslims around the world to guard against extremism and improve ties with the west while promoting his nation's moderate version of islam .

the bush administration also hoped that the proposed fta would reinforce the shared interests of the united states and malaysia , promote common values , and facilitate cooperation in counterterrorism , defense , counter - narcotics , education , and in other areas .

malaysia ( along with indonesia , singapore , and thailand ) plays a key role in protecting vital maritime shipping lanes in the strait of malacca from pirates and terrorism .

in the united states , opposition to the proposed fta has emerged from labor unions and environmental protection organizations , as well as "anti - globalization" groups .

in malaysia , voices opposing the fta have arisen from labor unions , farmers , fishermen and other groups , as well as from opposition political parties .

in some cases , opponents to a u.s. - malaysia fta from both nations have formed coalitions .

with respect to labor interests , the afl - cio opposes additional ftas unless they contain meaningful protections for workers' rights and environmental standards .

its position is that the bush administration launched or concluded bilateral free trade agreements that include no enforceable protections for core workers' rights , and move "backwards from previous accords on workers' rights , and contain many of the same flawed rules that have worsened our trade deficit" under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

labor organizations also are interested in ensuring that labor laws in the bilateral trading partner country are brought up to international labor organization ( ilo ) standards and that a dispute settlement or enforcement mechanism is included in agreements that would preclude partner countries from reversing labor gains or weakening labor laws following congressional approval and implementation of their respective ftas .

during the presidential campaign , barack obama expressed some support for the labor unions' concerns about the labor provisions of the negotiated ftas with colombia and south korea .

labor conditions in malaysia have been the subject of some international criticism .

according to malaysian law , workers are afforded a variety of rights and most workers have the right to engage in trade union activity .

however , according to the latest u.s. state department country report on malaysia , only 9.5% of the labor force was represented by trade unions .

in addition , malaysian trade union officials report extended delays of up to four years in obtaining legal recognition of their union .

a specific area of international concern has been the working conditions of malaysia's estimated 2.5 million immigrant workers — most from indonesia — who reportedly face abuse and exploitation by employers and recruitment agencies .

there has also been organized opposition to a u.s. - malaysia fta from malaysians .

on january 11 , 2007 , an anti - fta campaign in northern malaysia resulted in petitions with over 20,000 farmer and fishermen signatures being submitted to malaysia's prime minister abdullah and malaysia's ministry of international trade and industry .

the petitions state that the proposed fta would harm malaysia's rice farmers and fishing industry .

in october 2006 , a coalition of opposition parties , workers , and small businesses in malaysia called for the cessation of negotiations with the united states until a study of the economic and social impact of the proposed fta was conducted .

opposition to an fta also may arise from various special interest groups .

for example , public citizen , a nonprofit consumer advocacy organization in the united states , maintains that the fta with central america is "based on the same failed neoliberal nafta model , which has caused the 'race to the bottom' in labor and environmental standards and promotes privatization and deregulation of key public services. .

in malaysia , people concerned about the cost of pharmaceutical drugs , especially treatment for hiv / aids , are opposed to possible provisions in the fta that they believe will raise the cost of prescription drugs in malaysia .

another possible issue complicating the negotiations could be u.s. relations with israel .

malaysia currently does not have diplomatic relations with israel and requires export licenses for all goods sent to israel .

u.s. law currently contains several provisions designed to undermine official boycotts and trade embargoes aimed at israel .

as previously mentioned , u.s. support for israel's military operations in gaza have given rise to a boycott of u.s. products and calls to suspend the fta negotiations .

during recent congressional consideration of other proposed ftas , opposition concerns have been addressed either in the implementing legislation or by securing various commitments in writing from the administration .

for example , in congressional consideration of the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) , the bush administration assuaged opposition from labor , sugar , and textile interests by promising certain actions to ameliorate adverse effects of the proposed fta .

in a letter , the administration promised to allocate $40 million of fy2006 foreign operations appropriations for "labor and environmental enforcement capacity building assistance," and to continue to request this level of funding in budgets for fiscal years 2007 through 2009 .

the bush administration also stated that it would not allow the dr - cafta to interfere with the operation of the sugar program through fy2007 as the program is defined in the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 .

for the textile and apparel industry , promises were made related to rules of origin , stricter customs enforcement with respect to mexican inputs used in dr - cafta textile and apparel products , and actions to increase use of u.s. fabric .

the usual goal of free trade agreements is to reduce barriers to trade and investment .

in addition to eliminating or reducing tariffs on both sides , ftas often eliminate or reduce import quotas and other non - tariff barriers to trade .

they also usually provide access to services , open markets for investment , contain provisions strengthening protection of intellectual property , address certain types of government regulations and practices , provide for a dispute settlement process , and can touch on issues such as business visas , competition policy , and a variety of policies or practices that affect economic activity .

ftas also create winners and losers .

in general , the ones who gain from ftas tend to be exporters , investors , and consumers , while those who lose tend to be companies and workers in import - competing industries .

in addition , non - party countries could the fta can be affected by the terms of the agreement , as trade is created or diverted between nations .

an fta with malaysia would be the third fta negotiation by the united states with a southeast asian nation , following the u.s. - singapore fta that came into effect on january 1 , 2004 , and a proposed u.s. - thailand fta whose negotiations are currently stalled .

the united states also has an fta with australia and is negotiating an fta with south korea .

on may 10 , 2004 , the united states and malaysia signed a trade and investment framework agreement .

past ftas negotiated by the united states usually provide for tariff free trade between the two countries with a phase - in period for sensitive sectors .

with malaysia , some trade already is tariff free .

both the united states and malaysia participate in the information technology agreement ( ita ) under which tariffs on semiconductors and other information technology products are bound at zero .

the majority of current u.s. exports to malaysia are covered by this agreement .

semiconductors and parts for computers alone account for more than half of u.s. exports to malaysia .

an fta , however , would open markets artificially restricted by tariff and non - tariff barriers .

many of the more competitive u.s. exports face relatively high duties in malaysia .

these include products such as motor vehicles and parts , off - road dumpers , polyethylene , motorcycles , and adhesives .

for more information on the relative tariff rates of the two nations , see appendix c .

the potential impact of an fta depends on various other factors , including the relative size of the two nations , the amount and nature of their bilateral trade flows , the size of bilateral fdi in each nation , as well as existing trade relations with other nations .

below is a summary of key aspects of these factors .

 table 1 provides a summary of malaysia's key economic indicators .

malaysia has been one of the fastest growing economies in the world over the last few years .

early in 2008 , malaysia experienced a sharp rise in inflation , but the inflationary pressures subsided as the impact of the u.s. and e.u .

economic slowdown affected malaysia's exports .

malaysia's gdp and average per capita income make it a market considerably larger than most of the countries that have recently negotiated free trade agreements with the united states .

at official exchange rates , the per capita income in 2007 was $6,724 , but its purchasing power parity was estimated by the world bank at $13,570 – higher than argentina , chile , and mexico .

according to malaysia's ministry of finance , the united states is its largest trading partner and largest foreign investor .

according to u.s. trade figures , malaysia was the tenth largest trading partner of the united states in 2007 .

the united states exported more to malaysia in the first 11 months of 2008 than it did to colombia or peru , two other nations with pending ftas with the united states .

for the first 10 months of 2008 , u.s. investment in malaysia totaled $1.8 billion — the second greatest source of foreign investment in malaysia , after australia .

ftas usually have several distinct effects on trade flows .

they tend to divert export and import trade toward the countries involved , but they also can create more trade overall by lowering tariffs and other trade barriers .

ftas also can cause a substitution effect as imports are substituted for domestic production .

in that case , import - competing industries may suffer and may request assistance to adjust to increased competition from imports .

when the talks began , the ustr's goal was to have the u.s. - malaysia fta implementing bill considered by congress under "fast track" expedited procedures of the bipartisan trade promotion authority ( tpa ) act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

however , the statute requires the president to notify congress of his intention to enter into the agreement at least 90 calendar days before entering into the trade agreement .

since the president's trade promotion authority expired on july 1 , 2007 , and the president did not notify the congress by the april 2 , 2007 deadline , the u.s. - malaysia fta became ineligible to be considered under the 2002 tpa .

as a result , there are several possible scenarios under which a proposed fta with malaysia might be considered by congress .

first , if congress were to extend , renew or revise trade promotion authority , then the u.s. - malaysia fta might be considered under the provisions of a new tpa law .

second , congress could choose to pass legislation providing temporary or limited tpa for the proposed u.s. - malaysia fta .

this approach was used when congress considered the uruguay round agreements .

third , congress could consider the proposed u.s. - malaysia fta without tpa , as it did with the u.s. - jordan fta .

however , consideration of the proposed fta with malaysia without tpa would potentially allow congress to amend the implementing bill in ways that could modify the terms of the trade agreement .

in the meantime , while negotiations with malaysia on the proposed fta are incomplete , the legislative policy options include consultations with the executive branch , holding oversight hearings on pertinent u.s. trade policy and relations with malaysia and other nations , and working with interest groups that either support or oppose the proposed agreement .

p.l .

107-210 ( section 2104 ) provides for close consultations with the executive branch during and following the negotiations .

such consultations could lead to changes in the draft agreement before it is signed .

appendix a. map of malaysia appendix b .

chronology appendix c. a comparison of u.s. and malaysian tariff rates measuring the degree of protection provided by tariff barriers is a complicated process , since each country has thousands of products each with a tariff rate that depends on the category of exporter .

average rates , therefore , will differ depending on how they are calculated .

the two types of averages most often cited are the most favored nation ( mfn ) rates and the average applied rates .

average mfn tariff rates the mfn rates apply to most countries and all members of the world trade organization .

u.s. exporters face these rates unless they have been reduced by a special arrangement , such as the generalized system of preferences or the information technology agreement .

the average mfn rates are simple averages of all tariff lines .

on an mfn basis , malaysia's average tariff rate at 8.1% is higher than the 4.8% of the united states .

shows the average and range of u.s. and malaysian mfn tariff rates by major commodity category as classified under the harmonized system .

both the united states and malaysia have peaks in tariff rates on certain products .

malaysia and the united states each protects its agricultural sector .

although malaysia's average mfn tariff rate for agricultural products at 3.2% is lower than the 9.7% of the united states , malaysia maintains high rates on items of interest to u.s. agriculture .

the malaysian tariff rate for grains averages 15.2% and rice is at 40% , oranges and apples at 15% to 20% , and wheat flour at 96% .

prepared food is subject to tariffs of 5% to 30% .

beef enters the country at 15% , but pork faces a 139% tariff and ham 168% .

the tariff is 25% on yogurt , 10 to 25% on chocolate products , and 20% on baby food .

for the united states , the upper range for agricultural products is a 350% tariff on imports of tobacco products that exceed the import quota .

tobacco products within the quota face a 12.1% tariff rate .

in recent years , the tobacco quota has not been filled , so the 350% rate has not been applied .

in non - agricultural products ( excluding petroleum ) , malaysia's average mfn tariff rate is 8.7% as compared with 4.0% in the united states .

the ranges of tariff rates are similar .

in malaysian sectors where the government is fostering the growth of industry , however , the rates are particularly high .

for transport equipment , the average malaysia tariff of 25.6% is more than ten times the u.s. rate of 2.5% .

for non - electrical machinery , a sector in which both countries currently export to each other , the malaysia tariff rate at 6.3% is over four times the u.s. rate of 1.4% .

similarly , in electrical machinery the malaysia rate of 9.2% is much higher the u.s. rate of 2.2% .

average applied tariff rates applied average tariff rates are derived by dividing the amount of customs duties collected by the value of imports .

average applied tariff rates are frequently used indicators of a nation's actual level of tariff protection .

these rates may be somewhat lower than the mfn rates because items with high rates might not be imported at all ( so no tariffs are paid ) and because a nation may have special trade arrangements with other nations under which the partners pay lower or no tariffs on their exports .

they can also be higher if importers buy expensive items ( such as machinery or automobiles ) subject to higher tariff rates .

for malaysia , the average applied tariff rate of 8.4% in 2006 was more than twice the u.s. average rate of 3.7% .

for all industrial goods , the applied rate is 9.1% in malaysia as compared with 3.7% in the united states .

shows malaysian applied tariff rates for selected industrial sectors .

appendix d. u.s .

merchandise exports to malaysia by two - digit harmonized system codes , 2005-2007 ( us$ million ; fas value ) appendix e. u.s .

merchandise imports from malaysia by two - digit harmonized system codes , 2005-2007 ( u.s.$ millions , cif values ) appendix f. u.s .

merchandise exports by state to malaysia , 2004-2006 ( u.s .

dollars ) .

