in january 2002 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria ( global fund ) was established as an independent foundation in switzerland to support country efforts to curb the number of illnesses and deaths caused by hiv / aids , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and malaria .

each year , the three diseases kill some 6 million people , mostly in africa .

the fund's board meets at least twice annually to discuss governance issues , such as grant approval .

nineteen board seats are rotated among seven donor countries , seven developing countries , and one representative from each of a developed country non - governmental organization ( ngo ) , a developing country ngo , the private sector , a foundation , and affected communities .

the united states holds a permanent board seat .

in its first five years , the fund aimed to support: treatment for 1.8 million hiv - positive people , 5 million people infected with tb , and 145 million malaria patients ; the prevention of hiv transmission to 52 million people through voluntary hiv counseling and testing services ( vct ) ; the purchase and distribution of 109 million insecticide - treated bed nets to prevent the spread of the malaria ; and care for 1 million orphans .

as of july 11 , 2008 , the global fund has approved proposals for 519 grants in 136 countries totaling $10.8 billion ( table 1 ) .

about half of those funds have been disbursed .

as of december 2007 , the fund - supported grants have been used to treat an estimated 1.4 million hiv - positive people and 3.3 million people infected with tb , and to distribute 46 million insecticide - treated bed nets to prevent malaria transmission .

an estimated 58% of global fund grants support hiv / aids interventions , about 17% fund anti - tb programs ; some 24% sustain anti - malaria projects , and 1% strengthen health systems .

according to the global fund , in 2005 , its support represented more than 20% of all global hiv / aids spending , some 67% of global tb funds and about 64% of all international support for malaria interventions .

in 2005 , the fund approved round 5 grants in two tranches , because there were no sufficient donor pledges to support all recommended proposals at the time of grant approval .

its comprehensive funding policy ( cfp ) specifies that the fund can only sign grant agreements if there are sufficient resources to support the first two years of grant activities .

the policy is designed to avoid disruptions in funding that might interrupt project activities .

financial delays can cause people to miss treatments , potentially leading to drug - resistance , susceptibility to secondary diseases , or death .

the fund distributes grants through a performance - based funding system .

under this system , the fund commits to financially support the first two years ( phase i ) of approved grants , though it disburses the funds quarterly if grants meet their targets .

as the end of phase i approaches , the fund reviews the progress of the grant to determine if it should support the third through fifth years ( phase ii ) .

in november 2006 , the board established the rolling continuation channel ( rcc ) .

this funding channel , which began in march 2007 , permits country coordinating mechanisms ( ccms ) to request additional funding for grants that are performing well but set to expire .

the application process for the rcc is not as rigorous as the round process .

rcc - approved grants can receive support for up to an additional six years , with the funds being awarded in three - year intervals .

the channel is intended only for those grants that have demonstrated a significant contribution "to a national effort that has had , or has the potential to have in the near future , a measurable impact on the burden of the relevant disease. .

the fund uses a performance - based funding system that permits it to temporarily suspend support for grants if it finds significant problems with project performance , such as accounting inconsistencies .

in some instances , the fund restored support to grants once key concerns were resolved .

for example , in november 2006 , the fund suspended support for grants in chad .

after undertaking audits of the grants , the fund reportedly discovered evidence of "misuse of funds at several levels and the lack of satisfactory capacity by the principal recipient and sub - recipients to manage the global fund's resources. .

in august 2007 , the fund announced that it had lifted the suspension , "after a series of investigation and negotiations between the global fund and national authorities ... and after efforts and strong commitment of all relevant stakeholders which guaranteed that the issues have been addressed and better systems with clarified responsibilities will be put in place .

as part of the [global fund's] mitigation — besides other measures — a fiduciary agent will guarantee for an interim period of 12 months adequate financial monitoring and accounting for our grants. .

the fund might discontinue support for grants in phase ii if it finds that they did not sufficiently meet their targets .

countries whose grants have been discontinued can apply and have secured funding in subsequent rounds ( see nigeria below ) .

in extreme cases , the fund will immediately cancel financial support .

if funds are immediately revoked , the fund might invoke its continuity of services policy , which ensures that life - extending treatment is continued for suspended or cancelled grants or for those whose terms have expired until other financial support is identified .

to date , the fund has only terminated grants in burma .

when the fund decided to terminate support for grants in burma , policy analysts debated how best to serve humanitarian needs in politically unstable countries .

at the launching of pepfar , the administration proposed that over the plan's five - year term , $1 billion be contributed to the global fund .

the administration has requested $1.3 billion for the fund from fy2004 through fy2008: $200 million in each of fy2004 and fy2005 , and $300 million in each of fy2006 through 2008 .

congress has consistently provided more to the fund than the administration has requested through pepfar , appropriating some $3 billion from fy2004 through fy2008 ( table 3 ) .

in fy2008 , congress appropriated $840.3 million for a u.s. contribution to the fund , the single largest u.s. contribution to date .

of those funds , $545.5 million would be funded through the state department , and $294.8 million through the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the president requested $500 million for fy2009 .

some critics of the fund have expressed concern about particular aspects of the fund's financial policies .

observers contend that the fund's oversight mechanisms are not strong enough to protect against wasteful spending , particularly in countries that have a well documented history of corruption and poor financial management .

fund supporters counter that the organization's website provides an abundance of information related to its funding process , grant project proposals and budgets , grant spending trends , and results of board meetings , which include decisions regarding the suspension of grants .

fund advocates also argue that the fund's decisions to suspend temporarily , and in some cases , discontinue poor performing grants demonstrate the effectiveness of the fund's oversight and funding mechanisms .

in june 2005 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reported that the fund had a limited capability to monitor and evaluate grants , raising questions about the accuracy of its reported results .

gao also indicated that the fund's documents had not consistently explained why it provided additional funds for grants or why it denied disbursement requests .

in october 2006 , the center for global development ( cgd ) global fund working group reported similar findings and made a number of recommendations , including strengthening the performance based funding system .

in an effort to strengthen oversight of the fund's grants , congress included a provision in section 525 of p.l .

109-102 , fy2006 foreign operations appropriations , that required 20% of the u.s. contribution to the global fund be withheld until the secretary of state certified to the appropriations committees that the fund had undertaken a number of steps to strengthen oversight and spending practices .

the act allows the secretary to waive the requirement , however , if she determines that a waiver is important to the national interest .

at a march 2007 hearing on tb held by the subcommittee on africa and global health , representative adam smith expressed his reservations about the fund's oversight capacity , stating that the information and accountability that congress has come to take for granted through bilateral programs are not available through the global fund , and that many of the primary recipients of the global fund grants are governments with a history of corruption and fraud and / or limited capacity to properly manage large sums of money in their health sectors .

one could argue that the absence in the global fund of a robust reporting and monitoring mechanism , at both the primary and sub - recipient levels , is an open invitation for waste in these countries and a tragic loss of opportunity to save lives .

the implementation of a system that provides accountability and transparency would seem vital , absolutely necessary , in my view , to continue the expanded donor support of the global fund in the future .

gao re - evaluated the fund and released a report in may 2007 , which acknowledged that the fund had improved its documentation of funding decisions , but also determined that the process needed improvement .

the report indicated that while each grant that gao reviewed included an explanation of associated funding decisions , the explanations did not detail what criteria the fund used to determine whether to disburse funds or renew support , as it had found in 2005 .

gao recommended that the fund strengthen oversight of local fund agents ( lfas ) and standardize performance benchmarks to improve the quality of grant monitoring and reporting .

in fy2008 , congress placed additional monitoring and oversight provisions to global fund appropriations .

the fy2008 consolidated appropriations required that 20% of u.s. contributions to the fund be withheld until the secretary of state certifies to the committees on appropriations that the global fund releases incremental disbursements only if grantees demonstrate progress against clearly defined performance indicators ; provides support and oversight to country - level entities ; has a full - time , independent office of inspector general who is fully operational ; requires lfas to assess whether a principal recipient has the capacity to oversee the activities of sub - recipients ; is making progress toward implementing a reporting system that breaks down grantee budget allocations by programmatic activity ; makes the reports of the inspector general publicly available ; and tracks and encourages the involvement of civil society , including faith - based organizations , in country coordinating mechanisms and program implementation .

the fy2008 consolidated appropriations also required the secretary of state to submit a report within 120 days of enactment to the appropriations committees that details the involvement of faith - based organizations in global fund programs .

some in congress have long advocated for stronger oversight of global fund spending .

supporters of this idea have welcomed the provisions .

some global fund supporters contend , however , that such action is unnecessary in light of the strides that the fund continues to make in improving its reporting and monitoring practices .

as congress considers whether to continue supporting the global fund , members might debate whether the fund is sufficiently adhering to congressional mandates or if additional provisions are necessary .

p.l .

108-25 , u.s .

leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act , prohibits u.s. government contributions to the fund from exceeding 33% of contributions from all donors .

congress instituted the contribution limit to encourage greater global support for the fund .

there is some debate about whether the 33% provision should be interpreted as the amount the united states should provide to the fund or as the maximum amount the united states can contribute .

supporters of the fund contend that congress instituted the 33% mandate in recognition of the moral responsibility that the united states holds as one of the wealthiest countries in the world .

opponents of this idea assert that if u.s. contributions to the fund were to reflect its share of the global economy , then u.s. contributions would and should range from 20% to 25% of all contributions .

some global fund advocates who disparage the 33% restriction argue that the differing fiscal cycles of the fund and the united states complicate efforts to leverage support .

opponents to the 33% restriction contend that the requirement is harmful to the fund , because the u.s. fiscal year concludes some three months before the fund's .

critics most often point to fy2004 to substantiate their position .

in that fiscal year , nearly $88 million of the u.s. contribution was withheld from the fund to prevent the funds from exceeding 33% .

advocates of the restriction assert that the 33% cap was intended to suspend portions of u.s. contributions , where necessary .

proponents of the cap note that the fund was not significantly affected , as the withheld portion was released at the end of the calendar year , when the fund secured sufficient funds to match the u.s. contribution .

supporters of the provision contend that the fund benefits from the policy , because it encourages other donors to increase their contributions , as happened in fy2004 ( table 4 ) .

debate on the 33% contribution cap has also focused on the limited amount of support that the private sector and others have provided to the fund ( table 5 ) .

since its inception , the fund has struggled to secure support from non - government donors .

the bill & melinda gates foundation remains the largest single contributor among non - government donors .

as of july 17 , 2008 , the foundation accounts for about 86% ( $650.0 million ) of all non - governmental pledges ( $755.1 million ) and more than 75% ( $450.0 million ) of all payments made to the fund by non - governmental donors ( $579.6 million ) .

some fund supporters had hoped that the product red campaign , launched in january 2006 by co - founder bono , would lead to significant increases in contributions made by the private sector .

as of july 17 , 2008 , product red™ has contributed $69.8 million to the fund , comprising 12% of non - government contributions , double what it paid in april 2007 .

the administration has argued that any amount that congress provides to the global fund in excess of its request skews the appropriate balance of aid that the united states should provide to the fund and other bilateral hiv / aids efforts .

at a fy2005 senate appropriations committee hearing in may 2004 , then - global aids coordinator ambassador randall tobias argued that the "incremental difference between what the administration requested and what was appropriated to the fund is money that might have been available" for u.s. bilateral programs .

although appropriations to the fund have been increasing , the percentage of u.s. global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria appropriations provided for u.s. contributions have remained mostly level ( table 6 , figure 1 , and figure 2 ) .

fund supporters counter that appropriations made to the fund in excess of requested levels better reflect what the united states should provide and complement u.s. bilateral hiv / aid programs , particularly since the administration and the fund have strengthened their coordination .

u.s. officials acknowledge that though the fund is a critical part of pepfar , when making appropriations , congress should consider the pace at which the fund can distribute funds .

the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) has cited an instance when pefpar used some of its funds to purchase anti - retroviral medication ( arvs ) for a global fund project that faced financial delays .

in fy2009 , the administration requested $500 million for u.s. contributions to the global fund through foreign operations and labor / hhs appropriations .

this amount accounts for almost 8% of all hiv / aids , tb , and malaria proposed spending — about 5% less than fy2008 enacted levels .

