states and localities have at times proposed or enacted measures restricting governmental transactions with entities doing business or having financial ties with foreign countries whose conduct is found objectionable , particularly because of terrorism or human rights concerns .

this report summarizes constitutional arguments made for and against these laws and discusses the supreme court's decisions in crosby v. national foreign trade council and american insurance association v. garamendi , where the court addressed the permissibility of state laws having implications upon u.s. foreign affairs .

the report also discusses a 2007 federal district court decision which held that an illinois law that imposed sanctions upon sudan was unconstitutional , along with a 2012 federal district court decision preliminarily enjoining the enforcement of a florida statute which , among other things , restricts the state or local governments from entering contracts with certain entities that do business in cuba .

the report also suggests some possible legal ramifications of recent case law for future state and congressional action in this area , and summarizes recent federal enactments addressing state economic sanctions .

state and local sanctions have generally taken the form of ( 1 ) selective purchasing or contracting laws , which generally prohibit state or local agencies from contracting with or procuring goods and services from companies that do business in a named country , or ( 2 ) selective investment laws , which prohibit state or local agencies from investing public funds in such companies .

a variation of the latter is a state or local divestment law which , for example , may require divestment by state pension funds of stock in companies that either do business within a named country or with that country's government .

in the 1990s , a number of state laws focused on conditions in burma ( myanmar ) , while others targeted nigeria , tibet , cuba , indonesia , switzerland , and northern ireland .

other state laws addressed poor foreign labor practices regardless of country .

due to the troubled situation in darfur , between 2006 and 2010 a number of states proposed or enacted divestment legislation focused on sudan .

other states have passed legislation prohibiting pension fund investment in debt instruments issued by any nation designated by the state department as supporting or engaging in terrorism .

other pending or enacted state legislation is aimed at divestment of state funds from companies engaged in certain business activities in iran , in either iran or sudan , or in state sponsors of terrorism .

in february 2007 , a federal district court held that an illinois statute , which restricted the deposit of state funds to institutions having customers with ties to sudan and barring the investment of state pension funds with sudanese - connected entities , was constitutionally impermissible .

the state's appeal to the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit was subsequently dismissed as moot .

state and local economic sanctions that target foreign government behavior ordinarily raise three constitutional issues: ( 1 ) whether they burden foreign commerce in violation of the foreign commerce clause and , if so , whether they are protected by the market participant exception to the clause ; ( 2 ) whether they impermissibly interfere with the federal government's exclusive power to conduct the nation's foreign affairs ; and ( 3 ) where congress or the president has acted , whether they are preempted by federal law .

where state or local sanctions are held to be preempted by federal statute , congress may choose expressly to authorize such measures in new legislation .

it is also possible that a state or local sanctions law could be written so as not to conflict with a federal enactment .

where congress has not enacted or authorized sanctions against a particular country , state or local sanctions directed at that jurisdiction may be challenged on dormant foreign affairs or foreign commerce clause grounds , given that crosby did not address , and thus did not foreclose or limit the use of , these constitutional arguments .

at the same time , questions remain as to the outcome of these arguments in a particular case .

for example , if state or local sanctions were challenged on foreign commerce clause grounds , would congressional silence be construed by a reviewing court as implied authorization of these measures or , instead , as a manifestation of an overriding federal policy that a particular country not be subject to restrictive u.s. measures ? .

whether the market participant exception applies in foreign commerce clause cases also remains unclear .

where a state law is challenged as intruding into the federal foreign affairs power , the supreme court's ruling in garamendi suggests that executive agreements or statements might preempt state action , despite a lack of specific agreement language showing the intent to do so .

at the same time , the court recommended following justice harlan's standard from the zschernig case as a minimum threshold for foreign affairs preemption , that is , that the state legislation should "produce something more than incidental effect in conflict with express foreign policy of the national government. .

some commentators have provided practical criticisms of the state divestment laws .

for instance , state investors rely on private organizations to identify firms with business interests in targeted countries .

the particular concern is that this information might be inaccurate or fail to take account of the federal government's interests .

this could lead to divestment activities inconsistent or directly counter to u.s. foreign policy goals .

in response , the national conference of state legislatures has asked the federal government to provide u.s. investors with "authoritative information" regarding foreign and domestic firms with financial and investment activities in states that sponsor terrorism .

there are also overarching concerns about whether public plans are suitable means for achieving foreign policy goals .

besides questions of their efficacy in changing foreign government behavior , divestment measures could diminish the rate of return on investment .

there are increased administrative costs related to screening investments for ties to targeted nations .

broad restrictions on investment in certain companies could also undermine the goal of a diversified portfolio .

these risks are likely to be especially problematic because there may well be limited overlap between those authorizing and making divestment decisions and the stakeholders whom these decisions will affect .

the sudan accountability and divestment act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-174 ) , enacted into law on december 31 , 2007 , authorizes state and local governments to adopt divestment measures involving ( 1 ) federally identified persons with investments and business in the sudanese energy and military equipment sectors or ( 2 ) persons having a direct investment in or carrying on a trade or business with sudan or the government of sudan , provided certain notification requirements are met ; the statute also provides that a measure falling within the scope of the authorization is not preempted by any federal law or regulation .

the enactment is based on s. 2271 , an original bill of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ( s.rept .

110-213 ) .

h.r .

180 ( lee ) and s. 831 ( durbin ) also addressed sudan divestment by state and local governments ; h.r .

180 passed the house on july 31 , 2007 .

president george w. bush , upon signing the act , stated that "the executive branch shall construe and enforce this legislation in a manner that does not conflict" with the federal government's "exclusive authority" to conduct foreign relations .

the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act ( p.l .

111-195 ) , enacted into law on july 1 , 2010 , includes provisions authorizing state and local governments to divest or prohibit investments of public monies in iran .

responding to state and local divestment activities related to iran , congress designed title ii's divestment provisions to "remove [] any doubt as to the constitutionality of these measures. .

specifically , states can require public divestment from businesses making investments of ( or extending credit to persons who will make investments of ) $20 million or more in iran's energy sector .

states must provide notice to those affected by divestment measures and give those affected the opportunity to comment or challenge the measures' applicability to their business dealings .

if 90 days elapse after notice is given without the notified company changing its behavior , divestment can occur .

the statute clearly states that no federal laws or regulations preempt actions taken by the states under these provisions .

below is a list of state laws related to divestment of public funds from companies doing business in foreign countries .

unless otherwise indicated , the provided statute fits the general model of identifying companies doing business in a country and , after giving notice and opportunity to discontinue the offending activity , requiring divestment of public funds from these companies .

some , but not all , of these measures include language providing for their expiration in the event that congress or the president take specified action .

