after the last statutory changes to the naaqs - setting process in 1977 , numerous reports and memoranda discussed casac's role and the standard - setting process in general .

this section briefly reviews these reports and memoranda , before we turn to the 2006 revisions to the process in the next section .

after the mid - 1980s , there was little further discussion of changes to the naaqs review process until december 2005 , when epa's deputy administrator asked the assistant administrator for research and development and the acting assistant administrator for air and radiation to "conduct a top - to - bottom review of the naaqs process" to determine whether its discretionary ( as opposed to statutory ) aspects "reflect the most rigorous , up - to - date , and unbiased scientific standards and methods. .

the letter set forth a series of specific questions regarding the timeliness of the process , consideration of the most recent available science , the distinction between science and policy judgments , and whether changes were necessary to better identify and communicate uncertainties .

the two assistant administrators established a workgroup of epa staff to conduct the review and make recommendations .

the review was essentially completed by april 3 , 2006 , when the two assistant administrators sent the workgroup's report to the deputy administrator .

the report led to further discussions with casac and a public meeting , before the deputy administrator announced a decision , december 7 , 2006 , that the agency would revise the naaqs process , largely along the lines suggested in the report .

the workgroup report reached many of the same conclusions as the 1980s' reviews .

as the executive summary noted: past reviews of the process have addressed a number of issues , including the difficulty epa has had historically in completing naaqs reviews at five - year intervals as required by the caa , resulting in litigation - driven review schedules ; the statutory role of the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) in providing scientific and policy - relevant advice to the administrator ; concerns about the "encyclopedic" nature of epa's science assessment documents ( referred to as "criteria documents" ) and support for a more integrative synthesis of the science ; and general support for the introduction and subsequent evolution of a policy - oriented "staff paper" to help bridge the gap between the science presented in the criteria document and the policy judgments required of the administrator in reaching decisions on the naaqs .

while many improvements have come about as a result of these past reviews , some of the same issues remain relevant today , and are addressed again in this process review .

the report recommended: combining planning activities for the criteria document ( cd ) , risk / exposure , and policy assessment into one integrated planning document ; restructuring the cd to be a more concise evaluation , integration , and synthesis of the most policy - relevant science , and writing it in language more accessible to policy - makers , "perhaps in the form of a 'plain - english' executive summary" ; developing a continuous process to identify , compile , characterize , and prioritize new scientific studies ; developing a more concise risk / exposure assessment document ( similar to the risk / exposure chapter ( s ) now included in staff papers ) ; to the extent that the recommendations above are implemented , replacing the staff paper with a more narrowly focused policy assessment document ; and working with sab staff to consider the formation of a casac subcommittee on risk / exposure assessment , examining additional measures that can be taken to orient new casac panel members , and giving further consideration to the issue of casac closure in its review of key documents .

the first five of these recommendations were adopted in the december 7 , 2006 decision memorandum with little change .

most were relatively non - controversial , although some , such as the continuous process for review of new scientific studies , could require additional resources .

also non - controversial would be better focus of the criteria document ( renamed the "integrated science assessment" ) , a recommendation made by virtually every group that has reviewed the subject over the last 30 years .

one of casac's major suggestions , stated in letters to the administrator dated may 12 , 2006 and july 18 , 2006 , was that the initial step in the review process be the convening of a "science workshop," at which an invited group of expert scientists would "identify important new scientific findings regarding the pollutant in question. .

epa staff , casac members , and the public would be invited to the workshop , and , prior to it , "casac would provide input to the agency to identify subject - matter experts and key new scientific studies and findings to be discussed. .

the december 7 decision memorandum accepted this casac suggestion , and , as a result , press reports indicated that casac was generally pleased with the final decisions .

one potentially more controversial change was the preparation of a separate risk / exposure assessment , and a related recommendation that casac consider formation of a separate subcommittee on risk / exposure assessment .

in the workgroup report released april 3 , 2006 , these recommendations were presented as measures that "could enhance the efficiency and timeliness of the overall naaqs review process. .

in calling for better risk assessment , the 2006 review echoed the recommendations of both the 1981 and 1985 casac reviews .

better risk assessment would presumably clarify the policy choices the administrator faces in making naaqs decisions .

at the same time , it is difficult to see how adding a third significant document to the process would enhance its timeliness , as stated in the report .

in its may 12 , 2006 , letter to the epa administrator , casac raised this point .

noting that casac would now have to "double up" the scientific subject matter to be considered at certain meetings , the casac chair wrote: therefore , it was not apparent to us how the suggested alterations would make the naaqs process more efficient or streamlined .

on the contrary , epa's proposed process appears to be no less time - consuming and likely more resource - intensive than the current process .

indeed , rather than helping the agency more - easily achieve its naaqs reviews for the six criteria air pollutants within the statutorily - mandated five - year period ( i.e. , per the clean air act amendments of 1977 codified at 42 u.s.c .

§ sec .

7409 ) , the proposed process would seemingly ensure that court - ordered completion dates — the result of external litigation — would continue to be the principal "driver" for key milestones in these naaqs reviews .

the december 7 , 2006 decision memorandum retained the recommendation for a risk / exposure assessment document , but , rather than call for formation of a separate casac subcommittee on risk / exposure assessment ( which casac "emphatically" opposed in its july 18 letter ) , agreed to casac's suggestion that risk assessment experts be added to future casac review panels .

the workgroup report's recommendations concerning the staff paper ( renamed the "policy assessment document" in the report ) are difficult to evaluate .

although the language is somewhat vague , the report's cover memo appears to recommend the removal of epa staff and casac from the document's final review , making it a reflection of epa senior management views instead .

the memo says , "we have concluded that it is appropriate for the policy assessment document to reflect the agency's views , consistent with epa practice in other rulemakings. .

this presumably means the views of the agency's senior management rather than its staff .

on the other hand , the workgroup report stated: we recognize that important and complex issues are involved in deciding the scope of such a document , as well as deciding whether such a document would continue to reflect staff views , epa senior management views , or both , and how that choice may affect the process by which such a document would be reviewed by casac and the public .

the december 7 , 2006 decision memorandum reiterates the language of the april 3 recommendation , in stating: ... the agency will develop a policy assessment that reflects the agency's views , consistent with epa practice in other rulemakings .

.. .

this policy assessment should be published in the federal register as an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) , with supporting documents placed in the rulemaking record as appropriate .

the use of an anpr will provide an opportunity for both casac and the public to evaluate the policy options under consideration and offer detailed comments and recommendations to inform the development of a proposed rule .

a number of observers have interpreted this language to mean that casac will review the policy options after completion of the document rather than before , diminishing its role in the naaqs - review process .

in its july 18 , 2006 letter to the administrator , casac said that it wished to review both a first and second draft version of the policy assessment ( pa ) document before the issuance of a notice of proposed rulemaking .

the december 7 decision memorandum does not address this wish directly , but its choice of language appears to have rejected casac's request .

one press account quoted the casac chair as saying , "they will come out with their policy before we have a chance to comment on it. .

but she added , "they weren't taking our advice" even under the old process , at least in the recent pm decision .

in another press account , she appeared less concerned about the changes to the naaqs process , however , reportedly saying: "i see it as the role of the casac to advise the administrator on which levels will be health protective with an adequate margin of safety .

that we have done and that we will continue to do. .

a general theme in the april 3 recommendations and the december 7 final decision seems to be that the role of epa senior management in the naaqs - setting process should be heightened , and that of casac lessened .

the recommendation for preparation of a single integrated planning document , for example , "would provide an opportunity for early involvement of epa senior management and / or outside parties in the framing of policy - relevant issues," according to the review workgroup's march 2006 report .

the new policy assessment document would be reviewed after the document's publication , despite casac's recommendation that it review a first and second draft .

the march 2006 report also suggests: 1 ) a single casac review of the policy assessment document , as opposed to the current iterative process ; 2 ) the apparent discontinuation of casac closure on the document ; and 3 ) casac's comments to be solicited along with those of the public .

three recommendations regarding casac in the workgroup report also suggested a less independent role for the committee .

these were: that epa prepare more comprehensive guidance on casac's statutory role , to enhance the orientation of panel members and "increase awareness of the importance of maintaining the distinction between science and policy judgments" in casac's recommendations ; that further consideration be given by epa and "perhaps communication with casac" regarding the issue of casac "closure" on epa documents ; and that epa's sab staff office consider issues related to the selection and management of casac naaqs review panels .

these recommendations may have arisen simply from concerns for effectiveness — i.e. , they may represent only a concern that the agency better orient new members , make the selection process for review panels more transparent , and review the issue of closure , which was raised by several current and former casac members in comments they submitted to the workgroup .

but coming in the context of the other recommendations , they raised the possibility that epa intended to weaken the independence and power of casac through a variety of means .

as part of the 2006 naaqs process review , epa solicited comments from current and former casac members and from stakeholder groups .

the most consistent comments concerned the need to improve the focus of criteria documents and the need to reinstate the "closure" procedure .

sections 108 and 109 of the clean air act establish statutory requirements for the identification of naaqs ( or "criteria" ) air pollutants and the setting and periodic review of the naaqs standards .

but the process used by epa is as much the result of 37 years of agency practice as it is of statutory requirements .

in section 109 , for example , the statute establishes the clean air scientific advisory committee to make recommendations to the administrator regarding new naaqs and , at five - year intervals , to make reviews of existing naaqs with recommendations for revisions .

in practice , epa staff , not casac , have prepared these reviews , drafting criteria documents , which review the science and health effects of criteria air pollutants , and staff papers , which make policy recommendations .

casac's role has been to review and approve these epa documents before they went to the agency's political appointees and the administrator for final decisions .

under epa's new procedures , epa's political appointees have a role early in the process , helping to choose the scientific studies to be reviewed , and casac will no longer approve the policy staff paper with its recommendations to the administrator .

casac's iterative role that refined the epa staff paper conclusions could be eliminated , and the committee relegated to commenting on the policy paper after it appears in the federal register , during a public comment period .

the goal , according to agency officials , is to speed up the review process , which has consistently taken longer than the five years allowed by statute .

"these improvements will help the agency meet the goal of reviewing each naaqs on a five - year cycle as required by the clean air act , without compromising the scientific integrity of the process," according to the memorandum that finalized the changes .

the changes have caused concern among environmental groups and some in the scientific community , however , because , they say , they give a larger role to the agency's political appointees and a smaller role to epa staff and casac .

if congress chooses to review these new procedures , one issue that it may wish to focus on is the statutory role of casac: whether it should play some formal role in approving the administrator's choice of standards .

under current law , casac's role is purely advisory .

epa is not required by the clean air act to follow casac's recommendations ; the act ( in section 307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ) requires only that , when the administrator proposes a new or revised naaqs in the federal register , he set forth any pertinent findings , recommendations , and comments by casac ( and the national academy of sciences ) , and , if his proposal differs in an important respect from any of their recommendations , provide an explanation of the reasons for such differences .

casac , in practice , has tended to play a larger role , evaluating epa staff's analysis of the science and its policy recommendations and withholding formal "closure" on the agency documents until it was satisfied that the documents accurately reflected the state of the science .

the statute has never required epa to have casac's approval before proposing or promulgating naaqs revisions , but , in practice , the need to build a record that it could defend against court challenges has generally led epa to promulgate standards within the range of casac's recommendations .

in 2006 , for the first time , the administrator promulgated standards outside of that range , and casac , in a written response , made clear that it felt the standards did not meet the statutory requirements .

that may be the role congress intended for casac , or it may not .

on one hand , congress could conclude that casac has overstepped its bounds , in essence judging an administrator's final decision in contrast to its statutory mandate to make recommendations beforehand .

on the other hand , congress might conclude that the administrator's judgment should have been constrained to the range of options that casac established as being supported by the science .

the courts are likely to play a role here , as well .

thirteen states , the district of columbia , electric utilities and other industry groups , groups representing farmers and ranchers , and several environmental groups have challenged the pm standards in court .

legal challenges to naaqs are not unusual .

in reviewing epa regulations in the past , courts have often deferred to the administrator's judgment on scientific matters , focusing more on issues of procedure , jurisdiction , and standing .

nevertheless , casac's detailed objections to the administrator's decisions and its description of the process as having failed to meet statutory and procedural requirements could play a role as these standards are reviewed in court .

the subsequent ozone review , which was completed in march 2008 , provides a second example of the administrator not following casac's recommendations .

as of this writing , the new standard had not been challenged in court , but it is expected that it will be , giving the courts another opportunity to rule on casac's role in the setting of naaqs .

although the new naaqs review procedures will change the role that casac has historically played , casac , at first , appeared less concerned with the changes than some who have advocated on its behalf .

when the december 7 , 2006 decision memorandum was released , the committee's chair said casac did not plan to issue a formal response .

as noted above , in its response to the workgroup report released in april 2006 , the committee had made a number of suggestions , some of which , such as the convening of a science workshop at the outset of the process to better focus the review , were incorporated into the decision memorandum .

the memorandum also addressed another of casac's major concerns , that the old process spent too much time compiling an encyclopedic review of the literature , much of which had little relevance to the policy questions that needed to be addressed .

with respect to epa taking comments from casac at the same time that it considers comments from the public , casac's chair was reported to say , " ( s ) ome of the members were concerned but most are not , because it doesn't change casac's ability to comment. .

in early february 2007 , however , reports circulated that casac had changed its mind .

after its first experience with the new naaqs review process , it was reported that the committee would compose another letter to the epa administrator critical of the new process: henderson [casac chair dr. rogene henderson] said the staff paper had been based on scientific considerations .

with the new process , epa is "skipping that and going right to options based on management views," she said .

epa should produce options based on science before having epa management make recommendations about what they want the standard to be , henderson said .

henderson said that when epa first proposed the naaqs process changes in response to a memo by deputy administrator marcus peacock , casac had "misunderstood how it would be implemented. .

however , "the full consequences became apparent in the lead meeting," she said , with panel members concerned about not being able to review staff recommendations .

the new process "does not allow casac time for appropriate input to evaluate the science," she said .

"and the letter will say how this is not working out," henderson said .

negotiations between casac and epa management followed the february 6-7 , 2007 public meeting , with the result that epa modified its schedule to allow the casac lead review panel to review a second draft of epa's risk and exposure assessment before the agency's policy assessment was published in the federal register .

this mollified some of casac's concerns , but casac has continued to express "serious concerns" about other aspects of the lead naaqs review .

in january 2008 , casac's concerns ( now informed by experience with each step of the new review process ) crystallized in a four - page letter to administrator johnson .

the committee discussed "significant problems that exist in the latter steps of this new review process," specifically the absence of a staff paper ( "a document highly - valued by casac for its thorough analysis of the new scientific evidence ... , its presentation of the possible alternatives for the standards ... and , most importantly , its provision of the scientific evidence undergirding those alternatives." ) .

the committee said it had been reassured that the policy assessment to be published as an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) would be functionally equivalent to the staff paper , but in practice , in the ongoing review of the lead naaqs , it found that the anpr was " both unsuitable and inadequate as a basis for rulemaking . .

the letter states that "there is a stark contrast between the empty and regressive nature of the anpr — which is not a true policy assessment — and the scholarly and complete scientific analyses presented in epa's staff paper. .

the letter noted that the anpr asked for comment on options that had already been dismissed on scientific grounds .

the result is that , rather than inducing greater efficiency in the review process , it slows down the process "through its illogical contemplation of a greater number of options as time progresses. .

while agreeing that there may be a role for an anpr at the beginning of the review process , the letter concludes by reiterating casac's view of its statutory mission in reviewing the policy assessment: furthermore , it is essential that this policy assessment document be furnished to the casac for peer - review in public advisory meetings , in the same manner as multiple drafts of the staff paper were provided to the committee for review under the previous process .

it cannot be overstated that , in order to fulfill its congressionally - mandated and thus legal role , the committee needs to conduct a thorough and open evaluation of this "best available science," i.e. , the scientific justification and underlying analyses of the various options for standard - setting that the agency formerly presented in the staff paper — which of course will now include the viewpoints of epa management .

obscuring or weakening such an independent scientific review would subvert both the vital interests of the casac and the public's confidence in this naaqs review process — a result that the agency surely neither intends nor desires .

responding to the changes at the time of their announcement in december 2006 , the incoming chair of the environment and public works committee , senator barbara boxer , called them "unacceptable," and said the committee planned to make them a top priority for oversight in the 110 th congress .

 ( the committee included them among the topics it considered in a february 6 , 2007 hearing on "oversight of recent epa decisions." ) .

seven democratic members of the committee , including senator boxer , wrote epa administrator johnson , december 21 , 2006 , to express their strong opposition to the changes and to ask him to "abandon" them .

in the following months , congressional attention has generally been on other issues .

as the reviews of the pm , ozone , and lead standards progress , however , and as the courts review epa's final decisions regarding these standards , there are likely to be continued opportunities for congressional oversight .

thus , the role of casac in naaqs reviews could be the subject of further attention in congress .

