in the 109 th congress , tax reform was a major legislative issue .

in january 2005 , president bush appointed a nine - member bipartisan panel to study the federal tax code and to propose options to reform the code .

proposals for fundamental tax reform would have changed the tax base from income to consumption or changed the way income is taxed .

in a pure consumption tax system , income tax credits and deductions , like the mortgage interest deduction , would be eliminated .

other proposals for tax reform could have simplified the existing income tax system .

in these cases , modifications to the mortgage interest deduction could have simplified the tax code .

it was unclear whether changes to the mortgage interest deduction would occur given the strength of support that exists for the provision .

in 2005 , president bush indicated that homeownership tax incentives are important and should be preserved as tax reform is being considered .

specifically , in the executive order that established the president's advisory panel on federal tax reform , one of the very few restrictions was a request that the panel "recognize the importance of homeownership and charity in american society. .

some analysts concluded that the administration's statement indicated its support for preserving the mortgage interest deduction along with all of the other homeownership tax incentives .

in one tax journal it was written "in plain english , the mother of all tax subsidies , the mortgage interest deduction , shall remain untouched. .

there are three principal tax provisions for owner - occupied housing and one implicit tax benefit .

the deduction for mortgage interest is the most costly provision , with an estimate of $73.7 billion in revenue loss for fy2007 .

the exclusion of capital gains on the sales of homes is the second largest tax provision for homeowners , with an estimate of $28.5 billion in tax revenue loss for fy2007 .

the deduction of state and local real estate taxes is the third provision , with an estimate of $16.8 billion in tax revenue loss for fy2007 .

the exclusion of net imputed rental income from taxation , which is not a provision in the tax code but exists implicitly , is estimated to cost $33.2 billion in uncollected tax revenue for fy2007 .

this would bring the total projected revenue cost for owner - occupied housing in fy2007 to $152 billion .

the amount of revenue foregone by the federal government to promote homeownership greatly exceeds government spending on housing .

appropriations made in the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) budget totaled $31.5 billion in fy2005 .

most of the appropriations for hud address rental housing problems , most of which are faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

although fundamental tax reform has not been on the legislative agenda in the 110 th congress , changes to the mortgage interest deduction have been enacted .

the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) temporarily allowed , for tax year 2007 , mortgage insurance premiums paid for a personal residence to be tax deductible as mortgage interest .

the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( h.r .

3648 ; p.l .

110-142 ) extended that temporary provision through the end of 2010 .

mortgage insurance , which guarantees loan repayment in case of death or disability of the borrower , is often required by lenders for individuals who do not have sufficient funds for a full down payment on a residence .

premiums paid or accrued for qualified insurance on mortgage loans can be treated as qualified residence interest and deducted from income tax .

"qualified mortgage insurance" is mortgage insurance provided by the veterans administration ( va ) , the federal housing administration ( fha ) , the rural housing administration ( rha ) , and private mortgage insurers as defined under section 2 of the homeowners protection act of 1998 ( 12 u.s.c .

sec .

4901 ) .

the deduction of qualified mortgage insurance premiums generally applies to amounts paid or accrued only during tax years 2007 through 2010 , with respect to contracts issued during those years ; the provision terminates for premiums paid or accrued after december 31 , 2010 .

this deduction is also subject to a phaseout .

for every $1,000 , or fraction thereof , by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income exceeds $100,000 , the amount of deductible mortgage insurance premiums is reduced ( but not below zero ) by 10% .

in the case of a married taxpayer filing separately , the amounts are lowered to $500 and $50,000 .

the purpose of this phaseout is to prevent taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes greater than $109,000 ( $54,500 for a married taxpayer filing separately ) from claiming this tax benefit .

prepaid mortgage insurance amounts that are allocable to periods beyond the year in which they are paid are attributed to a capital account and treated as paid in the allocable year ( contracts issued by the va or rha are excluded from this provision ) .

if the mortgage is paid off before the end of its term , a deduction is not allowed for the unamortized balance of the capital account .

several tax reform proposals were introduced , most of which proposed to enact fundamental tax reform by changing the tax base from income to consumption .

h.r .

25 , the fair tax act of 2005 , and its companion bill , s. 25 , proposed a national sales tax that would have eliminated the current federal income tax system including the mortgage interest deduction .

s. 812 , the flat tax act of 2005 , proposed to replace the current federal income tax system with a flat rate consumption tax ( also known as a modified value - added tax ) .

the flat tax rate would have been 20% of taxable earned income .

the bill defined taxable earned income as the excess of earned income ( wages , salaries , professional fees ) over a standard deduction , a deduction for cash charitable contributions , and a deduction for home mortgage interest .

the deductions the bill proposed to allow were consistent with the previously mentioned mandate given by president bush to the tax reform panel .

h.r .

1040 , the freedom flat tax act , proposed to allow taxpayers to choose an election to be subject to a flat tax , in lieu of the existing income tax .

the rate would have been 19% of wages for the first two years after an election was made , and 17% thereafter .

the bill proposed to allow a basic standard deduction and an additional standard deduction for each dependent in the household but made no mention of allowing the mortgage interest deduction .

s. 1099 , the tax simplification act of 2005 , proposed a similar flat tax structure , with a 19% tax rate on wages for the first two years that would then have been reduced to 17% thereafter .

the nine - member panel appointed by president bush produced a report in the fall of 2005 that included a proposal to change the mortgage interest deduction .

specifically , the panel recommended converting the deduction to a tax credit equal to 15% of interest paid on mortgages .

the principal amount of debt associated with the interest that could be claimed would have been limited to regional house prices in the range of $227,000 to $412,000 .

this range would have been based on the house price ceilings that the federal housing administration ( fha ) sets for the amount of a home mortgage loan that it will insure .

these amounts vary by county across the country .

thus , if the principal amount of a mortgage loan was $500,000 , interest on the first $412,00 of loan principal would have qualified , depending on where the house was located .

the remainder of this report describes the deduction for home mortgage interest and explores rationales for subsidizing homeowners .

the report then provides an economic analysis of the value and performance of the deduction and concludes with a discussion and analysis of the possible changes to the mortgage interest deduction that could occur under different tax reform scenarios .

taxpayers may claim an itemized deduction for payments of "qualified" interest related to a primary or secondary residence .

the payments of interest that qualify include home mortgage interest , which is the interest paid on any loans secured by either the taxpayer's main home or a second home .

the loans may be a mortgage ( first or second ) , a line of credit , or a home equity product .

qualified residences can include cooperative apartments , condominiums , and mobile homes .

mortgage interest associated with recreational vehicles and boats can be included in the deduction as long as the vehicles have sleeping , cooking , and toilet amenities .

the debt must also be collateralized by the vehicles to be eligible for the mortgage interest deduction .

two types of indebtedness are associated with the interest that can be deducted: acquisition and home equity .

acquisition indebtedness is debt incurred in acquiring , constructing , or substantially improving a qualified residence and secured by such residence .

home equity indebtedness is all non - acquisition debt that is secured by a qualified residence .

the interest on such debt can be deducted even if the proceeds are used for personal expenditures unrelated to the home .

the underlying mortgage loans can represent acquisition indebtedness of up to $1 million , plus home equity indebtedness of up to $100,000 .

any secured debt used to refinance home acquisition debt is treated as home acquisition debt , up to a certain point .

the new debt qualifies as home acquisition debt only up to the amount of the balance of the old mortgage principal just before the refinancing .

any additional debt is not home acquisition debt , but may qualify as home equity debt .

thus , when refinancing , acquisition debt may not rise and home equity loans may not exceed $100,000 .

for example , if a homeowner with a $150,000 mortgage refinances the debt for $300,000 , the original $150,000 would be considered as acquisition debt , an additional $100,000 would be considered as home equity debt , and the interest on these amounts would be deductible .

the interest on the remaining $50,000 of debt would not be deductible .

the mortgage interest deduction is a federal subsidy that treats homeownership favorably compared to other economic activity .

the major justification for the deduction for mortgage interest is that it encourages homeownership , which proponents deem desirable .

homeownership is believed to promote continued growth and stability of neighborhoods and communities .

this effect results , in part , because homeowners are more likely to participate in community and political activities , to promote neighborhood cohesion , and to be more socially stable and less mobile .

like all tax benefits , economic theory suggests the deduction can be evaluated by applying the criteria of economic efficiency , equity , and simplicity .

these criteria are discussed in the next sections .

tax reform in the 109 th congress may have caused moderate or fundamental changes in the federal tax system .

these changes could have been as far reaching as eliminating the current income tax system and replacing it with an alternative tax system , like a national sales tax .

this change could have eliminated deductions and credits , including the mortgage interest deduction .

alternatively , congress could have chosen to simplify the existing tax code by modifying or eliminating provisions , like the mortgage interest deduction .

finally , tax reform could have occurred and the mortgage interest deduction could have been unchanged .

in the absence of tax reform , congress may or may not make changes to the mortgage interest deduction .

congress may choose to modify or eliminate the deduction for homeowners for a variety of reasons , including revenue raising strategies to reduce the deficit or addressing the equity issues surrounding the provision .

alternatively , congress may choose not to alter the mortgage interest deduction .

tax reform proposals made in the 109 th congress promoted consumption - based tax systems , most of which would have eliminated the mortgage interest deduction .

in the case of either a flat tax or a sales tax , all credits and deductions as they exist in the current income tax system would have been eliminated .

the deduction of mortgage interest would no longer be allowed , unless specifically addressed by legislation .

as an example , s. 812 proposed a flat tax that included the preservation of the mortgage interest deduction along with the charitable contributions deduction .

although the mortgage interest deduction is generally defended on the basis of supporting access to homeownership , most studies conclude that its primary effect is on housing consumption , not homeownership .

most of the benefits of the deduction accrue to households with well - above - average incomes , while households on the cusp of homeownership tend to have lower income .

depending on how they are structured , most studies suggest that lower income households would be aided more by down - payment assistance than by the deduction for mortgage interest .

eliminating the mortgage interest deduction separate from tax reform would have several effects .

it would tend to reduce debt relative to equity by ending the neutrality between equity - and debt - financing .

it would lead some households who may have been considering homeownership to choose to continue to rent .

some owner - households may choose to consume less housing , either by choosing smaller homes or fewer amenities .

the elimination could lower home prices relative to rents in the market and could cause households to convert housing assets to business investment .

if the deduction were eliminated as a result of fundamental tax reform , the resulting effects would depend on a variety of variables .

these variables include the nature of tax reform , the resulting changes in the tax base and tax rates , changes in interest rates , and other economic variables .

if the deduction were eliminated without other tax policy changes , federal income tax revenues could increase , the tax base could be broadened , and the federal budget deficit could be reduced .

this elimination could lead to greater economic efficiency , increased equity , and simplification of the current income tax system .

modifications to the mortgage interest deduction could also have several effects .

congress could choose to allow the deduction for only one residence , rather than two , or reduce the allowable principal debt from $1 million to some lower amount , perhaps $500,000 .

these changes would reduce the amount of tax revenue loss associated with the provision without adding complexity to the tax code .

congress could also choose to improve the equitable nature of the provision by allowing more low income households to claim mortgage interest , either as an above - the - line deduction or as a tax credit .

finally , the mortgage interest deduction could remain unaltered .

it would continue to be a benefit to more than 37 million taxpayers and provide more than $70 billion in annual tax savings to homeowners .

