technological advancement in u.s. industry often has been supported by congressional initiatives over the past 30 or more years .

this approach has involved both direct measures that concern budget outlays and the provision of services by government agencies ( such as the now terminated advanced technology program ( atp ) and the technology innovation program ( tip ) , as well as the existing manufacturing extension partnership ( mep ) of the national institute of standards and technology ) and indirect measures that include financial incentives and legal changes .

many of these efforts , however , have been revisited over the past several congresses .

congressional legislation appears to have favored indirect strategies such as tax policies , intellectual property right protection , and antitrust laws to promote technological advancement and government support for basic research over direct federal funding for private sector technology commercialization initiatives .

interest in technology development and industrial innovation increased as concern mounted over the economic strength of the nation and over competition from abroad .

for the united states to be competitive in the world economy , u.s. companies must be able to engage in trade , retain market shares , and offer high quality products , processes , and services while the nation maintains economic growth and a high standard of living .

technological advancement is important because the commercialization of inventions provides economic benefits from the sale of new products or services ; from new ways to provide a service ; or from new processes that increase productivity and efficiency .

it is widely accepted that technological progress is responsible for up to one - half the growth of the u.s. economy , and is one principal driving force in long - term growth and increases in living standards .

technological advances can further economic growth because they contribute to the creation of new goods , new services , new jobs , and new capital .

the application of technology can improve productivity and the quality of products .

it can expand the range of services that can be offered as well as extend the geographic distribution of these services .

the development and use of technology also plays a major role in determining patterns of international trade by affecting the comparative advantages of industrial sectors .

since technological progress is not necessarily determined by economic conditions — it also can be influenced by advances in science , the organization and management of firms , government activity , or serendipity — it can have effects on trade independent of shifts in macroeconomic factors .

new technologies also can help compensate for possible disadvantages in the cost of capital and labor faced by firms .

american companies have faced increased competitive pressures in the international marketplace from firms based in countries where governments actively promote commercial technological development and application .

in the united states , the generation of technology for the commercial marketplace is primarily a private sector activity .

the federal government traditionally becomes involved only for certain limited purposes .

typically these are activities which have been determined to be necessary for the "national good" but which cannot , or will not , be supported by industry .

to date , the u.s. government has funded research and development ( r&d ) to meet the mission requirements of the federal departments and agencies .

it also finances efforts in areas where there is an identified need for research , primarily basic research , not being performed in the private sector .

federal support reflects a consensus that basic research is critical because it is the foundation for many new innovations .

however , any returns created by this activity are generally long term , sometimes not marketable , and not always evident .

yet the rate of return to society as a whole generated by investments in research is significantly larger than the benefits that can be captured by the firm doing the work .

many past government activities to increase basic research were based on a "linear" model of innovation .

this theory viewed technological advancement as a series of sequential steps starting with idea origination and moving through basic research , applied research , development , commercialization , and diffusion into the economy .

increases in federal funds in the basic research stage were expected to result in concomitant increases in new products and processes .

however , this linear concept is no longer considered valid .

innovations often occur that do not require basic or applied research or development ; in fact many innovations are incremental improvements to existing products or processes .

in certain areas , such as biotechnology , the distinctions between basic research and commercialization are small and shrinking .

in others , the differentiation between basic and applied research is artificial .

the critical factor is the commercialization of the technology .

economic benefits accrue only when a technology or technique is brought to the marketplace where it can be sold to generate income or applied to increase productivity .

yet , while the united states has a strong basic research enterprise , foreign firms appear equally , if not more , adept at taking the results of these scientific efforts and making commercially viable products .

often u.s. companies are competing in the global marketplace against goods and services developed by foreign industries from research performed in the united states .

thus , there has been increased congressional interest in mechanisms to accelerate the development and commercialization processes in the private sector .

the development of a governmental effort to facilitate technological advance has been particularly difficult because of the absence of a consensus on the need for an articulated policy .

technology demonstration and commercialization have traditionally been considered private sector functions in the united states .

while over the years there have been various programs and policies to facilitate such activities ( such as tax credits , technology transfer to industry , and patents ) , the approach had been ad hoc and uncoordinated .

many of the programs implemented were based upon what individual committees judged appropriate for the agencies over which they have jurisdiction .

despite the importance of technology to the economy , technology - related considerations often have not been integrated into economic decisions .

there have been attempts to provide a central focus for governmental activity in technology matters .

p.l .

100 - 519 created within the department of commerce a technology administration headed by a new under secretary for technology .

however , this office was abolished as of the end of fy2007 by the america competes act .

to date , technological issues and responsibilities remain shared among many departments and agencies .

this diffused focus has sometimes resulted in actions which , if not at cross purposes , may not have accounted for the impact of policies or practices in one area on other parts of the process .

technology issues involve components which operate both separately and in concert .

while a diffused approach can offer varied responses to varied issues , the importance of interrelationships may be underestimated and their usefulness may suffer .

several times , congress has examined the idea of an industrial policy to develop a coordinated approach on issues of economic growth and industrial competitiveness .

technological advance is both one aspect of this and an altogether separate consideration .

in looking at the development of an identified policy for industrial competitiveness , advocates argue that such an effort could ameliorate much of the uncertainty with which the private sector perceives future government actions .

some commentators maintain that consideration and delineation of national objectives could encourage industry to engage in more long - term planning with regard to r&d and to make decisions as to the best allocation of resources .

such a technology policy could generate greater consistency in government activities .

because technological development involves numerous risks , efforts to minimize uncertainty regarding federal programs and policies may help alleviate some of the disincentives perceived by industry .

the development of a technology policy , however , is a contentious issue .

there is widespread resistance to what could be and has been called national planning , due variously to doubts as to its efficacy , to fear of adverse effects on our market system , to political beliefs about government intervention in our economic system , and to the current emphasis on short - term returns in both the political and economic arenas .

opponents of a national industrial policy may see this approach as government interference in the marketplace to "pick winners and losers. .

instead , it is argued , measures that would occasion a better investment environment for industry to expand innovation - related efforts would be preferable to government decisionmaking in technological advancement .

consideration of what constitutes government policy ( both in terms of the industrial policy and technology policy ) covers a broad range of ideas from laissez - faire to special government incentives to target specific high - technology , high - growth industries .

suggestions have been made for the creation of federal mechanisms to identify and support strategic industries and technologies .

various federal agencies and private sector groups have developed critical technology lists .

however , others maintain that such targeting is an unwanted , and unwarranted , interference in the private sector which will cause unnecessary dislocations in the marketplace or a misallocation of resources .

from their perspective , the government does not have the knowledge or expertise to make business - related decisions .

instead , they argue , the appropriate role for government is to encourage innovative activities in all industries and to keep market related decisionmaking within the business community that has ultimate responsibility for commercialization and where such decisions have traditionally been made .

the relationship between government and industry often is a major factor affecting innovation and the environment within which technological development takes place .

this relationship can be adversarial , with the government acting to regulate or restrain the business community , rather than to facilitate its positive contributions to the nation .

however , this may be changing as the benefits of industry / government cooperation become more apparent .

there are an increasing number of areas where the traditional distinctions between public and private sector functions and responsibilities are becoming blurred .

many assumptions have been questioned , particularly in light of the increased internationalization of the u.s. economy .

the business sector is no longer viewed in an exclusively domestic context ; the economy of the united states is often tied to the economies of other nations .

the technological superiority long held by the united states in many areas has been challenged by other industrialized countries in which economic , social , and political policies and practices foster government - industry cooperation in technological development .

the approach taken by the former clinton administration was a divergence from the past .

articulated in two reports issued in february 1993 ( a vision of change for america and technology for america's economic growth , a new direction to build economic strength ) , the proposal called for a national commitment to , and a strategy for , technological advancement as part of a defined national economic policy .

this detailed strategy offered a policy agenda for economic growth in the united states , of which technological development and industrial competitiveness were critical components .

the approach initially recommended and subsequently followed by the clinton administration provided a wide range of options while for the most part reflecting then current trends in congressional efforts to facilitate industrial advancement .

this policy , backed by congressional legislation , increased federal coordination and augmented direct government spending for technological development .

while many past activities focused primarily on research , the new initiatives shifted the emphasis toward development of new products , processes , and services by the private sector for the commercial marketplace .

in addition , a significant number of the proposals aimed to increase both government and private sector support for r&d leading to the commercialization of technology .

recent congresses and the bush administration questioned this approach .

instead , policies appeared more supportive of indirect strategies such as tax incentives , intellectual property protection , and antitrust laws to promote technology advancement , increased government support for basic research , and decreased direct federal funding for private sector technology activities .

in the 2006 state of the union address , former president bush announced the "american competitiveness initiative" to facilitate innovation and provide "our nation's children a firm grounding in math and science. .

to achieve these goals , the president called for doubling over the next 10 years the amount of federal funding for basic research , particularly in the national science foundation , the office of science in the department of energy , and in the core programs of the national institute of standards and technology , department of commerce .

in addition , the initiative would increase the number of math and science teachers and make permanent the research and experiment tax credit .

in april 2009 , president obama indicated his decision to double the budget of the key science agencies , as identified by former president bush , over the next 10 years .

in president obama's fy2011 budget the timeframe for doubling slipped to 11 years ; his fy2012 budget was intentionally silent on a timeframe for doubling .

in a speech before the national academy of sciences , president obama put forth a goal of increasing the national investment in r&d to more than 3% of the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) , but did not provide details on how this goal might be achieved .

despite the continuing debate on what is the appropriate role of government and what constitutes a suitable government technology development policy , it remains an undisputed fact that what the government does or does not do affects the private sector and the marketplace .

the various rules , regulations , and other activities of the government have become de facto policy as they relate to , and affect , innovation and technological advancement .

legislative initiatives have reflected a trend toward expanding the government's role beyond traditional funding of mission - oriented r&d and basic research toward the facilitation of technological advancement to meet other critical national needs , including the economic growth that flows from new commercialization and use of technologies and techniques in the private sector .

an overview of congressional legislation shows federal efforts aimed at ( 1 ) encouraging industry to spend more on r&d ; ( 2 ) assisting small high - technology businesses ; ( 3 ) promoting joint research activities between companies ; ( 4 ) fostering cooperative work between industry and universities ; ( 5 ) facilitating the transfer of technology from the federal laboratories to the private sector ; and ( 6 ) providing incentives for quality improvements .

these initiatives tend toward removing barriers to technology development in the private sector ( thereby permitting market forces to operate ) and providing incentives to encourage increased private sector r&d activities .

while most focus primarily on research , some also involve policies and programs associated with technology development and commercialization .

as indicated above , the laws affecting the r&d environment have included both direct and indirect measures to facilitate technological innovation .

in general , direct measures are those which involve budget outlays and the provision of services by government agencies .

indirect measures include financial incentives and legal changes ( eg , liability or regulatory reform ; new antitrust arrangements ) .

supporters of indirect approaches argue that the market is superior to government in deciding which technologies are worthy of investment .

mechanisms that enhance the market's opportunities and abilities to make such choices are preferred .

advocates further state that dependency on agency discretion to assist one technology in preference to another will inevitably be subjected to political pressures from entrenched interests .

proponents of direct government assistance maintain , conversely , that indirect methods can be wasteful and ineffective and that they can compromise other goals of public policy in the hope of stimulating innovative performance .

advocates of direct approaches argue that it is important to put the country's scarce resources to work on those technologies that have the greatest promise as determined by industry and supported by its willingness to match federal funding .

in the past , participants in the debates generally did not make definite ( or exclusionary ) choices between the two approaches , nor consistently favor one over the other .

for example , some proponents of a stronger direct role for the government in innovation also have supported enhanced tax preferences for r&d spending , an indirect mechanism .

opponents of direct federal funding for specific projects may have nevertheless backed similar activities focused on more general areas such as manufacturing or information technology .

however , in recent congresses , legislators directed many of their efforts toward eliminating or curtailing some of the programs that previously had enjoyed bipartisan support .

initiatives to terminate the advanced technology program and the technology innovation program reflected concern over the role of government in developing commercial technologies .

while appropriations for several programs decreased , and both atp and tip are no longer funded , support for several ongoing activities has continued .

how the debate over federal funding evolves in the congress may serve to redefine thinking about the government's efforts in promoting technological advancement in the private sector .

