in many instances , people who suffer physical or psychological injury , disease or death due to the actions of others may gain compensation through civil actions in the courts .

in addition , congress has established a number of programs to compensate or assist victims of certain specific circumstances , including negligence , terrorism , and "acts of god. .

the programs fall , broadly , into three categories: ( 1 ) those that primarily limit compensation or assistance to specified groups of people , with little or no limitation on the types of injury that may be compensated ( eg , workers' compensation systems ) ; ( 2 ) those that primarily limit compensation or assistance for specified types of injuries , with little or no limitation of the classes of individuals who may be compensated ( eg , the vaccine injury compensation program ) ; and ( 3 ) hybrid programs , which limit both the classes of eligible individuals , and the compensable injuries or diseases ( eg , the black lung program ) .

these compensation programs display considerable diversity in program design and implementation .

in the context of considering compensation for asbestos exposure , the government accountability office ( gao ) reviewed four federal programs designed to compensate individuals injured by exposure to harmful substances .

gao found that design of the programs , the agencies that administer them , their financing mechanisms , benefits paid , and eligibility criteria , including their standards of proof ( the evidence claimants must provide to support their claims ) , differed significantly .

to assure responsible stewardship of available funds , a variety of approaches are used to determine whether conditions stated in claims are actually related to the relevant employment or incident , and should , therefore , be compensated .

this matter is more easily resolved in the case of acute injuries , such as a broken leg sustained from a fall , than it is for illnesses that emerge some time following an exposure ( often termed a latent period ) .

some programs , such as those for workers' compensation , evaluate claims administratively on a case - by - case basis , offering claimants the opportunity to appeal denied claims .

other programs , particularly those dealing with ionizing radiation or other hazardous exposures that may cause a number of different health conditions , develop lists ( often called tables ) of compensable conditions .

it is presumed that when an eligible individual develops a listed condition , the condition is related to the exposure , and compensation is provided .

this is called a disease presumption .

vaccine injury compensation programs incorporate both an injury table and a time window following vaccination .

listed conditions that arise within the time window are presumed to be causally related to vaccination , and are compensated .

time limitations may not be applicable in many other circumstances , either because exposures did not occur at discrete or known times , or because some conditions ( eg , some cancers ) may arise decades after exposure , but still be causally related to an exposure .

when a program does not stipulate time limitations , there is nonetheless often the requirement that a claimant provide evidence that the onset of the condition did not precede the relevant exposure or incident .

burdens to demonstrate or refute the eligibility of individuals , or causality for health conditions , vary among programs .

disease presumptions help shift the burden of proof from the claimant to the program administrator , in what is an intrinsically adversarial system .

disease presumptions ideally flow from scientific evidence showing a causal relationship between an exposure and a subsequent disease .

but there is no bright line in medical science beyond which a causal relationship has been demonstrated , and a presumption should be provided .

further , it is not generally possible to know , for a specific individual , whether a condition is causally related to the exposure of interest , or arose for some other reason .

rather , when evidence suggests that exposed populations face an increased risk of developing certain conditions , the presumption of causality may be extended to all individuals in that population , in accordance with the compassionate intent that underpins many of these programs .

this report describes a number of federal programs that congress established to compensate or assist individuals who have suffered physical or psychological harm as a consequence of specific events ( including the actions of others ) , or who have suffered specific types of physical or psychological harm .

first , several program attributes — which are used subsequently to describe the specific programs — are discussed in general .

next , selected compensation programs are presented in three groupings , as mentioned above: ( 1 ) programs to compensate specified groups of individuals ; ( 2 ) programs to compensate for specified types of illness or injury ; and ( 3 ) hybrid programs .

next , three veterans' compensation programs are presented .

veterans' disability compensation is based on establishing a connection between an illness or injury and military service .

congress has on three occasions granted a presumption of a service - connection for a specific group of veterans .

a final section describes four additional federal assistance programs that do not fit into the above classifications , but that may nonetheless be of interest to policymakers: the federal tort claims act , stafford act emergency and disaster assistance , the breast and cervical cancer treatment program , and the world trade center medical monitoring and treatment program .

each of the program descriptions in subsequent sections of this report include discussion of certain program attributes .

following a background discussion of each program , including the basis for congressional action , program attributes that are described include .

the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) allows suits against the united states for torts committed by federal employees .

with exceptions , it makes the united states liable "under circumstances where the united states , if a private person , would be liable to the claimant in accordance with the law of the place where the act or omission occurred. .

an injured person must first present an administrative claim to the responsible federal agency .

if the agency denies the claim , the injured person may file suit in a federal district court , which will hear the case without a jury .

any person may file a claim with the appropriate federal agency within two years after the claim accrues .

federal employees injured on the job , however , whether military or civilian , may not recover under the ftca .

alternative compensation for work - related injury to these employees is available under the federal employees' compensation act and the veterans' compensation systems .

no restrictions .

successful plaintiffs may recover economic and noneconomic damages , to the extent allowed by applicable state law , except that punitive damages may not be awarded , and attorney's fees may not be awarded unless the united states acts in bad faith .

awards must be in lump - sum payments , but the parties may agree to structured settlements ( i.e. , periodic payments ) .

not applicable .

awards and settlements of $2,500 or less are paid out of appropriations available to the agency whose employee committed the tort .

awards and settlements in excess of $2,500 are paid out of general revenues .

in response to catastrophes , the president can provide funding to both state and local governments , and to individuals , to assist them in response and recovery .

assistance is provided under the authority of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) , upon a presidential declaration of an emergency ( providing a lower level of assistance ) or a major disaster ( providing a higher level of assistance ) .

pursuant to a stafford act emergency or major disaster declaration , federal assistance may be provided to assist individuals either in a congregate setting through state and local governments , or directly to individuals , in covering the costs of health care for related injuries or illnesses .

additionally , if requested specifically by the governor , a counseling program may also be made available under a presidential declaration .

stafford act assistance programs are administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

individual eligibility is strictly based on residence in an area subject to a presidential emergency or major disaster declaration , pursuant to the stafford act .

no restrictions .

pursuant to section 408 of the stafford act , the fema individuals and households program ( ihp ) provides cash assistance for uninsured , disaster - related medical , dental , and funeral expenses .

the amount available is the same for an individual or a household , and is capped in statute , with an annual adjustment based on the consumer price index .

the current ceiling ( for fy2009 ) is $30,300 .

recipients might have to use the funds to meet other needs concurrently , such as rent and other costs of living .

fema evaluates individual eligibility , and whether claimed medical , dental and funeral costs are disaster - related , on a case - by - case basis .

section 416 of the stafford act authorizes the president , pursuant to a major disaster declaration , to provide financial assistance to state and qualified tribal mental health agencies for professional counseling services , or training of disaster workers , to relieve disaster victims' mental health problems caused or aggravated by the disaster or its aftermath .

fema and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa , in hhs ) jointly administer the crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) .

pursuant to stafford act sections 403 ( for a major disaster declaration ) and 502 ( for an emergency declaration ) , states may receive federal assistance in providing for victims' health care needs , but such assistance is not provided directly to individuals .

not applicable .

activities undertaken under authority of the stafford act are funded through appropriations to the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , administered by fema .

the drf is a no - year account in which appropriated funds remain available until expended .

supplemental appropriations legislation is generally required each fiscal year to replenish the drf to meet the urgent needs of particularly catastrophic disasters .

in 1990 , congress established , in cdc , the national breast and cervical cancer early detection program ( nbccedp ) , which provides low - income , uninsured , and underserved women access to screening and diagnostic services to detect breast and cervical cancer at an early stage .

women in the program who were found to have breast or cervical cancer often faced access barriers to treatment , for the same reasons that made them eligible for the screening program .

on october 2000 , congress passed the breast and cervical cancer prevention and treatment act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-354 ) .

 ( in 2001 , in the native american breast and cervical cancer treatment technical amendment act , p.l .

107-121 , congress amended the act to also apply to american indians / alaska natives who are eligible for health services provided by the indian health service or by a tribal organization. ) .

the act gives states the option to provide medical assistance , through medicaid , to eligible women who were screened through the nbccedp and found to have breast or cervical cancer , including pre - cancerous conditions .

all 50 states and the district of columbia now offer such coverage .

the medicaid program is administered by the states under broad federal guidelines and the oversight of the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) in hhs .

in order for a woman to be eligible for medicaid under this program , she must: ( 1 ) have been screened for and found to have breast or cervical cancer , including precancerous conditions , through the nbccedp ; ( 2 ) be under age 65 ; and ( 3 ) be uninsured and otherwise not eligible for medicaid .

a woman remains eligible as long as she requires treatment for breast or cervical cancer , and continues to meet the other two criteria .

cms develops conditions of participation ( cops ) and conditions for coverage ( cfcs ) that health care organizations must meet in order to receive reimbursement through the medicaid program .

these conditions are the minimum health and safety standards that providers and suppliers must meet in order to be medicaid certified .

 ( these conditions apply equally for medicare. ) .

there are no additional provider restrictions applied to the breast and cervical cancer treatment program .

eligible individuals are entitled to the full range of medicaid services as specified in the state plan .

benefits are not limited to services for breast or cervical cancer .

as is the case with medicaid coverage in general , states may use administrative mechanisms , such as prior review and approval requirements , to determine that care and services furnished to women in this program are medically necessary .

not applicable .

states and the federal government share the cost of medicaid .

states are reimbursed by the federal government for a portion of a state's medicaid program costs .

because medicaid is an open - ended entitlement , there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal funds a state may receive .

the federal share of medicaid is funded through general revenues .

following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attack on the world trade center ( wtc ) in new york city ( nyc ) , thousands of responders worked on the primary and associated sites in a rescue , recovery , and clean - up operation that lasted more than a year .

in addition to the grim task of working amidst and recovering victims' remains , responders were potentially exposed to numerous toxins , including asbestos and other particulates , heavy metals , volatile organic compounds , and dioxin .

many of these workers are now experiencing physical and psychological health problems felt to be related to exposures at the site .

following the attack , congress provided appropriations to provide health care services for these workers , and others , in what is now called the world trade center medical monitoring and treatment program ( mmtp ) .

the mmtp is not explicitly authorized , but has received discretionary appropriations to pay for health care services for eligible individuals .

some members of congress have sought to establish explicit authority for the program .

the mmtp funds medical screening , monitoring , and treatment services for eligible workers ( paid and volunteer ) who were involved in the rescue , recovery , and clean - up activities following the attacks , and more limited services for some residents and others in the vicinity of the wtc during and after the attack .

the mmtp is administered by the cdc's national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) .

niosh is responsible for program components that serve four distinct groups of people , namely ( 1 ) nyc firefighters ; ( 2 ) other non - federal responders ; ( 3 ) responders who were federal employees at the time ; and ( 4 ) residents , students , and other non - responders affected by the disaster .

according to gao as reported in may 2008 , the program component for federal responders is implemented by federal occupational health services , under the hhs assistant secretary for administration and management , and was previously administered by the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response .

foh provides screening services , but treatment capability may be limited .

gao has commented on difficulties that hhs has had in establishing and running this program component .

congress first established program eligibility for residents , students , and other non - responders in fy2008 appropriations .

in april 2008 , niosh reported to congress that it was gathering information and exploring options for the provision of services for this "community program" in the nyc area .

the mmtp is intended to serve responders and others who do not reside in the greater nyc area , although niosh has had difficulty assuring consistent access to services for these individuals .

in may 2008 , niosh awarded a contract to manage the wtc "national responder health program. .

there is not , at this time , a comparable program for eligible non - responders outside the nyc area .

a related program , the world trade center health registry , was established to track , through periodic surveys , the physical and mental health status of workers , residents , and others exposed to the wtc site , for up to 20 years .

the registry , which is administered by the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( under the cdc director ) , does not provide compensation or health care services to registrants .

through appropriations , congress has expanded eligibility several times since the mmtp began , most notably to include residents and other non - responders .

 ( see the subsequent section on "financing" for details. ) .

at this time , the program covers wtc responders , whether paid ( including contractors ) or volunteer , regardless of their employer .

the fire department of new york ( fdny ) program is open to current and retired nyc firefighters , who are expected to receive care through the fdny bureau of health services and are , therefore , not eligible to receive care through the other program clinics .

beginning with fy2008 funds , the mmtp was to be expanded to include the community program , to provide monitoring and treatment for residents , students , and others affected by the wtc disaster .

niosh has not yet published individual eligibility criteria for the community program .

niosh reported that as of december 31 , 2007 , 50,300 responders were registered in the mmtp , 47,000 of whom were in the nyc metropolitan area .

of those in the nyc metropolitan area , 9,744 had received treatment for respiratory and / or gastrointestinal conditions , and 5,674 had received treatment for mental health conditions .

publicly available program information does not describe the status of eligible non - federal responders with respect to collateral health insurance or worker's compensation coverage .

for federal and non - federal responders seeking services in the nyc area , the mmtp funds medical monitoring and treatment services , and associated administrative activities , through two grantees: ( 1 ) a network of occupational medicine clinics in the nyc area , often referred to as the "ny / nj wtc consortium" or the "mount sinai coordinated consortium," and ( 2 ) the fdny bureau of health services .

in may 2008 , niosh awarded a contract to manage the wtc national responder health program .

information about the provision of services through this program component has not been published .

niosh reports that it has awarded a grant to the new york city health and hospitals corporation to manage the community program .

through appropriations , congress has expanded program benefits for responders over the years .

 ( see the subsequent section on "financing" for details. ) .

initially , the program provided baseline screenings , then expanded to include regular medical monitoring .

finally , coverage for treatment was first established with fy2006 funds .

at this time , for the diagnosis and treatment of specified conditions in eligible responders , the program covers all costs , without cost - sharing , including inpatient and outpatient medical procedures and prescribed medications .

the program does not cover the costs of care for unrelated health conditions , or the costs of services provided by an individual's personal physician if that physician is outside of the mmtp network .

also , for responders wishing to change the in - network clinic at which they receive care , the program generally permits only one such transfer .

services for family members of eligible responders are not covered , with the exception that certain family counseling services ( such as marriage counseling ) may be provided as part of an eligible responder's treatment plan .

the program does not recoup costs from other potential payers , such as health insurers or workers' compensation programs .

the community program is more recent — established for the first time with fy2008 funds — and its treatment benefits are more limited .

at this time , the community program "provides health screenings and assessments , health monitoring and tracking and improved access to health care services .

the grant money is used to help cover gaps when individuals' public or private insurance is insufficient to fully cover the costs associated with care or treatment. .

at this time , disease presumptions have been provided for responders .

whether such presumptions will also apply to non - responders has not yet been published .

for responders , covered conditions are those that are presumed to be related to wtc exposure or injury .

they include "aerodigestive conditions" ( eg , asthma , chronic cough , and gastroesophageal reflux disorder ) ; psychological conditions ( eg , post - traumatic stress disorder , depression , anxiety disorders , and substance abuse ) ; and musculoskeletal disorders ( eg , low back pain , and "other musculoskeletal disorders" ) .

per niosh: the conditions covered by this program have been established through the following guidelines: 1 ) conditions that have been reported in large numbers of patients seen through the [mmtp] , 2 ) rare conditions that have been diagnosed in some wtc responders and for which there is adequate scientific basis for a relation to the wtc - related exposures ; 3 ) conditions which are anticipated because of the nature of the wtc exposures but usually do not occur until several years after the exposure .

in june 2007 , niosh reported that aerodigestive conditions were the most prevalent , affecting 19% of mmtp registrants .

the mmtp has been funded through intermittent appropriations and has evolved since 2002 , initially providing baseline medical screenings , then regular medical monitoring , and , currently , periodic monitoring for all participants and medical treatment for those with wtc - related illnesses .

with the exception of small amounts for federal program administration , appropriated funds are provided to grantees ( i.e. , the consortium clinics and the fdny ) to deliver screening , monitoring , and treatment services .

grantees have used additional funding sources to support their programs , including charitable donations and state and municipal funds .

for fy2002 , congress directed $12 million in supplemental appropriations to the cdc to develop a baseline medical screening program for wtc responders .

for fy2003 , congress provided $90 million to continue baseline screenings and to provide long - term medical monitoring of program participants .

for fy2006 , congress provided $75 million for ongoing registry , screening , and monitoring activities , and stipulated for the first time that funds could also be used for treatment .

in may 2007 , congress provided an additional $50 million in supplemental funding for fy2007 , to remain available until expended .

for fy2008 , congress provided a total appropriation of approximately $108.1 million , providing in the law that funds shall be used "... to provide screening and treatment for first response emergency services personnel , residents , students , and others.... " for fy2009 , congress provided $70 million , noting that an additional $112 million was available in carryover balances from prior year appropriated funds .

in 2007 , both niosh and the city of new york estimated that the program's future needs would exceed recent federal funding levels , especially with the addition of medical treatment to the services provided .

projecting from earlier program expenditures , niosh estimated the probable short - term total annual cost of the program at $428 million , whereas the new york task force estimated that it could exceed $392 million .

 ( neither estimate included the cost of managing health problems , such as cancers , that have not emerged among program participants at this time , but that some experts fear may emerge in the future. ) .

subsequently , niosh reported to congress that it estimated annual treatment costs for responders for fy2008 and fy2009 at between $55 million and $80 million , and that it was in the process of determining cost estimates for the care of non - responders .

gao has noted concerns with niosh's cost estimation process for fy2007 , and improvements in the process it used to estimate costs for fy2008 and fy2009 .

legislation ( h.r .

847 ) introduced in the 111 th congress would provide statutory authority for the mmtp and designate its costs as mandatory spending .

bills introduced in the 110 th congress , in addition to providing statutory authority for the mmtp , also proposed alternative financing options for the program ( often coincident with other program modifications ) , including ( 1 ) authorizing continued discretionary appropriations ( h.r .

1414 / s .

201 ) ; ( 2 ) designating annual program appropriations as emergency spending ( h.r .

3543 ) ; ( 3 ) designating the costs of screening , monitoring and treatment services as mandatory spending ( h.r .

6594 ) ; ( 4 ) designating these costs as mandatory spending , but with total amounts only as provided in advance in appropriations acts ( h.r .

7174 ) ; and ( 5 ) establishing medicare eligibility for specified program beneficiaries ( h.r .

1247 ) .

none of these proposals was enacted in the 110 th congress .

traditionally , niosh has been involved in conducting or funding research on occupational illnesses and injuries ; conducting on - site inspections ( called health hazard evaluations ) to determine the toxicity of materials used in workplaces ; developing information and guidelines regarding workplace safety ; and educating workers , employers , and others .

the institute is not typically involved in administering or funding the delivery of health care services .

congress has called on the secretary of hhs , together with the director of niosh , to submit a comprehensive long - term plan for the mmtp .

gao has noted that hhs does not have a comprehensive plan to address responder health concerns in future disasters , though such a plan would fall among the responsibilities of the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response .

