on february 14 , 2007 , congress passed h.j.res .

20 , the revised continuing appropriations resolution for fy2007 , the fourth in a series of continuing resolutions ; it was signed into law on february 15 , 2007 ( p.l .

110-5 ) .

p.l .

110-5 provided funding for the remainder of fy2007 for most federal agencies , including the departments of transportation , the treasury , and housing and urban development , and the judiciary , the district of columbia , the executive office of the president , and independent agencies .

p.l .

110-5 provided funding generally at the level provided to agencies in fy2006 , except where otherwise stated .

on july 26 , 2006 , the senate committee on appropriations reported out h.r .

5576 , the fy2007 departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill .

the committee recommended an overall net funding level of $141.2 billion ( after budgetary scorekeeping adjustments ) , an increase of $3.6 billion ( 3% ) over the amount in the fy2006 act , $3.3 billion ( 2% ) over the administration request , and $2.5 billion ( 2% ) over the house - passed amount .

the committee also recommended performance requirements for amtrak , a 2.7% pay raise for federal civilian workers for calendar year 2007 , an easing of restrictions on agricultural exports to cuba , and a prohibition on easing restrictions on foreign control of u.s. airlines .

on june 14 , 2006 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

5576 .

the house approved an overall funding level of $139.6 billion ( after budgetary scorekeeping adjustments ) , a $2 billion ( 1% ) increase over the amount in the fy2006 act and a $1 billion ( less than 1% ) increase over the administration's request .

the house approved the appropriations committee's recommendations to provide the same pay raise ( 2.7% ) to federal civilian workers as that provided for uniformed military personnel for calendar year 2007 , to impose performance requirements on amtrak , to prohibit the internal revenue service from using private collection agencies to collect taxes , and to restrict the outsourcing of federal work .

the house approved several amendments to the bill , including ones increasing funding for amtrak and for selected programs in the department of housing and urban development , and to ease restrictions on u.s. agricultural exports to cuba ( the administration threatened to veto the bill if it contained provisions weakening sanctions on cuba ) .

the president's fy2007 request for the programs covered by this appropriations bill was $138.5 billion .

this was $2.3 billion ( 2% ) over the total in the fy2006 act ( after a 1.0% across - the - board rescission applied to the fy2006 funding ) .

the fy2007 request included cuts from the fy2006 funding level for grants to airports ( - $764 million ) , amtrak ( - $394 million ) , and housing programs for elderly and disabled in the department of housing and urban development ( - $307 million ) .

the fy2007 request for the executive office of the president was $225 million less than the fy2006 figure ; that reduction was primarily due to the proposed transfer of the high intensity drug trafficking areas program ( $225 million in fy2006 ) from the executive office of the president to the department of justice .

the president's fy2007 budget request proposals included: funding amtrak , the provider of intercity passenger rail service , at $900 million , down from $1.3 billion in fy2006 ; reducing funding for the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) airport improvement program ( aip ) to $2.8 billion , $700 million below its 'guaranteed' authorization level , which would make the entire appropriations bill subject to a point of order .

the proposed level was also below the aip formula threshold of $3.2 billion , which could result in a halving of most aip formula distributions ; reducing funding for community and economic development programs under the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) to $6.8 billion , $815 million below the amount provided in the fy2006 act ; reducing funding for housing for elderly and disabled persons under hud by $307 million ( 32% ) , from $971 million for fy2006 to $664 million for fy2007 ; eliminating the annual $29 million payment to the united states postal service for revenue forgone , as well as the absence of any funding requested for postal service security measures .

the house did not support most of these proposed changes .

the house - passed version of h.r .

5576 , the fy2007 departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill , provided $139.6 billion , $1.1 billion ( less than 1% ) over the administration's request .

the bill generally reflected recommendations of the house committee on appropriations ; the house did approve amendments increasing amtrak's fy2007 funding from $900 million to $1.1 billion , and approved amendments increasing funding for several programs within the department of housing and urban development .

the white house objected to several provisions in the bill , and issued a veto threat against the bill if it included any provision easing sanctions on cuba .

h.r .

5576 , as reported out by the senate committee on appropriations , also did not support most of the changes proposed by the administration .

the committee recommended $141.2 billion ( plus $597 million for the district of columbia in a separate bill ) , a total of $3.3 billion ( 2% ) over the administration request .

the committee recommended increases over the administration request for aviation , amtrak , housing , the internal revenue service , and drug control programs in the executive office of the president .

among the provisions recommended by the committee was one easing restrictions on agricultural trade with cuba , similar to the provision that had drawn a veto threat against the house - passed bill .

h.r .

5576 did not come to the senate floor .

a series of continuing resolutions kept most federal agencies operating early in fy2007 , culminating in passage of the revised continuing appropriations resolution for 2007 ( h.j.res .

20 / p.l .

110-5 ) , which was passed by congress on february 14 and signed into law on february 15 , 2007 .

this legislation provided funding for most federal agencies for the remainder for fy2007 , generally at the level provided to agencies in fy2006 , except where otherwise stated in the legislation .

among the agencies that received increases over their fy2006 levels were dot and hud .

the legislation also provides that the "requirements , authorities , conditions , limitations , and other provisions" of the fy2006 appropriations acts would apply to the funding provided for fy2007 , except where otherwise stated in the bill .

this section examines fy2007 appropriations for the treasury department and its operating bureaus .

fy2007 appropriations for the largest operating bureau , the internal revenue service ( irs ) , are examined in the following section .

the treasury department performs a variety of governmental functions .

foremost among them are protecting the nation's financial system against a host of illicit activities ( eg , money laundering and terrorist financing ) , collecting tax revenue , enforcing tax laws , managing and accounting for federal debt , administering the federal government's finances , regulating financial institutions , and producing and distributing coins and currency .

at its most basic level of organization , treasury consists of departmental offices and operating bureaus .

in general , the offices are responsible for formulating and implementing policy initiatives and managing treasury's operations , while the bureaus perform specific duties assigned to treasury , mainly through statutory mandates .

in the past decade or so , the bureaus have accounted for more than 95% of the agency's funding and work force .

with one possible exception , the bureaus can be divided into those engaged in financial management and regulation and those engaged in law enforcement .

in recent decades , the comptroller of the currency , u.s. mint , bureau of engraving and printing , financial management service ( fms ) , bureau of public debt , community development financial institutions fund ( cdfi ) , and office of thrift supervision have undertaken tasks related to the management of the federal government's finances or the supervision and regulation of the u.s. financial system .

by contrast , law enforcement has been the central focus of the tasks handled by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ; u.s. secret service ; federal law enforcement training center ; u.s. customs service ; financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) ; and the treasury forfeiture fund .

since the advent of the department of homeland security in 2002 , treasury's direct involvement in law enforcement has shrunk considerably .

the possible exception to this simplified dichotomy is the internal revenue service ( irs ) , whose main duties encompass both the collection of tax revenue and the enforcement of tax laws and regulations .

in addition to funding for the aforementioned departments and agencies , a diverse collection of 21 independent agencies receive funding through title vii of this appropriations bill .

table 10 lists their respective appropriations for fy2006 as enacted , and for fy2007 as requested in the president's budget , passed by the house , reported in the senate , and ultimately enacted in p.l .

110-5 .

discussion following the table focuses on key budget and policy issues in some of the larger agencies .

the transportation , treasury , et al. , appropriations act customarily includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs .

there also may be general provisions at the end of each individual title within the appropriations act which relate only to agencies and accounts within that specific title .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions was included in the fy2007 budget , appendix .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years .

for various reasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language is preferable to making the provisions permanent .

presented below are some of the government - wide general provisions that were proposed for elimination in the fy2007 budget .

inclusion of the provisions in h.r .

5576 , as passed by the house and reported in the senate , is noted .

h.r .

5576 was not enacted .

section 809 , which prohibits payment to political appointees who are filling positions for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed .

included as section 909 of the house bill and section 809 of the senate bill .

section 819 , which prohibits the obligation or expenditure of appropriated funds for employee training that ( 1 ) does not meet identified needs for knowledge , skills , and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties ; ( 2 ) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants ; ( 3 ) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation ; ( 4 ) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi - religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems ; or ( 5 ) is offensive to , or designed to change , participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace .

included as section 919 of the house bill and section 819 of the senate bill .

section 820 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce employee non - disclosure agreements if they do not contain whistleblower protection clauses .

included as section 920 of the house bill and section 820 of the senate bill .

section 823 , which requires that the committees on appropriations approve the release of any "non - public" information , such as mailing or telephone lists , to any person or any organization outside the federal government .

included as section 923 of the house bill and section 823 of the senate bill .

section 834 , which states that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states .

included as section 934 of the house bill and section 834 of the senate bill .

section 836 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowship program or to implement opm's proposed regulations limiting the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch .

included as section 936 of the house bill and section 836 of the senate bill .

section 837 , which requires agencies to report to congress on the amount of the acquisitions made from entities that manufacture the articles , materials , or supplies outside the united states .

not included in the house bill .

included as section 845 of the senate bill .

section 839 , which requires appropriate executive department and agency heads either to transfer funds to , or reimburse , the federal aviation administration to ensure the uninterrupted , continuous operation of the midway atoll airfield .

not included in the house bill .

included as section 838 of the senate bill .

section 840 , which provides certain requirements for conducting a public - private competition for the performance of an activity that is not inherently governmental for executive agencies with less than 100 full - time employees .

not included in either the house bill or the senate bill .

section 842 , which prohibits the use of funds to convert an activity or function of an executive agency to contractor performance if more than 10 federal employees perform the activity , unless the analysis reveals that savings would exceed 10 percent of the most efficient organization's personnel - related costs for performance of the activity or function by federal employees , or $10 million , whichever is lesser .

included as section 939 of the house bill and section 840 of the senate bill .

section 845 , which precludes contravention of the privacy act .

included as section 942 of the house bill and section 843 of the senate bill .

among new government - wide general provisions proposed in h.r .

5576 were those providing a 2.7% pay adjustment for federal civilian employees , including those in the departments of homeland security and defense ( section 940 of the house bill and section 841 of the senate bill ) , and prohibiting the use of funds to send or otherwise pay for more than 50 employees from a federal department or agency to attend a single conference outside the united states ( section 951 of the house bill and not included in the senate bill ) .

this latter provision was added to the bill by an amendment offered by representative scott garrett and agreed to by the house by voice vote on june 14 , 2006 .

the statement of administration policy on h.r .

5576 strongly opposed the 2.7% pay adjustment , stating that it exceeds the annual pay increase required by the federal employees pay comparability act for federal employees and the average private sector pay adjustment .

the fy2007 revised continuing appropriations resolution ( p.l .

110-5 ) provided that "the requirements , authorities , conditions , limitations , and other provisions" of the fy2006 tthud appropriations act would continue in effect through fy2007 , unless expressly changed in p.l .

110-5 .

since 2000 , either one or both houses have approved provisions in the annual treasury department appropriations bill that would ease u.s. economic sanctions on cuba ( especially on travel and on u.s. agricultural exports ) , but none of these provisions has ever been enacted .

in 2006 , both the house - passed and senate appropriations committee - reported versions of the fy2007 transportation - treasury - housing appropriations bill , h.r .

5576 , included a provision that would have prevented treasury department funds from being used to implement a february 2005 amendment to the cuba embargo regulations that tightened restrictions on "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

the administration's statement of policy on the bill maintained that the president would veto the bill if it contained any provision that would weaken sanctions on cuba .

action on h.r .

5576 was not completed by the end of the 109 th congress , and treasury department appropriations for fy2007 ultimately were funded by a series of continuing resolutions that did not include any provision on cuba sanctions .

in the house version of h.r .

5576 , the cuba provision was in section 950 , which was added on june 14 , 2006 , when the house approved h.amdt .

1049 ( moran , kansas ) by voice vote .

on the same day , the house rejected two additional cuba amendments: h.amdt 1050 ( rangel ) , that would have prohibited funds from being used to implement the economic embargo of cuba , was rejected by a vote of 183-245 ; h.amdt .

1051 ( lee ) , that would have prohibited funds from being used to implement the administration's june 2004 tightening of restrictions on educational travel to cuba , was rejected by a vote of 187-236 .

an additional cuba amendment , h.amdt .

1032 ( flake ) , that would have prohibited the use of funds to amend regulations relating to travel for religious activities in cuba , was withdrawn from consideration .

in the senate version of the bill , the cuba provision was in section 846 .

it was added to the bill on july 20 , 2006 , when the senate appropriations committee approved an amendment offered by senator dorgan by voice vote during the committee's markup of the bill .

the committee subsequently reported the bill ( s.rept .

109-293 ) with the cuba provision on july 26 , 2006 .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward communist cuba under fidel castro has consisted largely of efforts to isolate the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including prohibitions on u.s. financial transactions — the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) — that are administered by the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

restrictions on travel have been a key and often contentious component of u.s. efforts to isolate the cuban government .

the regulations have not banned travel itself , but have placed restrictions on any financial transactions related to travel to cuba .

in june 2004 , the bush administration significantly tightened restrictions on travel , and there was considerable negative reaction to the administration's tightening of restrictions for family visits and educational travel .

some u.s. commercial agricultural exports to cuba have been allowed since 2001 under the terms of the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 or tsra , but with numerous restrictions and licensing requirements .

exporters are denied access to u.s. private commercial financing or credit , and all transactions must be conducted in cash in advance or with financing from third countries .

since late 2001 , cuba has purchased about $1.2 billion in agricultural products from the united states .

overall u.s. exports to cuba amounted to about $7 million in 2001 , $146 million in 2002 , $259 million in 2003 , $400 million in 2004 , $369 million in 2005 , and $348 million in 2006 , the majority in agricultural products .

in february 2005 , the administration tightened u.s. economic sanctions against cuba by further restricting how u.s. agricultural exporters may be paid for their sales .

ofac amended the cacr to clarify that the term "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural sales to cuba means that the payment is to be received prior to the shipment of the goods .

this differs from the practice of being paid before the actual delivery of the goods , a practice that had been utilized by most u.s. agricultural exporters to cuba since such sales were legalized in late 2001 .

u.s. agricultural exporters and some members of congress strongly objected that the action constituted a new sanction that violated the intent of tsra , and could jeopardize millions of dollars in u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

ofac director robert werner maintained that the clarification "conforms to the common understanding of the term in international trade. .

in july 2005 , ofac clarified that , for "payment of cash in advance" for the commercial sale of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba , vessels can leave u.s. ports as soon as a foreign bank confirms receipt of payment from cuba .

ofac's action would reportedly ensure that the goods would not be vulnerable to seizure for unrelated claims while still at the u.s. port .

supporters of overturning ofac's february 2005 amendment , such as the american farm bureau federation , were pleased by the clarification but indicated that they would still work to overturn the february rule .

for additional information , see crs report rl32730 , cuba: issues for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33499 , exempting food and agriculture products from u.s. economic sanctions: status and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl31139 , cuba: u.s .

restrictions on travel and remittances , by [author name scrubbed] .

