it has been proposed that congress prohibit the sale or rental to minors of video games that are rated "m" ( mature ) or "ao" ( adults - only ) by the entertainment software ratings board .

this board is a non - governmental entity established by the interactive digital software association , and its ratings currently have no legal effect .

the board's website sets forth the criteria for its "m" and "ao" ratings: titles rated m ( mature ) have content that may be suitable for persons ages 17 and older .

titles in this category may contain intense violence , blood and gore , sexual content , and / or strong language .

titles rated ao ( adults only ) have content that should only be played by persons 18 years and older .

titles in this category may include prolonged scenes of intense violence and / or graphic sexual content and nudity .

the primary constitutional issue that a proposal to prohibit the sale or rental to minors of video games with "m" or "ao" ratings raises is whether it would violate the first amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech .

if it would not violate the first amendment , then it would constitute a valid regulation of interstate commerce within congress's power to enact under the commerce clause .

congress would also apparently have the power to delegate the promulgation of video game standards to a private entity , as the supreme court has upheld congress's power to delegate regulatory power to private entities in other contexts .

the first amendment provides that "congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech," but the supreme court allows various exceptions to this prohibition .

obscenity , for example , is not protected by the first amendment , but most sexually oriented material has not been judged to be obscene and is protected by the first amendment .

even a statute that restricts protected speech on the basis of its content may be constitutional , but the supreme court generally will uphold such a statute only if it passes "strict scrutiny. .

this means that , to be found constitutional , the statute must be necessary "to promote a compelling interest" and be "the least restrictive means to further the articulated interest. .

the supreme court has "recognized that there is a compelling interest in protecting the physical and psychological well - being of minors .

this interest extends to shielding minors from the influence of literature that is not obscene by adult standards. .

the supreme court has never ruled on the constitutionality of a statute that restricted minors' access to violent video games , but every lower federal court — three courts of appeals and five district courts ( not counting district court decisions that went up to a court of appeals ) — that has ruled on such law has found it unconstitutional and issued an injunction against its enforcement .

two of the federal courts of appeals decisions — the seventh and eighth circuits' — have considered the constitutionality of local ordinances ( indianapolis' and st. louis county's , respectively ) prohibiting making violent video games accessible to minors , and both refused to treat violent material like sexual material or to find it "obscene as to minors. .

both courts , rather , held the ordinances unconstitutional on the ground that the government had failed to present adequate evidence that violent video games are harmful to minors .

what sort of evidence would be adequate to persuade a court that there was a compelling interest in denying minors access to violent video games ? .

in the st. louis county case , the eighth circuit held: before the county may constitutionally restrict the speech at issue here , the county must come forward with empirical support for its belief that "violent" video games cause psychological harm to minors .

in this case , as we have already explained , the county has failed to present the "substantial supporting evidence" of harm required before an ordinance that threatens protected speech can be upheld .

we note , moreover ... that the county may not simply surmise that it is serving a compelling state interest because "society in general believes that continued exposure to violence can be harmful to children. .

where first amendment rights are at stake , "the government must present more than anecdote and supposition. .

st. louis county also asserted that it has a compelling interest in "assisting parents to be the guardians of their children's well - being. .

as to this , the eighth circuit said that in no case "does the supreme court suggest that the government's role in helping parents to be the guardians of their children's well - being is an unbridled license to governments to regulate what minors read and view. .

in the indianapolis case , judge richard posner , holding for the seventh circuit that a preliminary injunction against enforcement of the indianapolis ordinance was warranted , wrote: the city rightly does not rest on "what everyone knows" about the harm inflicted by violent video games .

these games with their cartoon characters and stylized mayhem are continuous with an age - old children's literature on violent themes... .

the city instead appeals to social science to establish that games such as "the house of the dead" and "ultimate mortal kombat 3," games culturally isomorphic with ( and often derivative from ) movies aimed at the same under 18 crowd , are dangerous to public safety .

the social science evidence on which the city relies consists primarily of the pair of psychological studies that we mentioned earlier... .

these studies do not support the ordinance .

there is no indication that the games used in the studies are similar to those in the record of this case or to other games likely to be marketed in game arcades in indianapolis .

the studies do not find that video games have ever caused anyone to commit a violent act , as opposed to feeling aggressive , or have caused the average level of violence to increase anywhere .

and they do not suggest that it is the interactive character of the games , as opposed to the violence of the images in them , that is the cause of the aggressive feelings .

the studies thus are not evidence that violent video games are any more harmful to the consumer or to the public safety than violent movies or other violent , but passive entertainments .

the third and most recent court of appeals decision — the ninth circuit's — struck down a california statute that prohibited the sale or rental to minors of violent video games , and that required that violent video games "be labeled with a sold white '18' outlined in black" that is "no less than 2 inches by 2 inches" in size .

applying strict scrutiny , the court held that the act violates rights protected by the first amendment because the state has not demonstrated a compelling interest , has not tailored the restriction to its alleged compelling interest , and there exist less - restrictive means that would further the state's expressed interests .

additionally [the court held] that the act's labeling requirement is unconstitutionally compelled speech because it does not require the disclosure of purely factual information ; but compels the carrying of the state's controversial opinion .

five federal district courts — in washington , illinois , michigan , oklahoma , and louisiana — have also struck down statutes that denied minors access to violent video games , and have not been reviewed by a court of appeals .

we discuss these five cases in the order in which they were decided .

in july 2004 , a district court struck down a statute enacted by the state of washington , finding that "there has been no showing that exposure to video games that 'trivialize violence against law enforcement officers' is likely to lead to actual violence against such officers. .

in december 2005 , a district court struck down an illinois statute that prohibited both violent and sexually explicit video games , finding , with respect to the prohibition of violent video games , that "defendants have failed to present substantial evidence showing that playing violent video games causes minors to have aggressive feelings or engage in aggressive behavior. .

in march 2006 , a district court struck down a michigan statute that , in the court's words , "regulates the distribution of both sexually explicit video games and ultra violent explicit video games to those under the age of 17 .

the plaintiffs only challenge the second part of the act dealing with ultra violent explicit video games. .

the court found that "defendants have failed to present substantial evidence showing that playing violent video games causes minors to have aggressive feelings or engage in aggressive behavior. .

the court also found that the statute would have a "chilling effect" on video game retailers because it "would make the retailers themselves responsible for determining which games are considered ultra - violent .

since they could not determine this in advance , the retailers would likely steer clear of any game with the potential of such violence in order to avoid civil and criminal liability , thus denying constitutionally protected free speech to minors and adults. .

the court found , in addition , that "[t]he defendants have also failed to consider less restrictive ways of achieving their interests ... such as undertaking an advertising campaign to inform parents of the [voluntary] ratings system [developed by the entertainment software ratings board] and what to watch out for when purchasing games for their children , much like the theater industry did when ratings were first introduced. .

finally , the court found the michigan statute to be "unconstitutionally vague. .

in december 2006 , a district court in louisiana granted a permanent injunction against a statute that criminalized the distribution to minors of violent video games .

the court found that , "when it comes to regulating expression in order 'to curb violent behavior,' the state must satisfy the standards set forth in brandenburg v. ohio , 395 u.s. 444 ( 1969 ) .

under brandenburg , the government must prove that the target expression 'is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action.' .

in addition , "the statute cannot be defended on the grounds that it is designed to protect minors from some form of 'psychological harm,' as that amounts to nothing more than 'impermissible thought control.' .

the court also found the statute underinclusive because "violent video games are only 'a tiny fraction of the media violence to which modern american children are exposed,'" and found "that there are less restrictive alternatives which would achieve the state's goals ... including encouraging awareness of the voluntary esrb video game rating system .. .

. .

finally , the court found the statute unconstitutionally vague .

in september 2007 , a district court in oklahoma granted a permanent injunction against the enforcement of a state statute that made it a crime to display , sell , or otherwise disseminate violent video games , as defined by the statute .

the court found no support in the record , let alone "substantial evidence," for defendants' conclusion that allowing dissemination of violent video games to minors is harmful to those minors or any others .

beyond defendants' generalized statements , there is a complete dearth of legislative findings , scientific studies , or other rationale in the record to support the passage of the act .

defendants' argument that "common sense" dictates that playing violent video games "is not good for children," and that the onus is on plaintiffs to prove otherwise , completely fails... .

the first amendment does not allow prohibitions based on "common sense. .

the court also found the statute unconstitutionally vague .

as noted above , in 2005 , a federal district court struck down an illinois statute that prohibited both violent and sexually explicit video games .

the state appealed only with respect to sexually explicit video games , and the seventh circuit affirmed .

the seventh circuit applied strict scrutiny and quickly found that the state's identified purpose in "shielding children from indecent sexual material and in assisting parents in protecting their children from that material" is "clearly" compelling .

the seventh circuit , however , found the illinois statute to fail the second prong of strict scrutiny because it "is not narrowly tailored and is overbroad. .

this was because it banned "access to material that has serious social value for minors," even though doing so was unnecessary for the state to achieve its stated purpose .

even apart from this problem , the court found that "the statute could still not survive strict scrutiny because the plaintiffs have identified other less restrictive alternatives... .

most obviously , the state could have simply passed legislation increasing awareness among parents of the voluntary esrb ratings system. .

in conclusion , it appears that , for a prohibition of the sale or rental to minors of video games with violent content to be upheld , the government would have to present empirical evidence that these games harm minors or cause them to become violent .

the prohibition of the sale or rental to minors of video games containing sexual content , however , would seem more likely to be upheld without empirical evidence that such games harm minors .

nevertheless , the apparent vagueness and potential overbreadth of the current criteria for "m" and "ao" ratings might cause a statutory prohibition on the sale or rental to minors of video games that incorporates those ratings to be found unconstitutional on its face , even if the sale or rental to minors of some of the video games to which the "m" or "ao" rating apply could constitutionally be prohibited by more narrowly tailored legislation .

