hurricane katrina's devastation to the nation's housing stock was unprecedented .

the 2005 hurricanes ( katrina , rita , and wilma ) and their related flooding were estimated to have damaged 1.2 million units of housing ; of those , over 300,000 were seriously damaged or destroyed .

the congressional research service ( crs ) estimated that 700,000 people may have lived in the areas most adversely affected by hurricane katrina , and were most likely to be displaced .

data provided to crs by fema in june 2006 showed that , at peak , approximately 1.25 million people were living outside their original zip code because of hurricanes katrina and rita .

these displaced families fell into a range of categories .

some were homeowners whose property sustained only minor damage and who quickly secured loans to begin repair .

some were homeowners whose property sustained massive damage and who were left waiting , even a year later , for information on their insurance settlements and options .

some were renters whose dwellings were quickly repaired , while others were renters whose dwellings will never be rebuilt .

some were homeless before the storm — about these people little is known .

even within these categories there is variation .

some of the families found permanent homes in new communities , others stayed with friends and family temporarily but were able to make their way back , and still others , a year after the storm , are still displaced and unsure whether they will ever return .

some of these families were economically stable , had sizeable savings , good insurance , and were able to maintain their employment ; others were economically unstable before the disaster and lost what little they had .

many probably fell somewhere in between .

the full effect of hurricane katrina and the circumstances of the families affected may never be fully known .

however , existing data provide some insights .

for example , crs estimates that the poverty rate in the katrina - damaged areas was 21% in 2000 — well above the national poverty rate of 12% — and the rate of homeownership in katrina - damaged areas was 55% , compared with 66% nationally in 2000 .

in light of the characteristics of the damaged communities — poorer than average and more likely to rent — it is not surprising that many questions arose about the role of the nation's primary housing assistance program for the poor , the section 8 housing choice voucher program .

these questions generally fall into three categories .

first , what was the effect of the hurricane on existing voucher holders in the damaged regions ? .

second , to what extent is the program being used to serve displaced families , regardless of whether they previously received vouchers or other hud assistance ? .

third , to what extent , if at all , should the program be modified and expanded to serve additional displaced families ? .

this report also reviews the forms of assistance fema has provided to displaced families in lieu of section 8 vouchers .

hurricane katrina affected both phas and assisted families .

some phas in the path of the storm temporarily ceased operations , including the housing authority of new orleans ( hano ) and the housing authority of the city of slidell .

others took in displaced voucher holders , most notably the housing authority of the city of houston .

an unknown number of families in the hurricane - damaged areas were receiving federal help with their housing costs , either through a section 8 housing voucher or by living in federally subsidized rental housing , such as public housing , before the storm hit .

while these families retain their assistance , the process of using this assistance in other areas can be cumbersome .

hud developed several policies and procedures for storm - affected agencies and families to follow .

outside of kdhap and dvp , congress did not fund , and hud did not provide , additional section 8 vouchers for families displaced by hurricane katrina .

displaced families could apply for existing hud assistance , including section 8 vouchers , if they were otherwise eligible ; however , in most communities , waiting lists for vouchers are very long — in some cases up to 10 years .

in response to the disaster , some phas chose to give waiting list preference to families displaced by hurricane katrina .

in order to offer such a preference , phas must generally modify their existing pha plan .

such changes require board approval and are generally subject to public scrutiny .

the decision to prioritize displaced families can be controversial .

given the limited supply of vouchers , prioritizing evacuees from other communities requires preempting other poor families who have been on waiting lists for many years .

prioritizing displaced families may also have budget implications .

in recent years , phas have received a fixed budget based on their inflated costs in 2004 .

since costs are driven by the difference between the rent and income of the families served , increases or decreases in either can change the cost in ways beyond what is captured in the aforementioned inflation factor .

given that many displaced families were very poor before the storm and many were at least temporarily unemployed after the storm , they may have qualified for larger subsidies than a pha's typical caseload .

since phas' budgets do not adapt to changes in their caseloads , it may be more expensive to serve displaced families .

if phas' budgets are squeezed , they may either have to reduce the amount of assistance they are able to provide to families or reduce the total number of families served .

also , because vouchers are portable , displaced families may leave the jurisdiction of the pha that issued the voucher and move back to devastated areas after they are rebuilt .

if families leave with their vouchers , unless the vouchers are absorbed in the new community , they will effectively be lost to the communities that issued them .

no database of pha preferences exists , so the number of phas that changed their preferences to prioritize katrina evacuees is unknown .

since revisions to plans require a public process , a search by crs of newspaper articles in early november found some reports of activity in local communities .

several phas chose to prioritize evacuees ; others considered making changes but ultimately decided not to ; and still others did not consider changes , given the need in their own communities .

even if given top priority for existing vouchers , some families displaced by hurricane katrina were ineligible to receive assistance because their incomes were too high .

recognizing this concern , on september 26 , 2005 , members of the louisiana house delegation introduced the hurricane katrina emergency housing act of 2005 ( h.r .

3894 ) .

the bill would have waived a number of the rules in the section 8 voucher and project - based programs , including those regarding income eligibility and subsidy determination , for families displaced by hurricane katrina .

the bill did not include additional appropriations for the section 8 program , nor did it authorize any additional vouchers .

h.r .

3894 passed the full house on october 6 , 2005 , but similar legislation was not introduced in the senate , and it was not enacted before the close of the 109 th congress .

after hurricane katrina struck , housing policy advocates and analysts from across the political spectrum called for the creation of additional section 8 vouchers to help house the hundreds of thousands of displaced families .

there is past precedent for the creation of temporary vouchers after an emergency , including after the 1994 northridge earthquake .

advocates for vouchers cite a number of advantages vouchers have over the use of trailers and cash grants , which are the two primary methods fema used to house displaced families following the storm .

vouchers are portable and allow families to move to the locations of their choice .

if administered by local housing authorities , they connect families with organizations that are knowledgeable about local markets and can help families locate housing .

since vouchers utilize the existing housing stock , they may cost less than trailers , which often need basic infrastructure to be developed before they can be installed .

arguments against using vouchers include the complexity of the eligibility and benefit calculation , although both can be modified by congress when authorizing and funding new vouchers .

also , sufficient rental units may not exist in the areas where families wish to live , and unlike trailers , vouchers cannot expand the stock to address that problem .

finally , once a voucher is authorized , it can be difficult to eliminate .

this was the case after the northridge earthquake .

many families with temporary vouchers were still using them when the assistance was set to expire , and , fearing the social and political implications of evicting families , congress extended the assistance several times before it was eventually made permanent .

given recent concerns voiced by congress about the cost of the section 8 program and administration initiatives to replace it with a new program , there may be political reluctance to expand it .

after the storm , the president did not request section 8 vouchers for displaced families outside of the limited kdhap / dvp assistance .

instead , fema provided cash grants to families to use for housing costs .

referred to as transitional housing assistance , these payments are governed by the individual and household assistance authority provided in the stafford act .

the first of these payments , at the amount of $2,358 , was made in september 2005 .

the grant amount was meant to represent three months of housing costs , and was calculated using the national average fair market rent for a two - bedroom apartment .

families who received the assistance were required to show receipts to prove that it was used for eligible housing expenses ; however , those rules were loosened for the first grant because fema acknowledged that families were given payments without sufficient direction as to how it was to be used .

the grants count against fema's $26,200 limit on assistance provided to an individual household .

fema indicated that the housing assistance could be extended for up to 18 months , and that future amounts might be adjusted to reflect regional rent variations .

families' eligibility for this assistance was determined when they registered with fema , and was based on the amount of damage to their homes .

as of august 14 , 2006 , 718,976 applicants had received rental assistance and as of august 23 , 2006 , 632,808 of those applicants , at their last recertification , were still eligible for ongoing rental assistance .

in addition to transitional housing assistance payments , fema can provide several other forms of housing assistance .

fema can provide trailer homes to families for up to 18 months after a disaster .

as of august 29 , 2006 , fema had provided more than 116,000 trailers and mobile homes to hurricane victims , of which more than 115,000 were occupied .

fema can also pay the cost of hotel rooms for hurricane evacuees .

at its peak , fema was paying for 85,000 rooms , for katrina and rita evacuees ; by the end of february 2006 , the agency was making payments for 10,000 rooms .

fema announced that hotel payments were only a temporary solution , and initially stated that it would cease such payments by december 1 , 2005 , with the exception of short - term extensions for the 12,000 hotel rooms occupied by evacuees in louisiana and mississippi .

that deadline was later extended to december 15 , 2005 , with 10 states eligible for extensions to january 7 , 2006 .

following a judge's ruling against the agency , fema first agreed to continue making payments for families until at least february 7 , 2006 , a date that was later extended to march 15 , 2006 .

fema reported that it had "an aggressive plan to help place these families in longer - term housing," which included a contract to provide case management assistance , continuation of transitional housing payments , and referrals to social service agencies .

by the end of august 2006 , the agency was still authorizing payments for 29 rooms .

some cities established their own voucher programs , for which fema had been providing reimbursements .

newspapers reported that houston has issued 35,000 vouchers to families to cover one year of rent .

fema reported that approximately 60,000 apartments were leased by state or local governments , or authorized partners , on behalf of evacuees in 32 of the states that received disaster declarations .

fema initially stated that it was phasing out the program and that it would cease reimbursing cities by march 1 , 2006 .

in late february , fema issued a notice to cities informing them that they were to transition all of their existing leases from one fema program ( fema's section 403 interim sheltering program ) to another ( fema's section 408 housing program ) with the aid of a fema contractor .

in this transition , the cities are removed from the lease and the evacuees are added .

in july 2007 , hud and fema entered into an interagency agreement through which fema will transfer responsibility for ongoing housing assistance for families displaced by katrina to hud .

according to the fema notice in the federal register announcing the agreement , due to the severity of hurricanes katrina and rita , the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) expertise in assisting families with long - term housing needs through its existing infrastructure of public housing agencies ( phas ) , the president determined that housing assistance should be transitioned to hud to address this continuing need .

according to the interagency agreement , fema will provide resources for up to 18 months of rental assistance and case management services for approximately 45,000 families at a total estimated cost of $565 million .

eligible families will include those currently receiving fema section 408 assistance and still eligible to continue receiving such assistance ; currently receiving other fema housing assistance ( e.g .

living in a fema - provided trailer ) and still eligible to continue receiving such assistance ; eligible to be receiving fema housing assistance but not currently receiving such assistance ; and living in a real estate owned ( reo ) property through an arrangement between fema and hud and determined to be eligible for rental assistance upon relocation out of the reo property .

hud invited phas in areas where families receiving fema housing assistance are located to participate in the new disaster housing assistance pilot program ( dhap ) .

participating phas were to begin providing pre - transitional case management to eligible families on or after september 1 , 2007 .

through october 1 , 2007 , families were to continue to receive rental assistance payments directly from fema .

beginning november 1 , 2007 , phas were to begin receiving rental assistance payments for eligible families from hud , and phas would then make payments to landlords for participating families .

the rental payments would be equivalent to the fmr in the community .

beginning in january 2008 , hud was to work with fema to transition eligible families out of travel trailers and into rental housing in the private market .

the initial start of dhap was delayed , with hud and phas assuming responsibility on december 1 , 2008 , rather than november 1 , 2008 .

according to hud , 30,200 families were referred by fema to hud to receive dhap assistance initially , and an additional 8,400 families , who were previously assisted with fema trailers , have been referred to hud and will be transitioned to the dhap with a target date of march 2008 .

beginning on march 1 , 2008 , families will be required to contribute $50 per month towards their rent , increasing by $50 per month for each subsequent month for the duration of the program , which is slated to end march 1 , 2009 .

phas will coordinate case management services for residents to help them "get back on their feet" and hud will work to help transition seniors and persons with disabilities into hud programs at the end of dhap .

hurricane katrina was an unprecedented housing disaster .

it affected the lives of hundreds of thousands of people , many of them poor before the storm and many who may become poor because of the storm .

the nation's largest housing program for the poor , the section 8 voucher program , played a minor role in aiding displaced families , despite calls for its use from across the political spectrum .

instead , the administration has relied on fema emergency provisions and , to a limited degree , the marshaling of existing hud resources .

in some parts of the country , local housing authorities prioritized hurricane evacuees for the limited supply of available vouchers .

in september , the kdhap / dvp program was created to serve the relatively small number of hurricane evacuees who previously received hud assistance .

to serve other displaced families , fema developed a number of interim policies , ranging from the provision of trailers to the awarding of cash grants .

some cities and states developed their own voucher programs , with the expectation of fema reimbursement .

the administration's approach to housing families displaced by the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes has come under intense criticism .

generally , the response was criticized as disorganized and inefficient .

the final report of a congressional review of the government's response to the disaster , a failure of initiative , found that "the government plans for ... shelter were far from adequate. .

low - income housing advocates voiced concerns that some families could not find ways to use their transitional housing funds , both because rental markets have become very tight in the areas immediately surrounding the most heavily damaged areas , and because families were unfamiliar with the rental markets in the areas to which they had relocated .

advocates also contended that fema did not make it clear to families that the transitional housing payments were to be used only for housing .

stories surfaced of families who used the funds for purposes other than rent , and are now facing eviction and possible sanctions from fema .

some argued that the mix of trailers , cash payments , and mission assignments is not cost effective when compared to vouchers .

in light of these criticisms and others , the administration undertook a review of its katrina response .

the final report , the federal response to hurricane katrina: lessons learned , recommends that hud be designated as the lead federal agency for the provision of temporary housing in future disasters .

it noted that hud has extensive experience in providing housing resources for those in need , and that it must use its extensive network of regional offices and state and local housing agencies to prepare for potential relocation emergencies .

it further notes that the provision of trailers should not be the default means of temporary housing offered to evacuees leaving shelters .

the congressional panel's review , in a failure of initiative , found that "fema failed to take full advantage of hud's expertise and perspective on large - scale housing challenges , such as the agency's experience with the voucher program. .

nearly two years after the storm , the administration decided to transfer administrative responsibility for ongoing housing assistance from fema to hud .

whether these findings and recommendations will mean that vouchers will play a larger role in future disasters is yet to be determined .

