in order for congress to address the key issue that it faces with respect to genetic discrimination , namely , whether the potential for genetic discrimination by employers and insurers merits protections for genetic information that are more extensive than those already in place for health information in general , there are several fundamental points that it may wish to consider .

these include an understanding of what genetic information and discrimination are , how current laws affect employers' and insurers' use of genetic and other health information , how proposed legislation would amend current law , and the arguments that have been made both in favor of and against the passage of legislation .

properly defining genetic information in potential nondiscrimination legislation is essential , as the scope of the definition will largely determine the types of activities that are permitted and proscribed .

yet this basic concept may prove to be complex , as many types of health information have a genetic component .

genetic information may be defined and derived in a number of ways .

of course , it may be obtained via genetic testing .

however , it may also be discernable through other laboratory testing that does not involve a specific examination of genes , such as some protein or molecular testing .

it may sometimes be derived through physical examination ( for example , down's syndrome , which has a genetic basis , has specific physical characteristics such as a single crease across each palm ) .

finally , genetic information may be discernable from a family's medical history , which might reveal risks for certain types of cancer , hypertension , and a myriad of other diseases with a genetic component .

once the definition of genetic information is settled , the question of what constitutes discrimination based on that information can be addressed .

in the context of the current debate in congress , genetic discrimination can be defined as the potential use of an individual's genetic information by employers or health insurers to discriminate against that individual in employment decisions ( hiring , promotions , firing ) or health insurance coverage decisions ( eligibility or premiums ) .

although the use of health information , including genetic information , by employers and insurers is currently regulated , some argue that genetic information merits special protections under the law .

three federal laws and a presidential order touch on the issues raised by the use of genetic information: the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) ; title vii of the civil rights act of 1963 ; the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) ; and executive order 13145 , to prohibit discrimination in federal employment based on genetic information ( 65 fr 6877 ) .

the ada protects people from discrimination based on existing disability , history of disability , and perception of disability in employment .

the executive order prohibits discrimination against federal employees based on protected genetic information , or information about a request for or the receipt of genetic services .

in general , the hipaa statute limits denial of coverage based on pre - existing conditions to 12 months .

in the absence of a current diagnosis , the hipaa statute would not consider predictions of risk of future disease based on genetic information to be a pre - existing condition .

in addition , the health information privacy rule , issued in 2000 pursuant to hipaa's administrative simplification provisions , restricts the disclosure of health information , including genetic information , by group and individual health plans .

the hipaa privacy rule also allows group and individual health plans to use some health information ( which could include genetic information ) in underwriting .

the civil rights act provides some protections against genetic discrimination against members of a protected group , such as persons of a certain race , color , religion , sex or national origin .

the existence and scope of state anti - discrimination legislation that could be interpreted to cover genetics varies .

most state laws prohibit: ( i ) discrimination based on particular traits or diseases ; ( ii ) discrimination based on genetic test results ; or ( iii ) insurers or employers from requiring that an individual take a genetic test and using the results .

legislation reintroduced in the 110 th congress ( s. 358 / h.r .

493 ) would extend current federal protections against discrimination to health insurers in the individual market , and would further limit the use and disclosure of genetic information .

the bills would also bar insurers from using genetic information or family history of disease in underwriting for an individual ( as an individual or applied to a group ) .

s. 358 and h.r .

493 would also prohibit discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibit an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information .

if such information were obtained , the bills would require that it be treated as part of a confidential medical record .

the bills include detailed provisions on enforcement which generally apply the remedies available in existing civil rights laws such as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000e - 4 et seq. ) .

neither bill addresses life or disability insurance .

genetic nondiscrimination legislation has been debated since the 103 rd congress .

since that time , many of the arguments and positions supporting and opposing genetic nondiscrimination legislation have remained largely unchanged .

on january 18 , 2007 , president bush called on congress to pass bipartisan genetic nondiscrimination legislation .

genetic nondiscrimination legislation is supported by consumer groups , the medical profession , researchers and the medical products industry ( including pharmaceutical companies ) .

opposition to genetic nondiscrimination legislation has come from some members of the insurance industry and from employers , represented broadly by the genetic information nondiscrimination in employment ( gine ) coalition , which includes the u.s. chamber of commerce .

supporters of the legislation argue that current laws are not clear on protection from discrimination based on genetic information ; because existing federal laws have not been tested in court , the extent of their protection of genetic information is not assured .

despite the fact that few cases of genetic discrimination can be documented , supporters argue that proper protections are necessary to allay the fears of individuals about the potential for discriminatory practices .

allaying the public's fears , they argue , will encourage individuals to seek beneficial health services , participate in much - needed clinical research , and otherwise reap the benefits of the publicly funded human genome project ( hgp ) .

many professional and consumer groups argue that individuals should not be penalized in their ability to obtain insurance or a job because medical science can identify a genetic condition or a gene that predisposes a person to a future illness , but cannot yet offer an effective treatment .

for example , the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) stated at a hearing in 2001 that "americans should be judged on their actual abilities , not their potential disabilities. .

on the other hand , this may create a disparity between people whose medical conditions have treatments available and those whose do not .

opponents of enacting special legislation to prevent potential discrimination on the basis of genetic information argue that current federal and state protections are sufficient .

the insurance industry also argues that additional regulation would be confusing , unnecessary and costly .

they claim that it would be unfair to prohibit them from acquiring genetic information when they already use other health information .

some groups , such as the american association of health plans ( now a part of the america's health insurance plans ) , support the premise of federal nondiscrimination legislation and have indicated support for legislation that is consistent with their principles .

however , others would further limit the definition of genetic information .

one bill introduced in the 108 th congress ( h.r .

3636 ) would have prohibited health insurers from discriminating based on predictive genetic information but would not have affected employers .

the bill had no cosponsors , and many consumer groups indicated that they would not support nondiscrimination legislation without both insurance and employment provisions .

some employers question whether legislation is necessary because there are few documented cases of discrimination based on genetic information , and there is no evidence that employers would use the information if they had it .

in addition , employers argue that existing law provides adequate protection against genetic discrimination in employment .

randy johnson , vice president of the u.s. chamber of commerce's office of labor policy , stated that if the legislation were to pass , it should be narrowed to acknowledge that employers should be able to make employment decisions based on information that some workers with specified genetic markers could pose a "significant risk to others. .

other business coalition members suggest that the definition of "family member" should be revised to include only immediate family .

many also support federal preemption whereby any new federal law would preempt existing state law in this area .

this report provides an overview of the scope and current permissible uses of health information and genetic information .

it reviews the existing evidence of genetic discrimination and the impact of the fear of discrimination .

then it provides a more detailed discussion of s. 358 / h.r .

493 and the key issues raised by the genetic nondiscrimination bills .

for a more detailed discussion of genetic testing and public policy , see crs report rl33832 , genetic testing: scientific background for policymakers , by [author name scrubbed] .

understanding how health information is currently used and regulated provides a framework for discussion about whether extra protections are necessary for genetic information , and if so , which protections are most appropriate .

health information , which includes genetic information , is currently used by health insurers and employers .

it is often presumed confidential , but increasing capabilities to store and rapidly transfer data electronically escalate the challenge of protecting privacy .

both the ways in which health insurers and employers use and are restricted from using health information are discussed in the sections that follow .

as noted in the introduction , the definition of genetic information is a key issue for congress in its consideration of genetic nondiscrimination legislation , because the broader the definition the more expansive the prohibitions on discrimination .

the definition of genetic information varies among sources .

genetic information is generally described as the information from a genetic test about genes , gene products , inherited characteristics or other traits that are derived from an individual or an individual's family member ( s ) .

information about an individual's current health status ( such as sex , age , results of physical examination , and chemical , blood , or urine analysis , where the analyses do not provide information about an individual's genotype ) is generally not considered to be genetic information .

the two key sources of genetic information are family medical histories and genetic test results .

critics of genetic nondiscrimination legislation have argued that legislation is not necessary because genetic discrimination is not occurring .

there have indeed been relatively few reported cases of genetic discrimination in health insurance and employment .

rothenberg and terry hypothesize that this is because: ( 1 ) the use of genetic information by employers and insurers is not widespread ; ( 2 ) affected persons may not know the underlying basis for adverse employment or insurance decisions ; and ( 3 ) many cases may go unreported because of disincentives associated with publicizing discrimination lawsuits .

reports of cases of genetic discrimination and genetic testing by employers are presented below .

while there are few documented cases of genetic discrimination by employers and health insurers , studies have shown that public fear of discrimination influences both the use of genetic testing and the use of genetic information by consumers and health professionals .

fear of genetic discrimination may cause consumers to refuse genetic testing and therapies that could be beneficial to their health .

it may deter people from participating in genetic research , thus slowing the development of new technologies .

in other words , whether or not genetic discrimination is actually occurring , public worry about the issue may itself have detrimental effects .

related questions have been raised about whether genetic counseling , in which professionals inform and assist patients making genetic - related healthcare decisions , may serve to unduly increase the fear of discrimination , amplifying the behavioral impact .

both examples of the behavioral impact of genetic discrimination and investigation into the role of genetic counseling are presented in this section .

the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2007 would restrict insurers' and employers' acquisition and use of genetic information in several ways .

these restrictions build upon those already imposed in current law .

the specifics of the proposed restrictions have sparked debates in both the employment and insurance arenas since they were first proposed .

this section of the report summarizes the current privacy protections in place for both insurers and employers , and then surveys the persistent debates that have accompanied genetic nondiscrimination legislation generally .

an overarching question regarding s. 358 and h.r .

493 is how the bills would protect genetic information .

the answer depends both on types of protections ( specifying what can be done with genetic information ) , and on the definition of genetic information itself ( specifying what is protected and what is not ) .

as discussed in previous sections , the types of protections would primarily be restrictions on the manner in which genetic information could be used in determining eligibility for health insurance , establishing premiums for health insurance , and in making decisions regarding employment .

the definition of genetic information is discussed in detail below .

the bills define genetic information as — and therefore protect — knowledge derived from a genetic test performed on individuals or their family members that relates to the occurrence of a disease or disorder .

the protections would apply to predictive genetic tests that provide information regarding a future possible health status of a currently non - affected person .

the bills' precise definition of genetic information , and thus protections that they would provide , hinge on factors discussed below , including the definition of family medical history , differences between title i and title ii , and predictive versus manifested disease information combined with the type of genetic test performed .

s. 358 and h.r .

493 specify that genetic information includes the fact that an individual or his / her family member has taken a genetic test .

the bills define family members to include distant relatives and adopted children ( which have no blood relationship and therefore would not be affected by genetic information in the family ) .

historically , genetic nondiscrimination act bills have stressed the importance of family history .

the senate report to accompany s. 1053 ( 108 th ) stated that "the committee realizes that family medical history could be used as a surrogate for a genetic trait by a health plan or health insurance issuer ... it is important to include family medical history in the definition of genetic information. .

the report further clarified the concept of family medical history as being consistent with the american medical association definition , and expected that the definition would evolve over time .

some debate has ensued over the question of who should be considered to be in one's family .

the risk of sharing genetic traits or conditions is greatest in first and second - degree blood relatives .

the risk of sharing genes decreases as the blood relationship becomes more distant .

for example , first degree relatives share one - half of their genetic material , second degree relatives share one - fourth , and third degree relatives ( first cousins ) , share one - eighth .

fourth cousins , which are ninth degree relatives , share only 1 / 512 of their genetic material .

at this level of relationship , only very rare conditions appear more frequently in family members , and the risk of sharing many common diseases is virtually the same as in the general population .

proponents of the legislation argue that the inclusion of individuals that have no blood relation ( i.e. , adoptive children ) is necessary to insure that the family remains insurable as a unit ; that adoptive children ( or adoptive parents ) are not penalized because one or the other has a genetic trait that they themselves could not have .

opponents argued that inclusion of distant or non - blood related individuals further extends the potential for litigation against insurers or employers .

the house education and labor committee chairman's version of h.r .

493 as reported by the committee defined a family member as someone related by blood within four generations .

s. 358 contains no parallel provisions .

during the february 14 , 2007 , house education and labor committee markup , a proposed amendment to expand the definition of family member to include fetuses was defeated .

however , the chairman's amended version of the bill contains provisions in title i and title ii specifying that the definition of genetic information ( rather than family member ) would include that of a fetus .

s. 358 contains no similar provisions .

although prenatal testing may be either diagnostic or predictive in nature , coverage for a child does not usually begin until the moment of birth .

in general , medical insurance covers the named insured and dependents of the named insured .

any genetic information collected about a fetus while a woman is pregnant would likely arise in the context of providing prenatal care to the insured woman .

because the fetus would not appear to be a separate insured individual , it seems likely that any genetic information collected about the fetus would probably be attributed to the woman as the named insured , and protected from discrimination to the extent that her own medical information was protected .

the bills' two titles define genetic information differently and , therefore , apply different restrictions to employers and insurers ( see table 1 ) .

title i ( health insurance provisions ) specifically excludes from its definition of genetic information — and therefore does not protect — medical information that is not genetic information , including the analysis of proteins or metabolites directly related to manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition .

this exemption is not present in title ii ( employment provisions ) , making the definition of genetic information — and the scope of what is protected — broader for employers than insurers .

in addition , the bills would permit health insurers to use or disclose the individual's current health status ( as determined without a genetic test ) , consistent with existing law .

this permission is not present in title ii , as employers are already prohibited from using a person's current health status in specific ways by existing law .

title i of the bills focuses on protecting predictive information ( i.e. , information about a future or potential health state in a currently symptom - free individual ) .

it does so by exempting from the definition of genetic information analyses of proteins or metabolites that are directly related to manifested diseases .

insurers could thus use this type of genetic information in accordance with current law governing insurance and employment practices .

the definition of genetic test in the bills is more limited than the medical or scientific definition of genetic test , which covers both predictive and diagnostic reasons for testing .

instances in which the distinction is blurred between predictive information and that related to a manifested disease may cause some confusion if the bills are enacted .

based upon the definition of genetic test in title ii , analyses of a person's dna or rna would be protected regardless of whether any related disease had manifested .

by contrast , as mentioned above , the definition of genetic test in title i does not include analyses that are both conducted on proteins or metabolites , and are directly related to manifested diseases .

thus , information derived from studying a protein or metabolite would only be protected before symptoms appeared .

these provisions create potentially unclear results when a single genetic test , which could be performed on dna or proteins , yields results that are both related to a manifested disease or condition , and are predictive in nature .

the potential dilemma is illustrated by the following example .

if a person had cancer , a test of the tumor dna or proteins may simultaneously provide information about the tumor itself ( a manifested disease ) , and its likelihood of recurrence ( a predictive probability ) .

if surgery were performed to remove the tumor and the patient went in to remission , the information obtained from the patients' tumor could be considered both diagnostic for the previously manifested tumor and predictive regarding a potential recurrence .

if the test had been performed on tumor dna , the information would be protected no matter whether it was considered to be diagnostic or predictive .

however , if it had been performed on tumor proteins , if it were considered diagnostic it would not be protected .

if it were considered predictive , it would be ( see table 2 ) .

this same lack of clarity may create issues in the case in which a person undergoes a pharmacogenetic test , which is a genetic test to determine whether a person is susceptible to adverse reactions to or beneficial results from a certain drug or other treatment .

information from pharmacogenomic tests reveals normal variability in how different people's bodies process different medications — personalized medicine .

it is unclear whether this type of test would be protected under current legislation .

pharmacogenetic tests for individual susceptibilities to certain drugs can be performed at any point in an individual's life ( i.e. , when an individual does not have a manifested disease ) .

thus , the scope of protections afforded to pharmacogenomic test results might depend on whether the person already had a disease for which the treatment was indicated .

under the current definition it is possible that , in the presence of manifested disease , information that a person would not likely respond to a drug could potentially be used in a negative manner by health insurers .

this may be of particular concern if only one treatment exists .

