president bush and some in congress advocate enactment of legislation that would provide the chief executive with line item veto authority , and the president has reiterated his support of a revival of such authority that would pass constitutional muster throughout his presidency in speeches , press conferences and annual budget submissions .

on march 6 , 2006 , the president announced that he was sending to congress proposed legislation that "would provide a fast - track procedure to require the congress to vote up - or - down on rescissions proposed by the president. .

the president's proposal , denominated the "legislative line item veto act of 2006," was introduced the next day in the senate and house as s. 2381 and h.r .

4890 .

in comments accompanying the proposal it was asserted that "the president's proposal is fully consistent with the constitution .

in its 1998 ruling [in clinton v. city of new york ] striking down the line item veto act of 1996 , the supreme court concluded that the act 'g[ave] the president unilateral power to change the text of duly enacted statutes. .

the legislative line item veto act does not raise those constitutional issues because the president's rescission proposals must be enacted by both houses and signed into law. .

standing alone , the proposed expedited rescission procedure would likely pass constitutional scrutiny .

congress would simply establish a process whereby the president may propose rescission of specific types of appropriation and tax provisions , including earmarks .

the fact the congress must act within a limited time period to either approve or reject the proposal , and that certain procedural and deliberative processes would be curtailed or eliminated , does not raise constitutional questions .

the so - called fast - track process is an exercise of the constitutionally - based authority of each house to establish its own rules of internal procedure .

the expedited rescission process of these bills , however , does not stand alone .

under the proposal , the president is given discretionary power to suspend covered spending and tax provisions for up to 180 days , and perhaps more , even if congress rejects a proposed rescission within that period .

this is unlike the current rescission process under the impoundment control act , which requires the obligation of funds if congress fails to approve the president's rescission proposal within 45 days of continuous session after submission of a rescission proposal , or the provision in the rejected line veto act of 1996 which required expenditure of canceled authorities immediately upon the enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval .

in addition , while congress must act speedily when it receives the president's proposal , nothing in the bills specifies when the president must send up his proposal ; nor do the bills appear to require that targeted spending and tax provisions in one law be sent up together ; and nothing in the bills limits the suspension period of the stated 180 days or prohibits the additional utilization of the 45-day wait period for proposed rescissions under the current impoundment control act , which is not to be repealed .

an issue before a reviewing court , then , might be whether the bills' suspension power reaches far enough to be considered an effective grant of authority to cancel provisions of law that was proscribed by the supreme court in clinton v. city of new york .

the discussion will proceed as follows .

after an examination of the nature and scope of the supreme court's ruling in clinton v. city of new york , the bills will be described and compared with the line item veto act of 1996 , and the current process for dealing with rescissions and deferrals under the impoundment control act of 1974 , as amended .

the discussion continues with an assessment of the legal and practical effect of the proposed suspension provision , and includes taking into account past and present legislative , executive and judicial precedents and practices with respect to impoundments , rescissions , deferrals and other efforts at budget and spending controls .

that examination suggests that , in light of the clinton ruling and analogous structural separation of powers decisions , a reviewing court might view the proposed suspension authority to be vested in the president as , in effect , a power to cancel appropriations akin to that proscribed in clinton .

the discussion concludes with a review and assessment of subsequent modifications of the administration's proposal in the house and senate that indicates that constitutional issues may still remain unresolved .

the supreme court's ruling in clinton v. new york city presents a formidable but not insurmountable legal obstacles to vesting the president with a form of line item veto authority .

while the court's opinion does not appear to limit providing the president with some form of line item veto influence by any means other than constitutional amendment , its rationale seems to require that the statutory vesting of such effective influence must be carefully circumscribed to prevent even the potential vesting in the executive a cancellation power .

structural separation of powers jurisprudence indicates that the courts will exercise heightened scrutiny of line item veto schemes .

as a matter of caution and prudence a scheme that provides authority for the president to submit proposals for cancellation of targetable items within a very short time after enactment of the law that contains them and that provides for automatic deferrals or suspensions that coincide and end with the conclusion of the period of expedited congressional consideration , is most likely to pass constitutional muster .

the validity of vestment in the executive of any further indicia of authority or control is uncertain .

