the u.s. military has been involved in afghanistan since the fall of 2001 when operation enduring freedom ( oef ) toppled the taliban regime and attacked the al qaeda terrorist network hosted by the taliban .

a significant u.s. military presence in the country could continue for a number of years as u.s. , north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , coalition , and afghan national army ( ana ) forces attempt to stabilize the country by defeating the insurgency , facilitating reconstruction , and combating afghanistan's illegal drug trade .

according to the department of defense ( dod ) , as of march 1 , 2007 there were approximately 25,000 u.s. service members in afghanistan .

the majority of u.s. combat forces composing the 7 th oef rotation to afghanistan were from the fort drum , ny - based 3 rd brigade,10 th mountain division , which constituted the division's third year - long deployment to afghanistan in five years .

about 5,800 troops from the division's 3 rd brigade , as well as division headquarters and other supporting units are from fort drum , while another 1,300 soldiers are from the division's 4 th brigade , stationed at fort polk , la .

there are also an unknown number of u.s. special operations forces ( sof ) personnel from all services that are part of the combined joint special operations task force that is conducting special operations missions in and around afghanistan .

the 10 th mountain division—less 3 rd brigade—is in the process of being replaced by the division headquarters of the fort bragg , nc - based 82 nd airborne division and the division's 4 th infantry brigade combat team .

aside from naval and air force special operations forces , u.s. navy and air force service members are playing an increased role in ground operations in afghanistan .

six of the twelve u.s. - led provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) are commanded by naval officers and 140 sailors are now serving on u.s. prts .

the other six u.s. prts are led by air force officers and are made up of both soldiers and airmen .

non - u.s .

coalition forces in afghanistan are distributed between the u.s. - led operation enduring freedom ( oef ) —which conducts counterterror and counterinsurgency operations—and the nato - led international security and assistance force ( isaf ) , which provides security and reconstruction support for all of afghanistan .

in october 2006 , nato assumed command of isaf and all security operations in afghanistan—including oef ( oef's u.s. commander serves as a deputy isaf commander ) .

some countries contribute forces to both oef and isaf , while others contribute strictly to isaf .

at present , 21 nations contribute approximately 3,100 troops to oef while the united states contributes about 9,600 troops to oef .

thirty seven nato and non - nato nations contribute about 36,000 troops to isaf .

according to u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) , the united states contributes approximately 15,800 troops to support isaf .

insurgent tactics and operations against coalition forces continue to evolve , and some maintain that they are becoming increasingly like the tactics employed in iraq .

u.s. military officials have noted that cross - border attacks against u.s. and afghan forces have increased significantly since september 2006 , when pakistan signed a pact with tribal groups in the border region .

according to officials , in the two months before the agreement , there were 40 cross - border attacks in khost and paktika provinces , but in the two months after the agreement , there were 140 attacks .

u.s. military intelligence officials also provided statistics detailing the increase in insurgent attacks .

in 2005 , there were a reported 27 suicide attacks and in 2006 , there were 139 attacks .

in 2005 , there were 783 road side bombs and in 2006 , there were 1,677 .

the insurgents conducted 4,542 direct attacks ( attacks using small arms , grenades an other weapons ) in 2006 , as compared to 1,558 such attacks in 2005 .

taliban insurgents reportedly seized control of two towns in southern and southwestern afghanistan , largely attributed to a lack of presence of nato forces .

on february 1 , 2007 , the town of musa qala in helmand province was taken over by taliban forces .

about five months earlier , british forces vacated the town and handed over responsibility for its security to a tribal council and local police forces .

on february 19 , 2007 , taliban forces seized a district in southwestern afghanistan .

the attack occurred in the baqwa district of farah province where few nato and afghan troops are deployed .

it is not known if taliban forces have retained control of baqwa district or have left the area .

prts are small , civil - military teams designed to extend the authority of the afghan central government beyond kabul and to facilitate aid and reconstruction projects .

prts have enabled coalition forces to extend a degree of security to outlying regions and have also permitted u.s. forces to establish personal relationships with local afghan leaders which some believe has helped to diminish insurgent influence in a number of regions .

as of february 7 , 2007 , isaf had 25 prts operational—12 of which were u.s. teams .

training of the ana commenced shortly after u.s. and coalition forces defeated taliban forces in early 2002 .

the bonn ii conference on rebuilding afghanistan in december 2002 endorsed a 70,000 strong afghan national army .

part of isaf's mission is "supporting and helping to train the afghan national security forces ( ansf ) to a standard that will enable them in time to assume full responsibility for the internal and external security of the country. .

the ana has been considered a relatively competent force , but one whose performance varies from very good to very poor , dependent to a large extent on the leadership of the particular unit .

recent reports suggest that the ana continues to improve its proficiency , with some suggesting that the ana "outperforms" the better - equipped iraqi security forces .

some military officials believe that the ana could defend afghanistan without u.s. and nato support in ten years or less .

u.s. military officials maintain that more than two dozen ana battalions are capable of conducting operations "on their own with minimal support" from u.s. or coalition forces .

some credit the ethnic diversity of the ana and its training curriculum—which includes literacy , writing , and language training—as key factors in the ana's growing efficacy .

crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32686 , afghanistan: narcotics and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33627 , nato in afghanistan: a test of the transatlantic alliance , by vincent morelli and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33110 , the cost of iraq , afghanistan , and other global war on terror operations since 9 / 11 , by [author name scrubbed] .

