the bush administration , in accordance with the statutory requirement that the president present a budget proposal by the first monday in february , released the budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2008 on february 5 , 2007 .

the full set of budget documents ( budget , appendix , analytical perspectives , historical tables , as well as several other supplemental budget documents ) contains extensive and detailed budget information , including estimates of the budget without the proposed policy changes ( known as "current service baseline" estimates ) , historical budget data , detailed budget authority , outlay and receipt data , selected analysis of specific budget - related topics , and the administration's economic forecast .

the budget documents contain general and specific descriptions of the administration's policy proposals and expectations from fy2007 through fy2012 , as well as limited information on budget policies for fy2012 through fy2017 .

the documents also discuss long - term fiscal issues facing the nation and provide historical data on previously enacted appropriations , past outlays and revenues , and other budget items .

the congressional budget process , which includes the annual budget resolution and appropriations bills , begins once the administration submits its budget to congress .

as congress deliberates over the budget , the administration often revises its proposals as it interacts with members of congress and as national and international economic conditions change .

congress adopted the conference report ( h.rept .

110-153 ; s.con.res .

21 ) on the fy2008 budget resolution on may 17 , 2007 .

the house and senate appropriation committees began considering the fy2008 appropriation bills shortly afterwards .

by late july , all twelve regular appropriation bills for fy2008 had cleared the house appropriations committee and , except for the defense bill , the senate appropriation committee .

by august 5 , the house had passed all twelve regular appropriations bills .

the senate passed the homeland security bill in july and three others in mid - september , but failed to pass the remaining eight by september 30 , the end of fy2007 .

in october , the senate passed the defense appropriations and commerce - justice - science appropriations bills .

on september 26 , the house passed a continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

52 ) to fund the government until november 16 , which the senate passed the following day .

the president signed the continuing resolution on september 29 ( p.l .

110-92 ) .

on november 8 , congress approved the labor - hhs - education bill ( h.r .

3043 , s. 1710 ) , which the president vetoed , and defense bill ( h.r .

3222 , p.l .

110-116 ) that provided $459 billion in non - emergency budget authority , which he signed .

the president had said he would veto nearly all of the appropriation bills that reached the house or senate floor , either because they exceeded requested funding levels or because of policy disagreements .

these veto threats may have complicated the appropriations process .

the defense bill included extended funding for government operations from november 16 until december 14 .

on december 14 , congress passed another funding continuation ( h.j.res .

69 ) to december 21 , which the president signed .

on december 19 , congress passed an omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

2764 ) that incorporated 10 remaining regular appropriations bills into the state - foreign operations appropriations bill and a fourth continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

72 ) .

on the same day , congress passed a fourth continuing resolution , which the president signed two days later ( p.l .

110-149 ) , that funded government operations through the end of the calendar year .

on december 26 , the president signed the omnibus measure , entitled the consolidated appropriations act of fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , which provided $555 billion in discretionary budget authority .

 table 1 contains budget estimates for fy2008 from cbo , the administration ( the office of management and budget , omb ) , and congress .

estimated budget totals can vary due to differing underlying economic , technical , and budget - estimating assumptions and techniques , as well as differences in policy assumptions .

minor differences in underlying assumptions , which may generate small short - term discrepancies , can produce wide divergences in projected long - term budget paths .

budget estimates produced by the president , cbo , congress , or by others , should be expected to change as new data arrive or as economic conditions change .

the senate budget committee ( sbc ) reported its version of the fy2008 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

21 ) on march 16 , 2007 .

the senate began its debate on the resolution on march 21 and after adopting some amendments and rejecting others , passed it on march 23 .

the house budget committee ( hbc ) reported ( h.rept .

110-99 ) its version of the fy2008 budget resolution on march 23 .

the house debated the resolution , rejecting three amendments , and passed it on march 29 .

the general direction outlined in the two resolutions is similar — additional domestic spending and accommodating the administration's war funding request .

both resolutions would put into place rules requiring offsets to new tax cuts or mandatory spending increases to keep the changes deficit neutral .

after lengthy informal discussions about the fy2008 budget resolution , both the house and senate appointed conferees in early may to resolve the remaining differences between the house and senate versions .

the conference announced an agreement on may 16 , which the house and senate adopted ( h.rept .

110-153 ) on may 17 , 2007 .

the conference agreement set fy2008 discretionary spending at $954 billion , which was more than $20 billion above the president's non - emergency discretionary spending request .

the adoption of the conference report on the budget resolution for fy2008 set the level of discretionary spending and was followed by the appropriations committees work to draft the fy2008 appropriations bills .

the house appropriations committee cleared its first ( of 12 ) regular appropriations bills in early june with the senate appropriations committee following in mid - june .

by mid - july , the house and senate committees on appropriations had approved most of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

at the end of fy2007 , the house had passed all 12 appropriations bills and the senate had passed four .

the senate passed three more appropriations bills in october .

on november 8 , congress approved the labor - hhs - education bill ( h.r .

3043 , s. 1710 ) , which the president vetoed , and defense bill ( h.r .

3222 ) , which the president signed .

the president has indicated that he would veto most of the remaining appropriations bills due to policy disagreements and spending levels .

during the last week of fy2007 , congress passed a continuing resolution ( h.j .

res 52 ) to fund government operations until november 16 , which the president signed on september 29 ( p.l .

110-92 ) .

on november 8 , congress approved the labor - hhs - education bill ( h.r .

3043 , s. 1710 ) , which the president vetoed , and the defense bill ( h.r .

3222 , p.l .

110-116 ) , which he signed .

the defense appropriations act of 2008 contained an extension of funding for government operations from november 16 until december 14 .

on december 14 , congress passed another continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

69 ) that extended funding for another week , which the president signed ( p.l .

110-137 ) on the same day .

on december 19 , congress passed an omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

2764 ) that incorporated 10 remaining regular appropriations bills into the state - foreign operations appropriations bill .

on the same day congress also passed a fourth continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

72 ) , which the president signed two days later ( p.l .

110-149 ) , that funded government operations through the end of the calendar year .

the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) on december 26 , which provided $555 billion in discretionary budget authority .

the administration's budget proposed fy2008 outlays of $2,902 billion , about $84 billion above the cbo baseline .

both the administration and cbo have issued projections of future federal outlays .

in addition , the budget resolutions passed by house and senate budget committees , which reflect congress's priorities , specify future paths for spending and revenues .

table 3 summarizes these projections .

the future path of federal receipts , as projected by the administration and cbo , is summarized in table 4 .

because economic conditions strongly affect federal revenue streams , forecasts of federal receipts beyond the immediate short term are necessarily imprecise .

the last few fiscal years have seen unexpectedly rapid growth in receipts ( in current dollars ) from year to year that neither omb nor cbo expect to continue .

receipts grew by 5.5% from fy2003 to fy2004 , by 14.5% from fy2004 to fy2005 , and by 11.8% from fy2005 to fy2006 .

these increases followed three years of falling receipts , from fy2000 through fy2003 .

receipts rose from 16.3% of gdp in fy2004 , the lowest level for receipts since fy1959 , to 18.4% of gdp in fy2006 .

omb's msr showed little variation in receipts as a share of gdp over the five - year window fy2008-fy2012 , ranging between 18.4% of gdp ( fy2008 ) and 18.7% of gdp ( fy2012 ) .

cbo's baseline showed receipts rising once the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts expire , reaching 19.8% of gdp in fy2012 .

deficits occur when congress and the president enact policies that cause federal spending to exceed federal receipts .

deficits increase government debt held by the public , generally increasing net interest payments .

surpluses occur when federal receipts exceed outlays , which reduces federal debt held by the public .

this can , in turn , reduce net interest payments .

many economists believe that running surpluses when economic growth is strong has desirable macroeconomic effects .

the federal government last ran a surplus in fy2001 , which amounted to $128 billion or 1.3% of gdp .

table 5 summarizes administration and cbo projections of federal deficits and surpluses .

the actual fy2007 total deficit , $163 billion , was slightly below cbo's january estimate , and well below the administration's estimate in the fy2008 budget .

the fy2007 on - budget deficit , which excludes a large social security surplus and a small postal service surplus , was $344 billion .

omb , cbo , and gao agree that over a longer time period , one beginning in this decade and lasting far into the century , the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable .

the nation's aging population , combined with health care costs that seem likely to continue rising faster than per capita gdp , raises spending in federal programs for the elderly to such an extent that the government faces constantly rising deficits and "a federal debt burden that ultimately spirals out of control... .

although the timing of deficits and resulting debt build up varies depending on the assumptions used , ... we are on an unsustainable fiscal path. .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , approximately its current share , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid .

a former cbo acting director stated that , "by 2030 ... spending for those programs [medicare , social security , and medicaid] is projected to reach roughly 15 percent of gdp... .

if that increase happened ... , the rest of the budget would have to be cut by more than half" to keep overall spending close to 20% of gdp .

a cbo report on the long - term fiscal outlook concluded that over the next half - century , the united states will confront the challenge of conducting its fiscal policy in the face of the retirement of the baby - boom generation... .

under current policies , the aging of the population is likely to combine with rapidly rising health care costs to create an ever - growing demand for resources to finance federal spending for mandatory programs , such as medicare , medicaid , and social security... .

attaining fiscal stability in the coming decades will probably require substantial reductions in the projected growth of spending and perhaps also a sizable increase in taxes as a share of the economy .

the administration indicated similar concerns about the outlook for the budget over the long term in the president's fy2008 budget .

the current structure of the federal government's major entitlement programs will place a growing and unsustainable burden on the budget in the long - term.... by 2050 , spending on these three entitlement programs [social security , medicare , and medicaid] is projected to be more than 15 percent of gdp , or more than twice as large as spending on all other programs combined , excluding interest on the public debt .

the social security , medicare , and medicaid programs present different challenges to the long - term fiscal position of the federal government .

estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between social security ( oasdi ) outlays and revenues as a proportion of long - term gdp are generally much smaller than estimates of long - term fiscal gap between medicare ( hi , part b , and part d ) outlays and revenues .

these long - term estimates of fiscal imbalances are especially sensitive to changes in assumptions regarding productivity growth and interest rates .

some analysts willing to make more felicitous assumptions about productivity growth present a more optimistic long - term outlook for social security .

spending projections for medicare and medicaid are sensitive to changes in medical inflation .

in past years , many projections that medical inflation would slow have turned out to be overly optimistic .

unexpected events , such as the hurricanes in 2005 or an economic downturn , can change the short - term budget outlook .

the interplay of policy , demographics , and medical care costs , however , will in large part determine the long - term budget outlook .

the retirement of the baby boom generation , which will rapidly expand the population eligible for federal programs serving the elderly , along with continuing increase in health care costs will put enormous pressure on the federal budget .

without policy changes , these programs could overwhelm the rest of the budget .

not only will the programs themselves be stressed , but their growth could easily limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or new needs as well as overwhelm the economy's ability to provide the resources needed for the expanded programs .

