growing populations and changing values have increased demands on water supplies and river systems , resulting in water use and management conflicts throughout the country .

these demands are particularly evident in the west , where population is rapidly increasing and where climate variability and water scarcity make managing water supplies especially challenging .

in many western states , agricultural and urban needs conflict , and these demands also compete with water demand for threatened and endangered species , recreation , and scenic enjoyment .

debate over western water resources revolves around the issue of how best to plan for and manage the use of this renewable , yet limited resource .

some observers advocate enhancing water supplies , through such steps as building new storage or diversion projects , expanding old ones , and funding water reclamation and reuse facilities .

others emphasize conservation and policies that provide opportunities for more efficient use of existing supplies , such as using market mechanisms or providing better price signals , which theoretically would result in more efficient water use .

in practice , all of these tools are used by western water managers to varying degrees , and all have been addressed by congress , again to varying degrees .

to address growing challenges in western water management , congress in 1992 directed the secretary of the interior to establish a federal water reclamation , recycling , and reuse program ( title xvi of p.l .

102-575 , the reclamation wastewater and groundwater studies and facilities act ; 43 u.s.c .

§390h ) .

the act directed the secretary to "investigate and identify" opportunities for water reclamation and reuse in the west , for design and construction of "demonstration and permanent facilities to reclaim and reuse wastewater , and to conduct research , including desalting , for the reclamation of wastewater and naturally impaired ground and surface waters" ( 43 u.s.c .

§390h ( a ) ) .

the title xvi program appears to be at a crossroad .

as reuse and desalination have become more viable options for addressing a variety of water management issues , legislative proposals for authorizing title xvi projects have increased .

at the same time , administration support for the program has changed from full support prior to enactment in 1992 , to the administration's current position of generally not supporting projects proposed for authorization by project sponsors ( primarily municipal water agencies ) that have not gone through reclamation's feasibility process .

for example , the administration , when asked , has testified against every title xvi bill in the 108 th congress and most of the pending bills in the 109 th congress , citing mostly budgetary and project feasibility concerns .

further , the administration continues to request funding only for projects that have received funding in prior years .

also during this time , congressional authorization of new projects has been significantly less than demand .

since 1996 , six projects have been authorized .

of approximately 13 project authorization bills introduced during the 108 th congress , two were enacted ; as of august 2006 , the 109 th congress has enacted one bill and has 16 individual project authorizations in pending legislation .

this situation has created frustration and confusion over the existing program , its future , and to some degree , the future role of the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) in the rapidly growing west .

frustration is especially apparent among project sponsors whose authorized projects remain without title xvi funding or with limited funding , and sponsors of pending project proposals , resulting in increased pressure on congress and the administration to address program issues .

in sum , the resulting backlog of sparsely funded and unfunded projects , and pent - up demand for federal assistance , have raised the question of the future of the title xvi program .

following is a title xvi overview covering its genesis , implementation , and current status .

this overview is followed by a brief discussion of a number of policy options for addressing issues associated with the title xvi program .

the appendix provides details on the status of individual title xvi projects and the overall program in table a - 1 .

omb's part review raises several specific policy issues not unique to title xvi .

first , it highlights the tension between congressional and administration priorities .

for example , while the part review concludes congressional earmarks drive the title xvi program , congressional supporters express frustration with the administration's lack of participation in the program , and hence seek to fund the program in line with congressional priorities .

second , the part review raises questions regarding the appropriate federal role in water supply development for municipal and industrial ( m&i ) uses .

for example , is congress redefining the federal government's role in m&i water supply and treatment as it authorizes new site - specific projects ? .

to what degree should the federal government provide incentives for water supply development via new technologies , and what geographic , regional , or social factors should be considered ? .

third , is coordination or realignment of certain federal water activities needed to ensure efficient use of scarce federal resources ? .

in general , title xvi policy issues fall into two categories: ( 1 ) broad policy issues and ( 2 ) issues specific to the program's implementation and structure .

growing pressure on water supplies in the west make it likely that the demand for title xvi projects and requests for federal assistance , and hence pressure on congress to approve more projects , will increase .

at the same time , the potential for future requests to escalate and create an entirely new class of water supply assistance , appears to have increased congressional , administration , and traditional reclamation stakeholder concerns over the implementation and authorization of new title xvi projects .

under the current process , the potential result is an ever - growing list of pending title xvi legislative proposals , and for those gaining congressional approval , a growing list of projects competing for limited appropriations and administration support .

currently , almost a third of the 33 authorized projects are unfunded — a "backlog" the administration has repeatedly cited as a reason to oppose new authorizations — and an additional 16 project authorizations are in legislation pending before the 109 th congress .

some of these proposals have been pending for multiple congresses .

thus , the 109 th congress is faced with the question , what should be the future of the title xvi program ? .

fundamental to deciding the future of the program are underlying questions related to the federal role in municipal water reclamation and reuse specifically , and perhaps municipal water supply more generally .

how urgent is the problem of water scarcity in west ? .

what are other options to address the problem ? .

how important is the problem ? .

while the problem may be acute in some areas , it may be less so in others — should an adjustment to the program acknowledge such differences and focus federal resources in certain areas ? .

should it be a federal responsibility to promote reuse in the west ? .

if so , why , or why not nationwide ? .

how does reuse contribute to national well - being ? .

if congress decides to affirm a federal role for water reuse in the west , a different set of questions arises: how does promoting or facilitating reuse in the west facilitate other federal goals , objectives , and legal obligations ( eg , protection of threatened and endangered species ) ? .

how does , or could , the title xvi program mesh with other federal activities ( eg , interior's water 2025 challenge grant initiative or calfed water reuse and storage activities ) ? .

should the program be tied to alleviating demand or reducing existing diversions where endangered species or other fish and wildlife , or water quality concerns are at issue ? .

should it be used to help communities drought - proof their supplies , or to slow pressure on agricultural water supplies , by possibly slowing conversion of "agriculture - to - urban" water transfers ? .

will promotion of water reclamation and reuse simply encourage more growth in already water scarce areas ? .

will growth or development come at the expense of federal investment in other economically depressed areas with plentiful water resources ? .

these questions are just a few that arise when discussing the future of title xvi .

oversight hearings have been held on the title xvi program in both the 108 th and 109 th congresses ; however , only recently have comprehensive bills been introduced which would amend title xvi .

stakeholders include local and regional proponents of new but unauthorized title xvi projects , proponents of authorized yet unfunded title xvi projects , the administration , congressional sponsors and committees of jurisdiction , as well as traditional reclamation stakeholders concerned about the programs' potential to siphon funds away from non - title xvi projects .

the title xvi program is at a crossroad .

growing demands on water resources in the west and elsewhere make it likely that demand for assistance with water reclamation and reuse projects will continue to increase .

depending on one's perception of problems with the title xvi program , different solutions to resolving program issues will be sought .

different stakeholders will have different opinions on the magnitude , importance , and scope of the broad policy , program criteria , project evaluation , and funding issues identified in this report .

congress and the administration have several options to address title xvi implementation issues .

resolution of these issues will depend on many factors , including whether or to what degree congressional and administration priorities for the program can be articulated and balanced .

for example , it appears from recent testimony that projects sponsors are generally interested in a more streamlined project development process and expanded program appropriations , while the administration supports a more limited program with long - term objectives focused on federal interests .

the challenge for congress will be how to proceed in the face of divergent positions .

title xvi has been amended multiple times since 1992 , resulting in a total of 33 authorized projects ( see table a - 1 ) .

for accounting purposes , reclamation has deemed the 12 authorized projects that have not yet received funding from reclamation , or received minor amounts , as inactive .

these projects are shown in italics in table a - 1 .

the other title xvi projects are considered active .

as noted earlier , title xvi funding obligations for three projects are complete , and nearly complete for five additional projects .

title xvi projects were yielding an estimated 121,678 acre - feet of water annually as of september 20 , 2005 — nearly 25% of the 525,000 acre - feet of water reused in california in 2001 — and they are expected to yield 163,243 acre - feet by the end of fy2006 .

because water yield figures are based on total design capacity , actual water yield will likely be slightly less .

except for the one oregon project , the other inactive projects have received no title xvi funding ; however , some of the inactive projects have received funding from epa , and in one case from the bureau of indian affairs .

to determine the status of the 12 inactive projects , crs contacted the project sponsors and determined that at least six inactive projects are moving forward in some manner with local funding .

of the 12 projects , crs completed interviews with seven project managers and found that three projects have started construction .

one of these is complete , and another is expected to be completed in 2006 .

the third involves two sub - projects , one of which is 10% complete .

three other projects have not yet started construction , but appear to be moving forward .

these projects are in various stages of planning , pre - feasibility , and permitting / environmental analysis .

the seventh project , for the city of tracy ( san joaquin area water reclamation and reuse project , ca ) , is no longer being pursued .

most project sponsors appear to be seeking alternative funding ; some have been more successful than others .

most project managers expressed desire for engagement with reclamation and , not surprisingly , felt that their projects would be farther along with federal funding .

some had begun working with reclamation in the early stages of the project ( eg , during the pre - feasibility / planning stage ) , but have not received assistance in recent years .

all in all , it appears six of the seven projects for which crs completed interviews are either moving or attempting to move forward with local funding .

crs was unable to secure information on all 12 projects .

title xvi projects authorized prior to 1996 ranged in total costs from $152 million ( $38 million for reclamation's share ) , to $690 million ( $172 million for reclamation's share ) , with 25% of the total project costs eligible for title xvi funding .

in 1996 , the program's authorization was amended to limit the federal share to no more than $20 million per project .

the three costliest title xvi projects were authorized in 1992 , before federal contributions were capped at $20 million .

post - 1996 projects have been smaller in scale , ranging from $10 million ( $2 million for reclamation's share ) to $280 million ( $20 million for reclamation's share ) .

