since the 1971 creation of the user - supported airport and airway trust fund under provisions of the airport and airway development and revenue acts of 1970 ( p.l .

91-259 ; the 1970 act ) there has been disagreement over the appropriate use of the trust fund's revenues .

the disagreement centered on differing views of whether the trust fund's primary purpose was to fund airport and airway ( mostly air traffic control ) infrastructure and those who viewed the trust fund as a user pay mechanism that should be available to also fund part or all of faa operations ( mostly salaries ) and maintenance activities .

this led , beginning in 1976 , to the enactment of a series of legislative mechanisms ( commonly referred to as "cap and penalty" provisions or "out of order" provisions ) designed to assure that federal capital spending for u.s. airports and airways would be funded at their fully authorized levels .

some supporters also hoped that these provisions would also assure a significant general fund share for the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) operating budget .

such funding guarantee proposals have been part of every faa reauthorization debate since 1976 .

this report begins with a background discussion of the establishment of the airport and airway trust fund ( hereafter referred to as the trust fund ) and the spending policy conflict that arose from different views concerning the legitimate use of the trust fund revenue during both the debate over the creation of the trust fund and the first years of its existence .

it then examines the 22-year era when congress imposed a variety of "cap and penalty" provisions on aviation trust fund spending in an effort to both encourage full funding of the faa's capital programs spending as well as assuring a significant general fund share to support the faa's operations .

the report then briefly examines the current spending guarantees that succeeded the cap and penalty provisions following passage of the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 st century ( air21 ; p.l .

106-181 ) in march 2000 , and that were continued through fy2007 by vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) .

finally , the report discusses a variety of spending guarantee options which may be discussed during the upcoming faa reauthorization debate .

this report's analysis necessarily assumes the spending levels and program structure of the times .

there is an alternative view that too much is spent on the faa , which is not discussed in detail in this report .

the faa budget is divided into four categories .

two of the categories , the grants - in - aid for airports category ( basically the airport improvement program ( aip ) ) and the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) category are considered "capital" accounts or programs because they deal with the development of airport and airway infrastructure .

the aip is a program of capital grant - in - aid for airport development projects such as runways and taxiways , but it also funds noise mitigation and other airport projects .

f&e , which is also a capital program , pays for the equipping , housing ( such as airport towers ) , and modernizing of the air traffic control system .

the two noncapital categories include research , engineering and development ( re&d ) and operations and maintenance ( o&m ) .

the re&d category funds research in support of the aip and f&e programs as well as safety research .

the o&m account pays the salaries of all faa employees ( aviation related ) and also funds some maintenance , safety , and administrative activities .

the issue of who should pay for the programs and activities of the faa predates the creation of the aviation trust fund in 1971 by the airport and airway development and revenue acts of 1970 .

previously , the faa's budget had been paid for out of the u.s. treasury's general fund which is supported by general taxpayer revenues .

no dedicated tax revenues were used to fund aviation use prior to implementation of the 1970 act .

the act authorized taxes on aviation users and dedicated their use to aviation purposes by crediting all these tax revenues to the aviation trust fund .

conflicts emerged immediately between those who viewed the aviation trust fund as a capital - only source of funding versus those who viewed it more as the basis of a full user - pay mechanism for all faa funding .

studies by both the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the general accounting office ( gao ; now the government accountability office ) have concluded that the 1970 act was intended to provide that the aviation trust fund would finance airport and airway capital needs and that remaining funds could then be used for the operating costs of the airway system ( mostly for air traffic control operations ) as well .

the issue of the appropriate general fund share of the faa budget has long been one of the most contentious issues during the reauthorization debates .

the general fund share within the context of aviation policy is to cover costs to the aviation system of government use ( mostly military use ) and the benefits of the system to nonusers .

aviation user groups have historically supported a larger general fund share than has the faa , the department of transportation ( dot ) , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the congressional budget and appropriations committees who often view , at least part of the general fund contribution as an unwarranted and / or unnecessary subsidization of civil aviation users by the general taxpayer .

the nixon administration's faa budget requests for fy1971 and fy1972 under the new trust fund system brought it into immediate conflict with congress over the budgetary treatment of trust fund revenues .

the administration treated the new financing system as a user - pay system to fund all or nearly all of the faa budget , whereas many members of congress viewed the trust fund as primarily a user - supported capital fund ( although spending on faa operations was allowable ) .

adding to the controversy , the administration's first budget submissions of the trust fund era ( the proposed fy1971 supplemental and the president's fy1972 budget proposal ) proposed funding both airport and airway facilities at well below the minimum authorized amounts of $280 million for airport grants and $250 million for airway facilities .

for fy1972 , the budget proposed that the remaining trust fund balance be used to pay for faa administration and operations costs .

this would , however , have provided more trust fund financing , $700 million , for operations than for airport grants and airway facilities combined .

many in congress saw this holding - down of faa capital spending to free up trust fund resources for faa operations costs as a violation of the intent and spirit of the 1970 act .

during the reauthorization debate that preceded the passage of the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 st century ( p.l .

106-181 ; air - 21 ) supporters of spending guarantees wanted a mechanism that would resolve the three issues that manifested themselves under the cap and penalty provisions .

first , they wanted legislation that would better assure full funding of the faa capital budget accounts , aip and f&e .

second , they wanted the legislation to assure that spending from the trust fund would roughly equal trust fund revenues each fiscal year and thereby prevent the accumulation of large balances in the fund .

third , they wanted an outcome that would continue a significant general fund share for the operations account .

provisions that would have accomplished this by taking the aviation trust fund off - budget or erecting budgetary "firewalls" to assure that all trust fund revenues and interest would be spent each year for aviation purposes never emerged from the conference committee .

instead air - 21 provided for funding guarantees that were to be enforced by points - of - order .

vision - 100 retained these provisions .

the vision 100 authorization of faa's programs and activities ended at the close of fy2007 .

as was mentioned earlier , short - term extension legislation has allowed these programs and activities to continue .

reauthorization proposals have originated in the senate , the house , and the faa .

the senate bill ( s. 1300 ) would extend the current spending guarantees through fy2011 .

the faa proposal ( h.r .

1356 ) is silent on spending guarantees .

the house bill ( h.r .

2881 ) , however , would make some changes in the spending guarantee mechanism .

because of the nature of the topic , the analysis of the various spending guarantees in this report , necessarily , assumes the existing programmatic structure and funding levels of the times .

advocates of the guarantees view the fully authorized funding of the capital programs as well as a significant general fund share as good things .

over time , however , there has also been an alternative view , that too much was being spent on faa programs .

this view casts a more critical eye on aip and f&e , whose funding the guarantees were specifically designed to assure .

these critics often view the breadth of aip spending and ever - widening project eligibilities as allowing for spending that is increasingly inefficient , unfocused and of questionable federal purpose .

they are often critical , for example , of the amount of aip's resources that go to projects at small local airports , that by their nature are questionable from a national mobility standpoint .

they tend to view f&e spending as having often been wastefully managed and having pursued questionable technologies that have failed to pan - out .

some would even argue that by downsizing faa programs and / or restricting program spending , it could be feasible to fund the entire faa budget out of the trust fund and thereby ease the burden on the general taxpayer .

despite questions about the effectiveness of existing and previous spending guarantee mechanisms , it may be unlikely that an faa reauthorization bill would be enacted without language designed to encourage full funding of the faa's capital programs , including aip .

the guarantee language in an authorization bill emphasizes the importance that authorizers place on fully funding aip and f&e .

the provisions are seen by some as helping shore - up support for the overall authorization legislation while the bills work their way through the legislative process .

extending the current guarantees might be enough to maintain the political advantage during the reauthorization debate .

extending or making minor modifications to the existing "guarantees" would probably encounter the least resistance .

should spending guarantees become a major focus of legislative effort , there are a number of options could arise during the debate .

it is important to keep in mind that as past history indicates , with the possible exception of the first option , all the options would almost certainly be opposed by the appropriations and budget committees in congress as well as dot and the office of management and budget .

as mentioned earlier , historically , the authorizing committees and appropriating committees have approached the funding of faa programs and activities from different perspectives .

authorizing committees generally support the full authorized level of spending for aip and f&e as the appropriate level of spending to meet the needs of the nation's airports and airways .

although also concerned about the needs of the airport and airway system , appropriators have viewed trust fund spending within the context of the unified congressional budget and the pressures of the overall budget environment of the time .

this conflict of goals between the committees has meant that the aip and f&e appropriations have often been less than their authorizations .

on its face , the simplest way to resolve the disagreement between committees would be for the committees to come to an agreement on trust fund spending .

an informal , negotiated "treaty" between the transportation authorizing and appropriating committees , although unusual , has been done at least once in the past .

in 1990 , the appropriations committees agreed to fully fund aip and the authorizing committees agreed to eliminate the penalty portion of the penalty and cap regime .

this option has the advantage of being the simplest .

its weakness is that any participant may abrogate the treaty .

under the treaty , aip was fully funded for two years ( fy1991 , fy1992 ) .

a reimposition of something similar to the cap and penalty provisions of the 1970s or 1980s might be considered by some during reauthorization .

the time the cap and penalty mechanism was probably at its most effective was when it was first authorized in 1976 .

at that time , support in congress for the provisions was strong , perhaps because it followed closely on the previously mentioned conflicts over the appropriate use of trust fund money with the nixon and ford administrations .

this environment might have encouraged adherence to the cap and penalty provisions during the appropriations process .

as mentioned earlier , the success of the cap and penalty provisions has been mixed , and at times may have had a role in unintended consequences such as rapidly growing trust fund balances and , in the view of some , a higher than justified general fund shares of the faa budget .

also , the history of the cap and penalty indicates that , over time , it does not appear to have been successful in assuring the full funding of faa capital programs such as aip and f&e .

during much of the cap and penalty era appropriators simply absorbed the penalty , allowed the unexpended balance of the aviation trust fund to increase as a result , and used this growing balance as an off - set for spending elsewhere .

the historical cap and penalty provisions may not be compatible with the current law concerning the "airport and airway trust fund guarantee. .

the guarantee requires that annual trust fund spending equal the estimated receipts for the year .

the object of the guarantee is to assure the full spending each year's trust fund receipts .

the cap and penalty mechanism , on the other hand , is designed to limit and penalize certain kinds of spending .

taking the aviation trust fund "off - budget" has , during past reauthorization debates , been proposed as a means of assuring that the tax revenues deposited in the trust fund are used for aviation purposes .

in theory , an off budget entity's budget authority , receipts , outlays and , in most proposals , any deficit or surplus would not be counted in regard to the congressional or presidential budgets .

if the trust fund were off - budget there would be no apparent incentive for budgeteers or appropriators to support spending less on aviation in order to be able to spend more on other government programs or activities .

proponents also argue that unexpended trust fund balances could no longer be used to mask the size of the federal budget deficit .

opponents of off - budget proposals often argue that trust fund revenues should not be separated from overall national needs and fiscal policies .

also , as mentioned earlier in regard with the aviation trust fund , the uncommitted balance has been much reduced in recent years and some are now more concerned about the trust fund going into deficit .

the trust fund's revenues in and of themselves are not sufficient to cover all of the faa's needs .

this increases the likelihood that an off - budget aviation trust fund would not assure full funding for faa capital programs .

aip and f&e would still have to compete with other aviation activities , such as operations , for the available trust fund resources in any given year .

borrowing from surface transportation legislation , one alternative to taking the aviation trust fund off - budget would be to amend the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 to create a discretionary spending guarantee ( firewall ) for the faa's spending .

this could be done by creating a separate budget category for aviation and annual spending caps for programs within the category .

funding from within this category could not be used to , in effect , off - set increased spending elsewhere in the budget thereby removing any incentive for restraining the spending of available trust fund revenues .

in some ways , this mechanism has effects similar to going off - budget , but the budgetary resources are still counted as part of the unified congressional budget .

this would prevent the reduction of faa capital program spending to free up funding for spending elsewhere in the budget .

it is uncertain how effective this would be for faa spending .

this option would be subject to many of the same caveats as taking the aviation trust fund off - budget but would , in the eyes of proponents of full funding for aip and f&e , have the advantage of setting annual funding guarantees that appropriators would have to abide by .

because this option reduces the appropriations committees' influence on spending , they could be expected to vigorously resist the change .

also because this option amends a budget act it would require the acquiescence of the house and senate budget committees .

historically , the rationale underlying the cap and penalty provisions was that the reward for fully funding the aip and f&e capital accounts with trust fund revenues would be to fund the full authorized trust fund amount for o&m and thereby lighten the demands for general fund support for the faa budget .

recently , the funding of the federal transit administration ( fta ) underwent a change .

instead of using both trust fund and general fund monies to fund all programs , the fta's formula programs are entirely paid for from the trust fund while the congressionally popular new starts capital program is entirely funded out of the general fund .

although this goes against the historical rationale that trust fund resources should first pay for capital needs , it also puts advocates of spending constraints in the position that they have to cut a part of the fta budget that has a history of strong congressional support .

for faa , an analogous change would be to fund all of faa's budget , except the well supported aip program , with trust fund revenues and fund aip with general fund revenues .

this would require that those who wish to constrain faa spending to cut the part of the faa budget that has the broadest and deepest support in congress .

on the other hand , this option could leave aip more exposed than other components of the faa budget should a consensus for deficit reduction reemerge or should other priorities take precedence over aip in the spending of general fund revenues .

