u.s. - israel defense , diplomatic , and economic cooperation has been close for decades , based on common democratic values , religious affinities , and security interests .

on may 14 , 1948 , the united states was the first country to extend de facto recognition to the state of israel .

subsequently , relations have evolved through legislation , bilateral agreements , and trade .

u.s. officials and lawmakers often consider israel's security as they make policy choices in the middle east .

congress provides military assistance to israel and has enacted other legislation in explicit support of its security .

such support is part of a regional security order — largely based on u.s. arms sales to israel and arab countries — that has avoided major arab - israeli interstate conflict for about 45 years .

some members of congress have occasionally authorized and appropriated funding for programs benefitting israel at a level exceeding that requested by the executive branch .

other members have sought greater scrutiny of some of israel's actions .

iran continues to be a top israeli security concern .

israel has sought to influence u.s. policy on iran , and supported the trump administration's may 2018 withdrawal from the iranian nuclear agreement .

in recent years , israel and arab gulf states have discreetly cultivated closer relations with one another in efforts to counter iran .

as iran - backed groups have been successful in helping syria's government regain effective control of the country , israel has conducted a number of airstrikes targeting these groups .

israeli officials consider an indefinite iranian presence in syria to be a serious security threat exacerbating the threat already posed by hezbollah in lebanon , and have vowed to prevent it .

as a result , israel's relationship with russia , which cooperates with iran in syria and hosts advanced air defense systems there , has become more important .

israel also remains threatened by hamas and other terrorist groups in the gaza strip while considering ways to work on gaza's difficult humanitarian and security situation with neighboring egypt and a wide range of actors .

in the israeli - palestinian conflict , political disputes persist over key issues including security parameters , israel - west bank borders , jewish settlements , palestinian refugees , and the status of jerusalem .

polls suggest wide skepticism among the israeli public about prospects for a negotiated end to the conflict .

contentious domestic politics for both israelis and palestinians make it difficult for them to make diplomatic concessions , particularly in a climate where questions surround the continued leadership of prime minister netanyahu ( see " corruption allegations involving netanyahu " below ) and palestine liberation organization ( plo ) chairman and palestinian authority ( pa ) president abbas .

possibly complicating the situation further , president trump recognized jerusalem as israel's capital in december 2017 and the administration moved the u.s. embassy from tel aviv to jerusalem in may 2018 .

the trump administration may be contemplating a diplomatic proposal aimed at restarting israeli - palestinian negotiations with the support of the arab states that israel has been discreetly cooperating with against iran .

israelis debate how their leaders should prioritize options such as participating in diplomatic initiatives , preserving the current facts on the ground , and acting unilaterally to influence outcomes .

israeli leaders and significant segments of israeli civil society regularly emphasize the importance of closeness with the united states .

yet , a number of geopolitical factors distinguish israel from other developed countries , including the regional threats it faces , its unique historical experience , and its population's relatively higher level of direct military service .

strong bilateral relations have reinforced significant u.s. - israel cooperation on defense , including military aid , arms sales , joint exercises , and information sharing .

it also has included periodic u.s. - israel cooperation in developing military technology .

u.s. military aid has helped transform israel's armed forces into one of the most technologically sophisticated militaries in the world .

this aid for israel has been designed to maintain israel's "qualitative military edge" ( qme ) over neighboring militaries , since israel must rely on better equipment and training to compensate for a manpower deficit in a conflict against one or more regional states .

u.s. military aid , a portion of which may be spent on procurement from israeli defense companies , also has helped israel build a domestic defense industry , and israel in turn is one of the top exporters of arms worldwide .

on november 30 , 1981 , the united states and israel signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) establishing a framework for consultation and cooperation to enhance the national security of both countries .

in 1983 , the two sides formed a joint political military group to implement provisions of the mou .

joint air and sea military exercises began in 1984 , and the united states has constructed facilities to stockpile military equipment in israel .

in 1986 , israel and the united states signed an mou — the contents of which are classified — for israeli participation in the strategic defense initiative ( sdi / "star wars" ) , under which u.s. - israel co - development of the arrow ballistic missile defense system has proceeded .

in 1987 , israel was designated a "major non - nato ally" by the reagan administration , and in 1996 , under the terms of section 517 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , congress codified this status , affording israel preferential treatment in bidding for u.s. defense contracts and expanding its access to weapons systems at lower prices .

in 2001 , an annual interagency strategic dialogue , including representatives of diplomatic , defense , and intelligence establishments , was created to discuss long - term issues .

the u.s. - israel enhanced security cooperation act ( p.l .

112-150 ) of 2012 and u.s. - israel strategic partnership act ( p.l .

113-296 ) of 2014 encouraged continued and expanded u.s. - israel cooperation in a number of areas , including defense , homeland security , cyber issues , energy , and trade .

the latter act designated israel as a "major strategic partner" of the united states — a designation whose meaning has not been further defined in u.s. law or by the executive branch .

since the late 1970s , successive administrations have argued that u.s. arms sales are an important mechanism for addressing the security concerns of israel and other regional countries .

during this period , some members of congress have argued that sales of sophisticated weaponry to arab countries may erode israel's qme over its neighbors .

however , successive administrations have maintained that arab countries are too dependent on u.s. training , spare parts , and support to be in a position to use sophisticated u.s. - made arms against the united states , israel , or any other u.s. ally in a sustained campaign .

arab critics routinely charge that israeli officials exaggerate the threat they pose .

the threat of a nuclear - armed or regionally bolstered iran , though it has partially aligned israeli and sunni arab interests in deterring a shared rival , may be exacerbating israeli fears of a deteriorated qme , as saudi arabia and other gulf states dramatically increase defense procurements from u.s. and other foreign suppliers .

in 2008 , congress enacted legislation requiring that any proposed u.s. arms sale to "any country in the middle east other than israel" must include a notification to congress with a "determination that the sale or export of such would not adversely affect israel's qualitative military edge over military threats to israel. .

in parallel with this legal requirement , u.s. and israeli officials frequently signal their shared understanding of the u.s. commitment to maintaining israel's qme .

however , the codified definition focuses on preventing arms sales to potential regional israeli adversaries based on a calculation of conventional military threats , raising questions about the definition's applicability to evolving unconventional threats to israel's security .

what might constitute a legally defined adverse effect to qme is not clarified in u.s. legislation .

after the passage of the 2008 legislation , a bilateral qme working group was created allowing israel to argue its case against proposed u.s. arms sales in the region .

for example , former secretary of defense robert gates wrote that , in 2010 , the obama administration addressed concerns that israel's leaders had about the possible effect on qme of a large u.s. sale of f - 15 aircraft to saudi arabia by agreeing to sell israel additional f - 35 aircraft .

the u.s. - israel strategic partnership act ( p.l .

113-296 ) enacted in december 2014 requires more frequent qme assessments and executive - legislative consultations .

it also requires that qme determinations include evaluations of how potential arms sales would change the regional balance , while identifying measures israel may need to take in response to the potential sales , and assurances or possible assurances from the united states to israel as a result of the potential sales .

specific figures and comprehensive detail regarding various aspects of u.s. aid and arms sales to israel are discussed in crs report rl33222 , u.s. foreign aid to israel , by [author name scrubbed] .

that report includes information on conditions that , in each fiscal year , generally allow israel to use its military aid earlier and more flexibly than other countries .

israel is the largest cumulative recipient of u.s. foreign assistance since world war ii .

since 1976 , israel has generally been the largest annual recipient of u.s. foreign assistance , with occasional exception of iraq and afghanistan after 2004 .

since 1985 , the united states has provided approximately $3 billion in grants annually to israel .

in the past , israel received significant economic assistance , but now almost all u.s. bilateral aid to israel is in the form of foreign military financing ( fmf ) .

u.s. fmf to israel represents approximately one - half of total fmf and between 15-20% of israel's defense budget .

the new 10-year bilateral military aid mou commits the united states to $3.3 billion annually from fy2019 to fy2028 , subject to congressional appropriations .

the united states also generally provides some annual american schools and hospitals abroad ( asha ) funding and funding to israel for migration assistance .

israel uses approximately 74% of its fmf to purchase arms from the united states , in addition to receiving u.s .

excess defense articles ( eda ) .

given the new mou's phase - out of israeli use of fmf for domestic arms producers , by fy2028 all of israel's fmf will go toward u.s. - origin arms .

israel's procurement of the f - 35 joint strike fighter from the united states has been underway since 2016 .

to date , israel has received 12 f - 35s , and it is under contract to receive a total of 50 by 2024 .

in late 2017 , israel was the first non - u.s. country to declare operational capability for the f - 35 , and it has reportedly used the aircraft in combat over israel's northern border .

under the terms of its arrangements with the united states , israel has had domestic contractors install customized equipment and weaponry , and it is the only f - 35 recipient to date with the right to perform depot - level aircraft maintenance within its own borders .

sales of u.s. defense articles and services to israel are made subject to the terms of both the arms export control act ( aeca ) and the july 23 , 1952 , mutual defense assistance agreement between the united states and israel ( tias 2675 ) .

the 1952 agreement states: the government of israel assures the united states government that such equipment , materials , or services as may be acquired from the united states ... are required for and will be used solely to maintain its internal security , its legitimate self - defense ... and that it will not undertake any act of aggression against any other state .

past administrations have acknowledged that some israeli uses of u.s. defense articles may have failed to meet the requirements under the aeca and the 1952 agreement that israel only use such articles for self - defense and internal security purposes .

these past administrations have transmitted reports to congress stating that "substantial violations" of agreements between the united states and israel regarding arms sales "may have occurred. .

the most recent report of this type was transmitted in january 2007 in relation to concerns about israel's use of u.s. - supplied cluster munitions during military operations against hezbollah in lebanon during 2006 .

other examples include findings issued in 1978 , 1979 , and 1982 with regard to israel's military operations in lebanon and israel's air strike on iraq's nuclear reactor complex at osirak in 1981 .

additionally , section 620m of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa ) , as amended ( commonly known as the leahy law ) , prohibits the furnishing of assistance authorized by the faa and the aeca to any foreign security force unit where there is credible information that the unit has committed a gross violation of human rights .

the state department implements leahy vetting to determine which foreign security force units ( and individuals within the units ) are eligible to receive u.s. assistance or training .

in 2016 , senator patrick leahy and 10 other members of congress corresponded with the state department on the application of the leahy law to some specifically alleged instances of possible extrajudicial killings or torture by israeli personnel .

the state department assured the members of congress that it was properly conducting leahy vetting and monitoring the instances that were mentioned in their letter .

in november 2017 , representative betty mccollum introduced the promoting human rights by ending israeli military detention of palestinian children act ( h.r .

4391 ) , which would prohibit the use of aid for israel in support of various types of ill - treatment of palestinian children .

congress provides hundreds of millions of dollars in annual assistance beyond administration - requested amounts for israel's iron dome anti - rocket system and joint u.s. - israel missile defense programs such as arrow and david's sling .

the new mou provides for $500 million in annual funding from fy2019 to fy2028 , with possibly more in exceptional circumstances .

in july 2016 , the united states and israel announced that they had successfully conducted a special trial — the first of its kind in eight years — to test the connectivity of u.s. - and israeli - controlled missile defense systems that are based in and around israel .

some countries have sought to acquire elements used in israeli missile defense systems .

in april 2018 , 40 members of congress sent a letter to the chair and ranking member of the house appropriations subcommittee on defense asking the subcommittee to "carefully study" whether the u.s. army might immediately acquire iron dome .

a 2018 report stated that rafael advanced defense systems ltd. — the primary israeli contractor for iron dome — has entered into a cooperation agreement with romania that would be the first to involve the export of iron dome's interception system .

israel aerospace industries reportedly has sold the radar used in the iron dome and david's sling systems to a number of countries , including canada and india .

u.s. - israel security assistance authoriz ation act of 2018 ( s. 2497 and h.r .

5141 ) .

this bill includes the following provisions: fmf authorization .

would authorize fmf of at least $3.3 billion per year from fy2019 to fy2028 ( the duration of the new mou ) .

extension of war reserves stockpile authority and access to loan guarantees .

would extend this authority and access through fy2023 .

precision guided munitions ( pgms ) .

would ( 1 ) authorize a joint u.s. - israel assessment of how the united states can help provide pgms to help with potential conflicts with hezbollah and hamas ; ( 2 ) authorize the president to utilize the special defense acquisition fund to transfer pgms to reserve stocks for israel ; and ( 3 ) authorize the modification of rapid acquisition and deployment procedures to aid u.s. production of pgms under circumstances of urgent need .

report on israel's eligibility for strategic trade authorization exception .

would require the president to report to congress on israel's status regarding this exception .

cybersecurity cooperation ( h.r .

5141 only ) .

would direct the homeland security department to establish a grant program to support cybersecurity research , development , demonstration , and commercialization in accordance with a 2008 bilateral agreement .

w orldwide foreign assistance , space exploration , and countering drone aircraft .

would encourage and authorize cooperative u.s. - israel efforts on these issues .

additional reporting on israel's qme and security posture .

would require the periodic reports on israel's qme that are already legally mandated to include additional information about threats to israel and countermeasures available to it .

201 9 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , h.r .

5515 ) .

the conference version of h.r .

5515 ( found in h.rept .

115-874 ) includes the following provisions: section 127 2 .

would authorize the funding currently authorized for anti - tunneling efforts to also be used for countering drone aircraft ( unmanned aerial systems ) .

section 1273 .

provisions from s. 2497 / h.r .

5141 on the extension of war reserves stockpile authority and the joint u.s. - israel assessment on pgms .

arms sales , information sharing , and technical collaboration between the united states and israel raise questions about what israel might do with capabilities or information it acquires .

the united states and israel have regularly discussed israel's dealings on sensitive security equipment and technology with various countries , especially china .

sources have reported that the united states has established de facto veto power over israeli third - party arms sales .

and s ince the 1980s there have been at least three cases in which u.s. government employees were convicted of disclosing classified information to israel or of conspiracy to act as an israeli agent .

the united states is israel's largest single - country trading partner , and — according to data from the u.s. international trade commission — israel is the united states's 24 th - largest trading partner .

the two countries concluded a free trade agreement ( fta ) in 1985 , and all customs duties between the two trading partners have since been eliminated .

the fta includes provisions that protect both countries' more sensitive agricultural sub - sectors with nontariff barriers , including import bans , quotas , and fees .

israeli exports to the united states have grown since the fta became effective .

qualified industrial zones ( qizs ) in jordan and egypt are considered part of the u.s. - israel free trade area .

in 2017 , israel imported approximately $12.6 billion in goods from and exported $21.9 billion in goods to the united states .

the united states and israel have launched several programs to stimulate israeli industrial and scientific research , for which congress has authorized and appropriated funds on several occasions .

for historical background on these issues , see crs report rl34074 , the palestinians: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

the prospects for an israeli - palestinian peace process are complicated by many factors .

since president trump took office , he and officials from his administration have expressed interest in brokering a final - status israeli - palestinian agreement .

many of their statements and policies , however , have raised questions about the timing and viability of any new u.s. - backed diplomatic initiative .

the change in u.s. policy on jerusalem in december 2017 has complicated the u.s. role ( see " jerusalem ," below ) .

israeli leaders generally celebrated the change , but plo chairman abbas strongly objected .

many other countries opposed president trump's statements on jerusalem .

this opposition was reflected in december action at the united nations .

citing alleged u.s. bias favoring israel , palestinian leaders have broken off high - level political contacts with the united states and have sought support from other international actors and organizations to improve their negotiating position with israel .

however , the pa continues security coordination with israel .

tensions over jerusalem appear to have influenced administration decisions to reduce or delay certain types of aid to the palestinians , and have made prospects for restarting israeli - palestinian talks in 2018 less certain .

reports suggest that the administration is preparing a detailed document on the peace process that it may share in an attempt to overcome obstacles to progress .

at the end of a june 2018 trip to meet with various middle eastern leaders , senior white house advisor jared kushner ( the president's son - in - law ) said that the administration's plan was almost done .

kushner also said , "if president abbas is willing to come back to the table , we are ready to engage ; if he is not , we will likely air the plan publicly. .

some former u.s. officials have cautioned against presenting a plan given current palestinian opposition .

in may , abbas characterized the possible removal of core issues of the israeli - palestinian conflict — namely , jerusalem's status and palestinian refugee claims — from the negotiating table as "an american slap. .

the administration seeks support from some arab states , including saudi arabia , the united arab emirates , jordan , and egypt , for the anticipated u.s. initiative .

while these arab states have criticized the u.s. stance on jerusalem , there are also signs that the shared goal of countering iranian influence in the region is leading some of them to interact more overtly with israeli counterparts and to dissuade the palestinians from abandoning u.s. - backed diplomacy .

the 2002 arab peace initiative remains a key reference point for arab positions on issues of israeli - palestinian dispute .

speculation surrounds the particulars of the possible trump administration proposal .

dating back to unconfirmed reports from late 2017 , some observers anticipate that a proposal could favor israeli positions that call for limited palestinian sovereignty , maintaining most west bank settlements , locating a palestinian capital on the outer fringes of jerusalem , and dismissing refugee claims to a right of return .

palestinian officials have complained that the united states is trying to undermine abbas and dictate a solution .

in june , abbas's spokesperson accused the administration and israel of seeking to separate gaza from the west bank under the guise of humanitarian aid .

in december 2017 , president trump recognized jerusalem as israel's capital and pledged to move the u.s. embassy from tel aviv to jerusalem .

these actions represented a departure from the decades - long u.s. executive branch practice of not recognizing israeli sovereignty over jerusalem or any part of it .

the president pointed to the jerusalem embassy act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-45 ) as a significant factor in the policy change .

the western part of jerusalem that israel has controlled since 1948 has served as the official seat of its government since shortly after its founding as a state .

israel officially considers jerusalem ( including the eastern part it unilaterally annexed after the 1967 arab - israeli war , while also expanding the city's municipal boundaries ) to be its capital ( see figure 2 below ) .

in his december remarks , president trump stated that he was not taking a position on "specific boundaries of the israeli sovereignty in jerusalem," and would continue to consider the city's final status to be subject to israeli - palestinian negotiations .

however , he did not explicitly mention palestinian aspirations regarding jerusalem ; palestinians envisage east jerusalem as the capital of their future state .

in a february 2018 interview , the president said that he would support specific boundaries as agreed upon by both sides .

he also has called on all parties to maintain the "status quo" arrangement at jerusalem's holy sites ( see textbox below ) .

on february 23 , the state department spokesperson issued the following press statement announcing that the embassy would open in may 2018 , to coincide with israel's 70 th anniversary: the embassy will initially be located in the arnona neighborhood , in a modern building that now houses consular operations of u.s. consulate general jerusalem .

those consular operations , including american citizen and visa services , will continue at the arnona facility without interruption , as part of the embassy .

consulate general jerusalem will continue to operate as an independent mission with an unchanged mandate , from its historic agron road location .

initially , the interim embassy in arnona will contain office space for the ambassador and a small staff .

by the end of next year , we intend to open a new embassy jerusalem annex on the arnona compound that will provide the ambassador and his team with expanded interim office space .

in parallel , we have started the search for a site for our permanent embassy to israel , the planning and construction of which will be a longer - term undertaking .

the embassy opened on may 14 at the arnona facility ( see figure 3 below ) amid criticism from several international actors and violence on the same day at the gaza - israel frontier ( see " hamas and gaza " above ) .

according to the state department spokesperson , the site is located "partly in west jerusalem and partly in what's considered no man's land," as it lies "between the 1949 armistice lines" in a zone that was demilitarized between 1949 and 1967 .

the white house stated that it cost $400,000 to modify the facility to function as an embassy .

the ambassador's official residence is to transition to jerusalem at a later date .

congress could consider a number of legislative and oversight options with regard to the plans mentioned above to expand the embassy at the arnona site , and later to plan and construct a permanent embassy .

these options could focus on funding , timeframe and logistics , progress reports , and security for embassy facilities and staff .

a state department official said in february that a new embassy building would take 7 to 10 years to construct , and a former official estimated that building a new embassy in jerusalem may cost about $500 million .

israel has approximately 130 official residential communities ( known internationally and by significant segments of israeli society as "settlements" ) in the west bank , and approximately 100 additional settlement outposts unauthorized under israeli law .

it also maintains other military and civilian land - use sites in the west bank .

in addition , israeli authorities and jewish israeli citizens have established roughly 14 main residential areas ( referred to variously as "settlements" or "neighborhoods" ) in east jerusalem .

all of these residential communities are located beyond the 1949-1967 armistice line ( the "green line" ) in areas that palestinians assert are rightfully part of their envisioned future state .

the first west bank settlements were constructed following the 1967 war , and were initially justified as residential areas connected to personnel involved with israel's military occupation .

major west bank residential settlement building began in the late 1970s with the advent of the pro - settler gush emunim ( "bloc of the faithful" ) movement and the 1977 electoral victory of menachem begin and the likud party .

subsequently , israelis have expanded existing settlements and established new ones .

israelis who defend the settlements' legitimacy generally use some combination of legal , historical , strategic , nationalistic , or religious justifications .

the international community generally considers israeli construction on territory beyond the green line to be illegal .

in 2015 , an israeli anti - settlement advocacy group said that a two - tier planning system exists in area c of the west bank: "a civil and representative planning system for jewish settlers , and a military system without representation for palestinians. .

israel retains military control over the west bank and has largely completed a separation barrier that roughly tracks the green line , but departs from it in a number of areas that include significant settlement populations .

israeli officials state that the barrier's purpose is to separate israelis and palestinians and prevent terrorists from entering israel .

palestinians object to the barrier being built on their territory because it cuts palestinians off from east jerusalem and , in some places , bisects their landholdings and communities .

it also is seen by many as an israeli device to unilaterally determine borders between israel and a future palestinian state .

not counting east jerusalem , one source states that 77% of israeli settlers live within the barrier's perimeter .

counting east jerusalem , the figure grows to 85% .

settlers affect the political and diplomatic calculus in various ways .

they influence key voting blocs in israel's coalition - based parliamentary system ( although they do not all share the same background or interests , settlers constitute about 6% of the israeli population ) .

additionally , some initiate public protest and even violent resistance against government efforts to limit or regulate their actions .

also , they have a significant symbolic role in a country whose initial survival depended on pioneering spirit in the face of adversity .

some israelis caution that the demand to provide security to settlers and their transportation links to israel could perpetuate israeli military control in the west bank even if other rationales for maintaining such control eventually recede .

protecting settlers is made more difficult by altercations between some settlers and palestinian west bank residents , and some settlers' defiance of israeli military authorities .

when ordered by israel's court system to dismantle outposts , the government has complied .

in some cases , the government placated settlers by relocating displaced outpost residents within the boundaries of settlements permitted under israeli law .

u.s. policy on settlements has varied since 1967 .

until the 1980s , multiple administrations either stated or implied that settlements were "contrary to international law," with president carter's secretary of state cyrus vance stating explicitly that settlements were "illegal" in 1980 .

president reagan later stated that settlements were "not illegal," but "ill - advised" and "unnecessarily provocative. .

since then , the executive branch has generally refrained from pronouncements on the settlements' legality .

rather , a common u.s. stance has been that settlements are an "obstacle to peace. .

additionally , loan guarantees to israel currently authorized by u.s. law are subject to possible reduction by an amount equal to the amount israel spends on settlements in the occupied territories .

a former u.s. official wrote in 2014 that u.s .

administrations are "not entirely sure what to do with the fact that israeli prime ministers of all political stripes have continued israeli settlement building on the west bank and construction in parts of east jerusalem that we'd like to see become the capital of a palestinian state. .

an april 2004 letter from president george w. bush to then israeli prime minister ariel sharon explicitly acknowledged that "in light of new realities on the ground , including already existing major israeli populations ( sic ) centers , it is unrealistic to expect that the outcome of final status negotiations will be a full and complete return to the armistice lines of 1949. .

the obama administration generally opposed israeli settlement activity , but took differing approaches at various points .

during the administration's first term , it sought to freeze all settlement activity , including in east jerusalem .

israel responded with a partial 10-month moratorium .

in february 2011 , the united states vetoed a draft u.n. security council resolution that would have characterized israeli settlements in the west bank and east jerusalem as illegal .

during president obama's second term , he signed trade and customs legislation ( p.l .

114-26 and p.l .

114-125 ) opposing punitive economic measures against israel ( such as measures advocated by a non - governmental boycott , divestment , and sanctions [bds] movement ) .

however , he asserted in a presidential signing statement for p.l .

114-125 that certain provisions treating "israeli - controlled territories" ( i.e. , west bank settlements ) beyond the green line in the same manner as israel itself were not in line with u.s. policy .

finally , in december 2016 , the obama administration decided to abstain from ( rather than veto ) a u.n. security council resolution ( resolution 2334 ) similar to the one it vetoed in 2011 .

to date , the trump administration has been less critical than the obama administration of israeli settlement - related announcements and construction activity .

in february 2017 , the white house press secretary released a statement with the following passage: while we don't believe the existence of settlements is an impediment to peace , the construction of new settlements or the expansion of existing settlements beyond their current borders may not be helpful in achieving that goal .

as the president has expressed many times , he hopes to achieve peace throughout the middle east region .

some reports suggest that israel at some point coordinated settlement construction plans with trump administration officials .

however , in february 2018 a white house spokesperson denied reports that u.s. officials may have discussed the possible annexation of some settlements with prime minister netanyahu .

appendix a. israeli knesset parties and their leaders appendix b .

selected u.s. - based interest groups relating to israel selected groups actively interested in israel are noted below with links to their websites for information on their policy positions .

american israel public affairs committee: http: / / www.aipac.org american - israeli cooperative enterprise / jewish virtual library: http: / / www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org american jewish committee: http: / / www.ajc.org american jewish congress: http: / / www.ajcongress.org americans for peace now: http: / / www.peacenow.org anti - defamation league: http: / / www.adl.org conference of presidents of major jewish organizations: http: / / www.conferenceofpresidents.org foundation for middle east peace: http: / / www.fmep.org hadassah ( the women's zionist organization of america , inc. ) : http: / / www.hadassah.org israel bonds: http: / / www.israelbonds.com israel institute: http: / / www.israelinstitute.org the israel project: http: / / www.theisraelproject.org israel policy forum: http: / / www.israelpolicyforum.org j street: http: / / jstreet.org jewish federations of north america: http: / / www.jewishfederations.org jewish national fund: http: / / www.jnf.org jewish policy center: http: / / www.jewishpolicycenter.org new israel fund: http: / / www.nif.org s. daniel abraham center for middle east peace: http: / / www.centerpeace.org zionist organization of america: http: / / www.zoa.or .

