a variety of interrelated statutes and agency regulations govern leasing and permitting foroil and gas development on federal lands .

the national mining and minerals policy fosters andencourages the following activities: private enterprise in ... the development of economicallysound and stable domestic mining , minerals , metal and mineral reclamation industries [and] theorderly and economic development of domestic mineral resources , reserves , and reclamation ofmetals and minerals to help assure satisfaction of industrial , security and environmental needs .

 ( 1 ) the bureau of land management ( blm ) - - part of the u.s. department of the interior - - managesmost federal mineral development and is largely responsible for implementing this policy .

 ( 2 ) blm also manages a largeamount of federal lands .

federal land in the national forest system ( nfs ) is under the jurisdictionof the forest service , which is part of the u.s. department of agriculture .

the forest service playsa role in authorizing mineral development on nfs lands .

this report addresses the leasing and permitting of onshore , federal public domain lands .

"public domain lands" encompass lands obtained "by treaty , conquest , cession by states , and[certain] purchase[s]. .

 ( 3 ) the historical distinction between public domain lands and other federal lands is reflected in thedifferent statutes that apply to the different types of lands .

this report first analyzes the legal framework for oil and gas leasing and permitting onfederal public domain lands managed by blm and the forest service .

second , this report assesseshow the recently enacted energy policy of 2005 affects these laws .

finally , this report analyzesselected judicial and administrative decisions regarding what steps federal environmental lawsrequire agencies to take before issuing coalbed methane leases .

coalbed methane is a type of naturalgas that is trapped in coal seams by water pressure ; it is leased separately from the coal .

at the dawn of the twentieth century , private entities could explore , develop , and purchasefederal public domain lands containing oil with relative ease .

the federal government permittedmineral exploration of such lands without any charge .

oil could be developed as a placermineral .

 ( 4 ) full ownershipof oil lands "could be obtained for a nominal amount. .

 ( 5 ) however , congress's enactment of the mineral lands leasing actof 1920 ( mlla ) ended the private acquisition of title to federal oil lands by authorizing thesecretary of the interior ( secretary ) to issue permits for exploration and to lease lands containing oiland gas and other defense - related minerals .

 ( 6 ) the first section of this report details the legal framework for suchoil and gas leasing .

in august 2005 , the congress passed and the president signed the energy policy act of 2005 ( 2005 epact ) .

 ( 119 ) this comprehensive law touches upon many aspects of u.s. energy regulation , and among itsprovisions were several changes to the law governing federal oil and gas leases on public domainlands .

this section of the report highlights selected provisions from the 2005 epact relating tothese topics .

it also addresses selected provisions that were included in either the house or senatebill , but were not included in the final legislation .

the topics addressed by this section can beclassified into four categories: ( 1 ) streamlining and expediting oil and gas development processes ; ( 2 ) a nepa - related provision ; ( 3 ) the arctic national wildlife refuge ; and ( 4 ) miscellaneousprovisions .

coalbed methane ( cbm ) is a natural gas that is trapped in coal seams by water pressure .

developers extract cbm by pumping water into coal seams to decrease the water pressure , therebyreleasing the cbm .

 ( 140 ) in the second half of the 1990s , cbm production "increaseddramatically to represent a significant new source of natural gas for many western states. .

 ( 141 ) in 1999 , the supremecourt held that cbm could be leased separately from coal .

 ( 142 ) recently,environmental groups , developers , and blm have litigated issues surrounding what actionsconstitute compliance with flpma and nepa in the context of cbm development .

these issueshave developed through several cases adjudicated by federal courts and the interior board of landappeals ( ibla ) , which is part of the u.s. department of the interior .

