on may 18 , 2005 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) promulgated the first national standards for mercury emissions from coal - fired electric power plants .

mercury is a potent neurotoxin that can cause adverse health effects ( principally delayed development , neurological defects , and lower iq in fetuses and children ) at very low concentrations .

the principal route of exposure to mercury is through consumption of fish .

mercury enters water bodies , often through air emissions , and is taken up through the food chain , ultimately affecting humans as a result of fish consumption .

according to the epa , as of december 2004 , 44 states had issued fish consumption advisories due to mercury .

twenty - one states ( primarily in the midwest and northeast ) have issued advisories for mercury in all their freshwater lakes and / or rivers .

twelve states in the southeast and new england , have advisories for mercury statewide in their coastal waters , and hawaii has a statewide advisory for mercury in marine fish .

mercury reaches water bodies from many sources , including combustion of fuels containing the substance in trace amounts .

in the united states , coal - fired power plants are the largest emission source , accounting for 42% of total mercury emissions according to epa .

epa's 2005 regulations , referred to as the clean air mercury rule ( camr ) , establish a cap - and - trade program for power plant mercury that will take effect in 2010 .

camr will have little impact on emissions before 2018 , however .

at that time , the regulations call for a 69% reduction in emissions as compared to the 1999 level .

in setting the limit so far in the future , epa stated , in part , that mercury control technologies are not commercially available , and will not be generally available until after 2010 .

many observers disagree with that conclusion , including a growing number of states .

this report describes what those states that have chosen alternative forms of regulation are requiring .

as of february 2007 , 18 states have established more stringent emission limits that will take effect sooner than will epa's , and four other states are developing regulations that would do so .

the states with regulations already promulgated ( or laws enacted ) represent a broad cross - section of states , including arizona , colorado , connecticut , delaware , florida , illinois , maryland , massachusetts , minnesota , montana , nevada , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , north carolina , oregon , pennsylvania , and virginia .

together , these states have 177 coal - fired power plants , with a total of 414 electric generating units .

the combined generation capacity of these units is estimated at 97,138 megawatts ( mw ) , 32% of total u.s. coal - fired electric generation .

the four states that have proposed but not yet finalized mercury standards ( georgia , michigan , washington , and wisconsin ) have an additional 51 plants .

their combined generation capacity is estimated at 33,986 mw , an additional 11% of total u.s. coal - fired generation .

in addition to the programs developed by individual states , the state and territorial air pollution program administrators ( stappa ) and association of local air pollution control officials ( alapco ) developed a model rule in 2005 to encourage more stringent controls on power plant mercury emissions .

 ( stappa and alapco are now known collectively as the national association of clean air agencies , nacaa. ) .

the model , which was publicly released november 14 , 2005 , offers two options .

the first option calls for an average 80% capture of inlet mercury from existing units ( or an equivalent output - based emission standard of 0.010 lbs. / gwh ) based on a 12-month rolling average , beginning december 31 , 2008 .

during this phase , owners or operators could comply by averaging emissions from all their existing units within the state .

a second phase , beginning december 31 , 2012 , would require a 90-95% capture of inlet mercury or an output - based emission standard of 0.0060-0.0025 lbs. / gwh .

during this phase , averaging would be limited to units located at a single electric generating plant .

the rule would prohibit interstate trading of allowances .

a second option in the stappa / alapco model rule , like a provision in new jersey's law , would provide more flexibility to electric generating units in return for the installation of control technologies designed to capture additional pollutants .

under this option , an owner or operator could delay compliance with the mercury emission limits for four years at up to 50% of its generating capacity if it agreed to meet stringent standards for emissions of sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and particulate matter , in addition to mercury by the end of 2012 .

while no state has adopted the stappa / alapco model intact , the model serves as a window on what state and local officials closely involved in regulating power plant emissions believe is feasible .

nineteen of the 22 states that have proposed or adopted programs more stringent than the federal camr rule have done so since the model rule's unveiling .

with a few exceptions , it is a general precept of federal environmental laws that more stringent state standards are not preempted .

relying on this authority , some states ( particularly , california and a number of northeastern states ) have adopted various environmental requirements that address problems that are judged to be unique to their state or more severe in their state than elsewhere .

thus , state actions to set more stringent limits on mercury emissions are not considered unprecedented or unusual .

nevertheless , the degree to which states are opting out of the federal program and the speed with which they are doing so appear noteworthy .

in part , the development of these state programs reflects a judgment by state regulators or legislators that the camr rule is not sufficiently stringent .

in part , it reflects a judgment that epa's assessment of the availability and cost of technology to control mercury emissions are unduly pessimistic .

state actions were also dictated by a looming deadline for submission of programs for epa approval .

under the camr rule , states had until november 17 , 2006 to submit their programs ( either programs adopting camr or programs at least as stringent ) to epa .

failure to submit can leave states liable to imposition of a federal implementation plan ( fip ) , which would impose the camr rule's requirements on a state through an epa - run program .

epa officials have aggressively promoted camr and the threat of fips , testifying before state legislatures against the adoption of more stringent state programs , and questioning the authority of states to prohibit interstate trading of allowances .

at the same time , many of the states adopting more stringent requirements are pursuing legal action to overturn epa's rule and force the agency itself to adopt more stringent requirements .

it may be some time before these issues are resolved .

in the meantime , if state programs with stringent control requirements are successfully implemented , it will become more difficult for epa to argue that technology is unavailable to more aggressively control power plant mercury emissions .

conversely , if the technology fails to do its job or proves to be more expensive than emissions control industry spokespersons have asserted , epa's hand will be strengthened .

since the earliest state requirements take effect at the end of 2007 and early in 2008 , these questions may continue to merit congressional oversight at least through that period .

appendix a .

enacted / promulgated mercury controls appendix b .

other state action .

