since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the u.s. armed forces , under guidance from the department of defense ( dod ) , have conducted the following military operations: operation enduring freedom ( oef ) in afghanistan and other small global war on terror ( gwot ) operations like the philippines and djibouti that began immediately after the 9 / 11 attacks and continue ; operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) that began in the fall of 2002 with the buildup of troops for the march 2003 invasion of iraq and continued with counter - insurgency and stability operations until 2010 ; operation new dawn ( ond ) , a successor to oif that began on september 1 , 2010 , when u.s. troops adopted an advisory and assistance role and concluded in december 2011 when all u.s. troops withdrew from iraq ( though some 13,000 combat - ready troops remain in kuwait ) ; operation noble eagle ( one ) providing enhanced security for u.s. military bases and other homeland security that was launched in response to the attacks and continues at a modest level ; and operation inherent resolve ( oir ) , authorized by the president on august 7 , 2014 , beginning with dod air strikes in iraq and syria to "degrade and ultimately defeat" the islamic state ( is ) without deploying u.s. ground troops .

on may 27 , 2014 , president obama's announced that the number of u.s. troops in afghanistan would decrease from 33,000 to 9,800 by january 1 , 2015 ; would halve again by january 1 , 2016 , to about 4,900 ; and be limited to an embassy presence of about 1,000 thereafter .

some unspecified number of the 60,000 u.s. troops currently providing in - theater support would remain in the region as an "enduring presence" after the withdrawal of troops from afghanistan .

in june 2014 , after the announcement of troop levels for the afghan withdrawal , the administration replaced its earlier $79.4 billion placeholder request for dod ( submitted with the original fy2015 budget in march ) with an amended war request of $58.6 billion .

including this amended dod request with state department / u.s .

agency for international development ( usaid ) , and veterans administration ( va ( medical requests , the total fy2015 war request — including the new november 2014 request for oir — totals $79.0 billion .

the fy2015 continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

124 / p.l .

113-164 ) sets war spending levels for this fiscal year at $95.5 billion , reflecting the fy2014 enacted level .

that total is $16.5 billion above the $79.0 billion amended request that includes oir .

the continuing resolution ( cr ) exceeds the request primarily because dod's fy2015 request is below the fy2014 enacted level .

the cr expires on december 11 , 2014 , and congress is expected to pass another cr or an omnibus appropriations act to set final fy2015 spending levels .

at that time , congress may consider the following war budget issues: the amount , purposes , and appropriateness of the fy2015 department of defense ( dod ) war cost request reflecting the troop drawdown to 9,800 troops in december 2014 ; the utility of an administration proposal for $5 billion for the counterterrorism partnerships fund ( ctfp ) , a broadly - flexible new account intended to respond to "evolving threats" primarily through "train and equip" programs ; whether to rely on oco - designated funding for all dod expenses , including paying for an "enduring presence" of some 60,000 u.s. troops in the region , and financing afghan security forces rather than transferring some of these costs to dod's base budget ; and responding to the new november funding request of $5.5 billion for operation inherent resolve , including whether to set restrictions on the use of u.s. ground forces .

these defense budget issues are discussed below after a summary of the status of the fy2015 request and an accounting of cumulative and annual war funding levels for fy2001-fy2015 .

based on funding enacted from the 9 / 11 attacks through fy2014 , crs estimates a total of $1.6 trillion has been provided to the department of defense , the state department and the department of veterans administration for war operations , diplomatic operations and foreign aid , and medical care for iraq and afghan war veterans over the past 13 years of war .

since the 9 / 11 attacks , some observers have criticized war funding as "off - budget" or a "slush fund" appropriated largely in emergency supplemental acts or for "overseas contingency operations" ( oco ) where normal budget limits in annual budget resolutions or the budget control act ( bca ) do not apply .

in recent testimony on september 18 , 2014 , for example , former secretary of defense chuck hagel acknowledged these ambiguities , saying "there're a lot of different opinions about whether there should be an overseas contingency account or not and whether it's a slush fund or not. .

some observers have argued that the tendency to designate funding for activities only tangentially related to oco or war has intensified with the threat of sequestration in the bca .

under that act , if final appropriations breach separate , annual "defense" and non - defense budget caps , omb must administer a largely across - the - board sequestration reducing each account , and sometimes individual programs , by the same percentage to ensure that caps are met .

 ( should a sequestration be required , however , all budgetary resources , including war funding , would be affected by across - the - board cuts. ) .

others have suggested that the "oco" designation has provided a "safety valve" to preserve base budget programs and help agencies meet bca caps by designating funding for base budget programs as oco .

for example , congress transferred $9.2 billion in operation and maintenance ( o&m ) funds from dod's base budget request to the oco - designated title i funds in the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

under the bca caps , dod spending has been constrained to $496 billion in fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 , with a $3 billion increase to $499 billion in fy2016 .

dod contends that the bca "sequester" caps ( the limits that must be reached to avoid a sequester ) would require dod to make significant cuts from current plans that would affect both readiness and modernization .

dod's current future years defense plan exceeds the bca limits by $176 billion or 3.3% over the bca caps between fy2012 and fy2021 .

in addition , departmental spokesmen argue that congressional reluctance to accept dod - proposed compensation reforms and weapon system cancellations could create an additional "hole" of $70 billion in dod's current five - year defense plan , which already exceeds sequester caps by about 4.4% .

in both fy2014 and fy2015 , the administration has contended that the bca limits for both defense and nondefense should be raised with additional savings achieved from tax and entitlement reform , proposals that have not been addressed by congress .

the oco or emergency designation can be applied to all or only some accounts within an appropriation act .

there is no single account for war funding in any agency .

generally , war funding is appropriated in regular appropriation accounts for incremental expenses associated with war activities or programs .

for dod , war funding designations has been provided in individual accounts in emergency supplemental , omnibus , or dod appropriation acts for amounts that cover incremental or additional expenses related to deploying military personnel , conducting combat or train and assist operations , and supporting troops overseas .

with bca spending limits in place until fy2021 , some believe that the definition of what constitutes war funding may continue to be applied broadly .

for example , concerned about dod's proposal to end funding for a - 10 ground attack aircraft in its base budget , the house version of the fy2015 national defense authorization act included $635 million in title xv for oco funding to retain a - 10 aircraft .

in a similar way , the state department has requested emergency or oco designations for some of the costs of diplomatic operations or usaid programs associated with afghanistan and iraq , such as the diplomatic and consular programs or the economic support fund .

congress has also created new accounts or spending caps to fund activities that do not fit neatly into the purposes of regular accounts and to provide additional flexibility ( see figure 9 ) .

dod definitions of what constitutes war - related activities and expenses have shifted over the years .

because of the flexibility of the emergency or oco designations , some have questioned whether there are any limitations on what could be counted as war funding .

the only check on the amount of funding that can be designated as either "emergency" or "oco" is the requirement that congress and the administration agree .

shifts in dod definitions have reflected differing viewpoints about the extent , nature , and duration of the afghan and iraq wars and the "global war on terror" ( gwot ) as well as growing budget pressures .

over the years , both congress and the president have adopted sometimes more and sometimes less expansive definitions to accommodate the needs and pressures of the moment .

dod's initial fy2015 war request submitted in february 2014 was a "placeholder" figure because the president had not yet decided about the pace of future withdrawal of u.s. troops from afghanistan .

in june 2014 , dod submitted a specific fy2015 request for $58.6 billion for the afghan war and post - war iraq activities reflecting two policy announcements by president obama about u.s. withdrawal plans .

in his february 2013 state of the union address , the president announced that u.s. troops in afghanistan would decrease to 33,000 by february of 2014 , and that by the end of 2014 , "our war in afghanistan will be over," with later activities focusing "on two missions — training and equipping afghan forces so that the country does not again slip into chaos , and counterterrorism efforts that allow us to pursue the remnants of al qaeda and their affiliates. .

on may 27 , 2014 , president obama announced further reductions in the number of u.s. troops in afghanistan during the transition to an "advise and assist" role with decreases from 33,000 in february 2014 to 9,800 by january 1 , 2015 ; by another halving to about 4,900 by the january 1 , 2016 ; and the number of u.s. troops in afghanistan would be an "embassy presence," of about 1,000 according to press reports by january 1 , 2017 .

recent press reports suggest that the decrease to 9,800 u.s. troops may be delayed from january 1 , 2015 , to at least the spring of 2015 as u.s. troops fill the "train and assist" role of some allied nations who are still finalizing their contributions .

another pressure to retain more u.s. troop could also be posed by the recent decision by president obama to allow dod to provide more extensive support for afghan operations through air support and sometimes accompanying afghan troops on ground operations .

these figures do not include over 60,000 u.s. troops located primarily in the region who provide "in - theater" support to war operations as well as headquarters and presence ( figure 2 and appendix a ) .

the size of a u.s. "enduring presence" in the region after the withdrawal from afghanistan remains a key policy question to be decided with significant cost implications .

dod's fy2015 war request is $26.6 billion , or 31% below the fy2014 enacted level , while troop strength in afghanistan falls by 69% ( table 7 ) .

in testimony before the house armed services committee , department of defense comptroller , mike mccord , stated that the decrease in fy2015's request reflects "a continued downward trajectory of our war - related spending as we conclude our combat mission in afghanistan after 13 years of war ..." but argues that dod is also "faced with covering the costs of returning , repairing and replacing equipment ... [and] the costs associated with our broader presence in the middle east , from which we support a number of critical missions in - country from fy2014 to fy2015. .

in justifying both its fy2014 and fy2015 requests , dod contended that war expenses would not fall proportionately with troop levels because the cost of closing bases ; returning , repairing , or disposing of equipment ; and maintaining some 60,000 troops in the region offset some of the lower cost of deploying fewer troops at lower operating tempo .

in addition , dod deputy secretary robert work argued that costs remained high because of continued support for the afghan national security forces , our coalition partners in theater , and pay for the retrograde equipment and personnel will continue to reset the forces to enable a truly vast range of support activities , including logistics , intelligence , and will support a portion of the temporary army and marine corps in strength that supports oef , which has been approved by congress .

the fy2015 dod oco request also includes $4 billion for dod's counterterrorism partnership fund ( ctpf ) , a controversial , new transfer fund intended to provide " a flexible mechanism that allows the department of defense ( dod ) and the federal government as a whole to respond more nimbly to evolving terrorist threats from south asia to the sahel. .

it also includes $925 million for a european reassurance fund ( eri ) to " reassure allies of the u.s. commitment to their security and territorial integrity as members of the nato alliance" in response to russian moves in the ukraine .

 ( the administration requests another $1 billion for the state department's ctpf account. ) .

some ways to evaluate dod's fy2015 request for war funding which congress may consider as part of the appropriations and authorization process may include: reviewing whether dod has spent all the war funds appropriated over the past several years ; comparing operational and troop costs experienced during the iraq drawdown with the proposed fy2015 costs of the afghanistan drawdown ; and comparing the administration's new ctpf proposal to expand funding for "train and equip" counterterrorism training programs with previous similar programs .

passed in june 2014 , the house - passed version of the dod appropriations bill , h.r .

4870 , reflected the administration's initial oco placeholder request , while the senate - reported version of h.r .

4870 marked up dod's amended request .

neither the house nor the senate version includes the additional $5.5 billion requested for dod in november 2014 to combat the islamic state by conducting air strikes in syria and iraq and re - instituting training of iraqi security forces .

that request is discussed separately below because the request is for a new military operation with different purposes ( " the new request to counter the islamic state " ) .

one of the more controversial issues in the fy2015 request is the administration's proposal to set up the new counterterrorism partnership fund ( ctpf ) intended to allow dod and other agencies "to respond more nimbly to evolving terrorist threats from south asia to the sahel" by building "partnership capacity. .

dod's ctpf is a $4 billion oco - designated transfer account available for three years .

monies could be spent in any appropriation account , in any geographical location , for a variety of general purposes , and notwithstanding any other provision of law .

the administration argues that this broad flexibility is necessary .

budget justification materials provide nonbinding illustrative funding allocations and congress could only participate in allocation decisions by raising objections after receiving notifications 15 days in advance of transferring funds .

the ctpf has raised congressional concerns because of the amount requested and the flexibility to apply the funds for broadly - defined purposes after enactment , including an illustrative allocation of $500 million to train and equip syrian opposition groups fighting the islamic state ( is ) .

the administration is also requesting funds for a less controversial new european reassurance initiative ( eri ) to help "reassure nato allies and bolster the security and capacity of u.s. partners" and counter recent russian actions in the ukraine for more specific activities such as increasing the number of bilateral and multilateral exercises in europe , building partner capacity with newer eastern european nato members and expanding u.s. presence through additional pre - positioning of u.s. equipment .

the issue for congress is the amount of flexibility to give dod to respond to needs that it cannot define when appropriations are requested .

from the administration's perspective , the trade - off is between flexibility and acting quickly .

from a congressional perspective , the trade - off is between flexibility and congressional oversight .

unlike individual appropriation accounts where funds are used for specific types of purposes and expenses , or specific items , flexible funding generally appropriates a lump sum or sets an overall cap on the amount of money that can be spent and then permits an agency to move the monies to different accounts for different purposes depending on how needs develop .

to assess the ctpf proposal , crs compared it with other flexible funds for war approved by congress since the 9 / 11 attacks .

on november 10 , 2014 , the administration submitted a fy2015 budget amendment of $5.5 billion in oco funds — $5 billion for dod and $520 million for the department of state — to support efforts to combat the islamic state ( is ) after its takeover of territory in iraq and syria .

the november amendment would increase dod's oco request from $58.6 billion to $63.6 billion ( table 13 ) .

several budgetary and policy questions may be raised about the new $5.0 billion budget amendment funding military action against the islamic state: could all or some of the additional $5.0 billion request be accommodated within the original $58.6 billion request since there are indications that dod's june request may be larger than needed ? .

what are the pros and cons of the new train - and - equip authority for iraq , and how might it be modified to narrow its scope and increase congressional oversight ? .

is the cost - sharing arrangement proposed practical ? .

would congress want to include restrictions on the missions of u.s. troops deployed in iraq or in syria ? .

the president's afghanistan withdrawal plan calls for: 9,800 u.s. troops in afghanistan as of january 1 , 2015 ( the end of the first quarter of fy2015 ) to train and assist afghan security forces and conduct counter - terrorism operations ; about 4,900 u.s. troops by january 1 , 2015 , a halving ; and an "embassy" presence of about 1,000 with unspecified counterterrorism forces .

according to recent reports , the administration is considering keeping more u.s. troops in afghanistan at least into the spring of 2014 to make up for shortages in training capacity due to delays in commitments of isaf allies to commit troops .

there may also be pressure to retain troops because of the administration's recent agreement to expand the mission of u.s. forces to include providing air support and sometimes accompanying iraqi ground troops on operations .

at the september 4 , 2014 , wales summit , international security assistance force ( isaf ) , made up of united states and its allies supporting afghanistan , "reaffirmed their commitment" to operation resolute support , the "non - combat train , advise , and assist mission in afghanistan beyond 2014. .

there were no specific funding commitments beyond 2015 .

if the afghan government signed a bilateral security agreement ( bsa ) , isaf agreed to "contribute significantly to the financial sustainment of the ansf [afghan national security force] throughout the decade of transformation. .

on september 30 , 2014 , the united states and afghanistan signed the bilateral security agreement , the day after president ghani succeeded president karzai , who had been unwilling to sign the agreement .

in light of this potential , long - term commitment , and the current presence of over 60,000 u.s. troops in the region , congress may have to face the issue of whether and how much dod funding would be needed in later years and whether those funds should continue to be designated as oco — and exempt from budget limits — or whether paying for a u.s. "enduring presence" mission like the u.s. military in south korea or japan should be carried in the base budget .

post - withdrawal expenses that might or might not be considered "oco" could possibly include the cost of residual u.s. troops in the region or the "enduring presence" ; continued support of the afghan security forces in the next decade ; continued or expanded funding of train - and - equip programs with partner countries ; and reset and reconstitution of equipment , army and marine corps excess strength from the earlier planned force structure expansion , and some intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) programs , as proposed in the fy2015 ctpf request .

in august , 2014 , press reports suggested that dod would soon issue "migration guidance" to the services for the fy2016 budget that would identify areas currently funded as oco that would be folded back into the base budget .

more recently , dod deputy secretary robert work suggested that oco funding should be continued but under stricter rules .

recently , dod comptroller mike mccord suggested that dod is negotiating with omb to retain the oco budget for the next couple of years in order to fund global counterterrorism while dealing with spending limits imposed by the bca .

some observers cite the islamic state ( is ) threat along with russian actions in the ukraine as justifications for continuing oco - designated funding .

although congress did not consider the administration's request for funding above bca caps in dod's fy2015 budget request , some members are calling for lifting sequester caps in later years .

assuming that current bca budget caps are maintained , dod would need to reduce its planned funding for the fy2012-fy2021 decade by $176 billion or 3.3% to meet bca caps .

under these caps , dod's funding would grow from $496 billion in fy2015 to $499 billion in fy2016 , essentially a spending freeze that would not cover inflation .

after that , dod funding is slated to increase by about $12 billion annually under the sequester caps until fy2021 , a "real" freeze that would largely cover inflation .

the migration of some or all oco - designated costs to the base budget would increase budgetary pressures .

in light of the new u.s. operation against the islamic state , as well as some uncertainty about the nature of continued u.s. operations during the last stages of withdrawal from afghanistan , congress has voted on several amendments designed to place limits on military operations .

some concerns have been raised in response to recent press reports , saying that the president is permitting the military to broaden its mission to support afghan security forces after december 2014 from "train and assist" to include air support and airstrikes in support of afghan combat missions and in some circumstances , to accompany afghan forces in ground operations against the taliban .

in drafting such amendments , congress has turned to experience from vietnam , cambodia , and iraq to look for options .

in the past , congress has considered both funding and non - funding options .

most observers would maintain that restrictions tied to appropriations have been more effective .

restrictive funding options generally prohibit the obligation or expenditure of current or previously appropriated funds for certain purposes .

obligations occur when the government pays military or civilian personnel , or the services sign contracts or place orders to buy goods or services .

expenditures , or outlays , take place when payment is provided .

past attempts or provisions to restrict funding have followed several patterns , including those that cut off funding for particular types of military activities but permit funding for other activities ( eg , prohibiting funds for combat activities but permitting funds to withdraw troops ) ; as of a certain date in a specific country ; "at the earliest practical date," which essentially gives the president leeway to set the date ; or if certain conditions are met ( such as a new authorization ) or certain events take place ( such as the release of u.s. prisoners of war ) .

other non - funding approaches to restrict military operations have required that troops be withdrawn by a specified date or at the "earliest practical date" ; withdrawn funds unless there was a declaration of war or a specific congressional authorization of war ; or repealed previous congressional resolutions authorizing military activities .

one or both houses may also state a "sense of the congress," or non - binding resolution that does not need to be signed by the president , that u.s. military operations should be limited , wound down , or ended or forces withdrawn .

while only a handful of provisions have been enacted , congressional consideration of these various limiting provisions did place pressure on the administration at the time , influencing the course of events .

for example , the well - known cooper - church provision that prohibited the introduction of u.s. ground troops into cambodia was enacted in early 1971 after u.s. forces had invaded and then been withdrawn from cambodia .

that provision was intended to prevent the reintroduction of troops .

although president nixon did not reintroduce u.s. troops , the united states continued to bomb cambodia for the next three years .

later in 1973 , congress passed two provisions that prohibited the obligation or expenditures of "any funds in this or any previous law on or after august 15 , 1973" for combat "in or over or from off the shores of north vietnam , south vietnam , laos , or cambodia. .

the final version of that provision reflected negotiations between the administration and congress about when the prohibition would go into effect , with august 15 , 1973 , set in the enacted version .

bombing did , in fact , stop on that day .

several well - known proposals that were not enacted — two mcgovern - hatfield amendments and an earlier cooper - church amendment — were also part of this vietnam - era jockeying between the administration and congress .

one mcgovern - hatfield amendment prohibited expenditure of previously appropriated funds after a specified date "in or over indochina," except for the purpose of withdrawing troops or protecting our indochinese allies , while another also prohibited spending funds to support more than a specified number of troops unless the president notified the congress of the need for a 60-day extension .

the earlier cooper - church amendment prohibited the expenditure of any funds after july 1 , 1970 , to retain troops in cambodia "unless specifically authorized by law hereafter. .

generally , congress continued to provide funds for u.s. troops in vietnam at the requested levels as the nixon administration reduced troop levels .

overall , funding restrictions , it might be said , have generally proven more effective than the war powers act , which has been challenged by the executive branch on constitutional grounds .

during the current congress , the house voted on the following resolutions and amendments that would place limits on military operations in iraq , afghanistan , or syria: h.con.res .

105 prohibits the president from deploying or maintaining u.s. armed forces in a sustained combat role in iraq without specific , subsequent statutory authorization ( passed house july 25 , 2014 ) ; h.amdt .

928 to h.r .

4870 , the fy2015 dod appropriations act , provided that none of the funds in this act may be used to conduct combat operations in afghanistan after december 31 , 2014 ( defeated 153-260 , june 19 , 2014 ) ; h.amdt .

914 to h.r .

4870 stated that "none of the funds made available in this act may be used to provide man - portable air defense systems to syria" ( agreed to by voice vote , june 19 , 2014 ) .

h.amdt .

917 to h.r .

4870 stated that none of the funds in act "may be used to provide weapons in syria" ( defeated 167-244 , june 19 , 2014 ) .

in the 112 th congress , before president obama announced the most recent troop withdrawal plan for afghanistan , amendments were considered to limit funds to withdrawal costs: h.amdt .

1103 to h.r .

4310 , the fy2013national defense authorization act , limited war funding in the act to paying for the safe and orderly withdrawal of u.s. troops and military contractors from afghanistan ( failed 113-303 , may 17 , 2012 ) ; h.amdt .

330 to h.r .

1540 , the fy2012 national defense authorization act required dod to begin a "safe , responsible , and phased withdrawal" of u.s. ground troops except for small , counter - terrorism units ( defeated 123-294 , may 25 , 2011 ) .

during the house debate over the fy2010 supplemental ( h.r .

4899 ) , three amendments were voted on to restrict funding or troop levels for the afghan war , similar to vietnam - era amendments: h.amdt .

3 would have deleted all military funding for the afghan war ( defeated 25-376 ) ; h.amdt .

4 would have limited the obligation and expenditure of funds to the protection and "safe and orderly withdrawal from afghanistan of all members of the armed forces and department of defense contractor personnel who are in afghanistan" ( defeated 100-321 ) ; and h.amdt .

5 would have required the president to submit a plan for a "safe , orderly , and expeditious redeployment of the armed forces from afghanistan," along with a "timetable for the completion of that redeployment and information regarding variables that could alter that timetable," as well as require that none of the funds in the act be obligated or expended "in a manner that is inconsistent with the president's policy announced on december 1 , 2009 , to begin the orderly withdrawal of united states troops from afghanistan after july 1 , 2011," unless the congress approves a joint resolution that would receive expedited consideration in both houses ( defeated 162-260 ) .

appendix a. u.s. troop levels in afghanistan and iraq , fy2001-fy2015 table a - 1 shows monthly u.s. troops deployed in - country in afghanistan and in iraq from january 2002-september 2014 based on reports prepared by the joint staff and provided to congress and crs .

beginning in may 2008 , dod began to include the total number of u.s. troops deployed not only in - country but also in the surrounding area to provide in - theater support , as well as those conducting other counterterror operations .

appendix b. omb criteria for war costs in february 2009 , at the beginning of the obama administration , omb issued new budget guidance to dod providing criteria for expenses to be considered as appropriate for war funding .

revised in september 2010 to clarify the distinctions , the letter states that the criteria "for deciding whether funding properly belongs in the base budget or in the budget for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) ... have been very successful in delineating between these two sources of funding," according to omb ( see below ) .

appendix c. war appropriations by public law and agency the table below shows enacted appropriations by act from fy2001-fy2014 .

appendix d. war funding by function , fy2009-fy2015 since fy2009 , dod has provided a functional breakdown of war costs , which helps to compare changes in troop levels and changes in war costs .

the categories range from operational costs to coalition support .

table d - 1 combines these elements into three major categories: operational , including operations , force protection , in - theater support , military intelligence , and military construction , largely reflecting troop levels ; i nvestment , including reset or reconstitution that pays for repairing and replacing war - worn equipment reflecting the extent and pace of operations as well as changing definitions of war costs ; p rogrammatic support , covering training of afghan and iraq security forces , coalition support , and other supporting activities not necessarily related to changes in troop strength .

o ther costs , including national intelligence and activities with little , if any , relationship to war operations .

operational costs and troop levels while overall costs may not rise or fall with troop levels , operational costs would be expected to change roughly proportionately .

in the case of iraq , both overall and operational costs fell by about 90% , in line with troop strength .

as troop strength fell from 140,000 in fy2009 to 9,180 in fy2012 , overall funding fell from $89.1 billion in fy2009 to $9.6 billion in fy2012 when all u.s. troops were out of iraq ( table d - 1 ) .

in the case of the afghan drawdown , neither overall nor operational costs have fallen proportionately since the fy2011 peak in strength .

as of the fy2015 request , average strength is slated to fall by 88% and total cost by 56% since that peak .

while operational costs would fall slightly faster , by 62% , the decline lags decreases in troop strength .

dod has suggested that operational costs remain high because of the need to dismantle bases and dispose of equipment as troop levels fall as would also have been the case in iraq .

one source of the disparity between afghanistan and iraq may be the $18 billion cost for over 60,000 u.s. troops currently providing in - theater support .

while the number of in - theater support troops declined as u.s. troops left iraq , some troops in neighboring countries like kuwait remained and their cost was allocated to oef ( figure 2 ) .

in fy2015 , dod projects an increase in these support troop levels to 63,000 .

the persistence of these support troops raises the question of whether the cost of these troops is more appropriately considered an "enduring" cost that could transition into dod's base budget .

reset — repair or replacing war - worn equipment — costs in afghanistan are projected to remain high during the withdrawal , increasing from $8.4 billion in fy2014 to 9.2 billion in fy2015 , unlike the iraq experience when these costs fell rapidly from $8.9 billion in fy2011 to $1.6 billion in fy2012 ( table d - 1 ) .

while dod may argue that more equipment may have accumulated in afghanistan over the past 13 years of war , these high levels of funding for reset could also reflect "forward financing," or providing funds before the work can be executed by the depots .

based on army budget repair plans — and the bulk of equipment returned from afghanistan goes to army depots — the amount of orders estimated to carry over from one fiscal year to the next is expected to be $3.5 billion in fy2014 and $2.9 billion in fy2015 .

both these levels exceed dod criteria for appropriate carryover levels .

in the past , congress has reduced funding when carryover levels are high , questioning whether plans can be executed .

as would be expected , operational costs make up the bulk of war costs in both the afghan and iraq war , generally an average of 65% in afghanistan and over 70% in iraq .

the share for reset in iraq rose as equipment was more heavily used and as the definition of war expense broadened , and then decreased as the definition narrowed and equipment was used less heavily as the u.s. mission shifted to "train and assist," and the number of troops fell .

the fy2015 request for afghanistan does not follow this pattern .

programmatic costs cover a wide range of tools that support troop operations indirectly and so do not necessarily reflect the pace of war operations .

the largest amounts for the training of afghan and iraq security forces reflect both policy decisions about the size of the afghan and iraq armies and police , as well as the u.s. commitment to equipping and training those forces .

other tools , like coalition support to reimburse primarily pakistan for its logistical costs of conducting counterterror operations that support the united states , have been funded between $1.0 billion and $2.0 billion over the years .

a local tool , the commanders' emergency response fund ( cerp ) , is intended to help u.s. commanding officers win the support of local populations by providing funds for local development projects , and generally reflects the pace of operations and troop levels .

funds to research and buy new systems to defeat improvised explosive devices or land mines grew as it became clear that this was the weapon of choice for insurgents .

