on december 20 , 2006 , the tax relief and health care act of 2006 was signed into law ( p.l .

109-432 ) , continuing funding for the abstinence - only education block grant ( at an annual $50 million rate ) and program authority for transitional medical assistance ( tma ) through june 30 , 2007 .

earlier , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 , s. 1932 ) , a budget spending reconciliation bill signed into law february 8 , 2006 , included a scaled - back version of welfare reform reauthorization .

the act extended funding for the basic temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant through fy2010 , increased the percentage of tanf families who will be required to participate in work or work activities , increased funding for child care , revised the child support enforcement program , and established healthy marriage promotion grants and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

the 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , p.l .

104-193 ) was a major piece of social legislation , most known for ending the cash welfare entitlement for needy families with children , creating the tanf block grant , setting a five - year time limit on aid , and requiring more work from welfare recipients .

the law also restructured child care programs , combining programs for cash assistance recipients and other working poor families ; modified the child support enforcement ( cse ) program ; restricted eligibility for noncitizens in various welfare programs ; restricted eligibility for disabled children in the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program ; and made changes to the food stamp program .

the goals of welfare reform include reducing welfare dependency through work , job preparation and marriage ; reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and promoting the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

tanf gives states a great deal of latitude in designing their programs , resulting in each state having a different program with a different story to tell .

in their tanf - funded cash welfare programs , many states tightened work rules , requiring applicants to search for work even before being certified eligible for aid .

most states adopted tougher penalties on families where a member refused to comply with work requirements .

however , states also adopted features that liberalized eligibility , particularly for families where recipients went to work once on the rolls .

for example , in most states families are allowed to keep more of their welfare benefits as their earnings increase , have a car , and accumulate more assets .

spending on child care has increased .

table 1 shows various social and economic indicators for the post - welfare reform period .

the period following welfare reform saw the cash welfare caseload plummet and child poverty rates drop to levels not seen since the 1970s .

employment of single mothers increased dramatically .

progress was more muted , or could be less tied to changes in policy , on a number of other fronts .

the rate at which teenagers gave birth declined , but that was a continuation of a trend that became evident before the mid - 1990s .

the percent of children born out of wedlock continued to increase , though at a rate slower than during previous periods .

further , much of the progress occurred during the period 1995 to 2000 .

in 2001 , the economy entered a recession .

national caseloads remained steady for the 2001-2004 period ( they had begun to decline again in 2005 , which is not shown in the table ) .

employment ( in 2004 ) of single mothers is down from its historical high in 2000 , although is still higher than its 1995 level .

the number of children living in families headed by a married couple decreased slightly from 2000 to 2003 .

child poverty rates increased again from 2000 to 2004 .

welfare dependency has been viewed as both a result of and a cause of chronic poverty .

welfare caseloads and child poverty simultaneously declined during the late 1990s .

however , the welfare caseload declined faster than child poverty , meaning that cash welfare touches a smaller share of the poor than it did before welfare reform .

further , despite the decline in welfare dependency , children are still more likely to be poor than the elderly and nonaged adults , and out - of - wedlock births and single parenthood remain at historical highs despite the halving of the cash welfare caseload .

the original funding authority for tanf , mandatory child care , and state grants for abstinence education provided in the 1996 welfare law expired at the end of fy2002 ( september 30 , 2002 ) .

president bush submitted his welfare reauthorization proposals to congress in february 2002 .

though congress debated welfare legislation throughout the three years 2002 through 2004 , no final action was taken on a long - term reauthorization during the 107 th and 108 th congresses .

while reauthorization legislation remained stalled , congress passed measures to provide stop - gap funding for the welfare programs , and such was the case through 2005 .

as in previous years , efforts to pass comprehensive free - standing welfare legislation in the first session of the 109 th congress were unsuccessful .

however , a scaled - back version of welfare reauthorization legislation was ultimately included in broader budget spending reconciliation legislation , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) .

in crafting the dra ( s. 1932 / p.l .

109-171 ) , only one of the chambers initially included welfare reauthorization provisions in reconciliation legislation .

the senate - passed version of s. 1932 contained no welfare - related provisions prior to conference .

the house , on the other hand , adopted as part of its initial budget reconciliation bill select reauthorization proposals that had been approved earlier by the ways and means human resources subcommittee and the education and workforce committee as part of h.r .

240 , a welfare bill .

although the full senate had failed to act on welfare reauthorization legislation prior to assembling and considering the dra , early in the 109 th congress , the senate finance committee did approve a welfare reauthorization measure ( s. 667 ) .

the 1996 welfare law converted and consolidated several federal - state matching grant programs into the tanf and child care block grants .

most tanf funding is provided in a fixed , basic annual grant of $16.5 billion ( 50 states and d.c ) .

this amount represents the peak federal contribution made to pre - tanf programs in the mid - 1990s .

the basic block grant is fixed ; it neither increases nor decreases with changes in the cash assistance caseload .

moreover , it is not adjusted for inflation .

the child care block grant has two major parts: ( 1 ) discretionary funding , which is determined in annual appropriations ; and ( 2 ) mandatory funding , with appropriations found in the 1996 welfare reform law .

the 1996 law included gradual increases in mandatory child care funding .

total child care funding has been essentially flat since fy2002 .

table 2 compares the tanf , child care , and transitional medicaid funding provisions included in the deficit reduction act of 2005 with the house - passed reconciliation measure , and s. 667 as reported from the senate finance committee .

as mentioned earlier , the senate did not include comparable provisions in its reconciliation measure prior to conference , nor did it pass a free - standing welfare bill earlier in the session .

note that while the basic tanf block grant is extended and maintained at the annual amount of $16.5 billion until fy2010 under the dra ( p.l .

109-171 ) , tanf supplemental grants are extended for only three years .

further , previous welfare reauthorization proposals had included $200 million per year in grants for healthy marriage promotion — $100 million per year for matching grants to states and tribes and a second $100 million per year in research and demonstration funding controlled by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the deficit reduction act scales back funding for healthy marriage promotion to $100 million in research and demonstration funding .

an additional $50 million in mandatory funding is for responsible fatherhood initiatives .

all existing tanf bonuses — a high performance bonus based on states' progress toward meeting the block grant's goals ( $200 million per year ) and a bonus for reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies ( $100 million per year ) — are eliminated .

the level of mandatory child care funding has been a contentious point of debate over the past four years .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that to maintain the current level of child care subsidies over the five years covered by the dra — that is , to maintain current child care caseloads and average subsidy levels and keep pace with inflation — a total of $4.8 billion in extra federal or state funds would be needed .

the current child care caseload includes families on the cash welfare rolls , as well as other low - income working families .

in fy2001 , only one in five families aided by the child care block grant received tanf cash assistance — the other four families were either former tanf families ( in the transition from welfare to work ) or were working poor families without a connection to the cash welfare program .

the deficit reduction act includes an increase of $200 million per year ( from $2.717 billion to $2.917 billion per year ) in federal mandatory child care funding , or a total increase of $1 billion over five years .

the increase reflects twice that proposed earlier in the house - passed budget reconciliation bill ( $0.5 billion ) , mirroring the funding level passed by the house in welfare reauthorization measures of both 2002 and 2003 .

the $1 billion increase stands in contrast to the proposed increase of $6 billion over five years included in the bill reported out of the senate finance committee early in 2005 ( s. 667 ) .

the deficit reduction act's $1 billion in additional federal child care funds requires state matching .

this "leverages" some additional state dollars for each new federal child care dollar .

if states draw down the full $1 billion , approximately $0.8 billion in state child care funds will also be expended , bringing the total new federal and state spending for the child care block grant to about $1.8 billion .

however , the $1.8 billion in total new federal and state child care funds is estimated to be insufficient to maintain current caseloads and average child care subsidies , and to keep pace with inflation as projected by the cbo .

in addition , the deficit reduction act has tanf work provisions ( see below ) that , beginning in fy2007 , are likely to substantially increase the share of tanf families that will be required to work or participate in job readiness activities .

this , too , is likely to increase the demand for child care subsidies .

the child care and tanf block grants do not entitle families to child care subsidies .

therefore , states could respond in a number of different ways ( or combination of ways ) to inflationary pressures and the likely increase in the demand for child care subsidies caused by stricter tanf work participation requirements: increase funding from other sources , particularly tanf .

tanf has been a major contributor of child care funds , the second - largest spending category next to cash assistance within tanf .

states could allocate more tanf spending to child care .

however , a number of factors are likely to limit tanf's ability to contribute more child care funds , specifically: ( 1 ) the block grant will remain frozen at the same levels as it was in fy1997 ( $16.5 billion ) and inflation continues to erode the purchasing power of those dollars ; ( 2 ) the dra will have the likely effect of increasing the percentage of tanf families that will have to participate in work activities , increasing the tanf work costs in addition to child care costs ; and ( 3 ) allocating additional funding to child care would mean cutting back on other initiatives that have been funded with tanf dollars , for instance tanf's contribution to funding child welfare benefits and services for children who have been subject to , or are at risk of , abuse , neglect , or family breakup .

target more child care dollars to families receiving cash assistance .

as discussed above , in fy2001 only one in five families receiving subsidies under the child care block grant received cash assistance .

to meet the higher child care costs due to the increase in tanf work participation standards , states could target more child care dollars to families on tanf assistance , reducing spending on subsidies for other low - income ( "working poor" ) families .

restructure child care subsidies to reduce their average costs .

under both block grants , states determine subsidy levels and how much a family has to contribute from their own income ( co - payments ) .

these rules can be restructured to reduce the average child care subsidy per family .

tanf requires states to run "mandatory" work and job preparation programs , setting participation requirements and sanctioning families ( reducing or ending benefits ) that do not comply with them .

mandatory participation requirements can help achieve a number of different policy objectives , including the following: enforcing the notion that recipients are obligated to support their families through work ; that is , they must "do something" in exchange for their benefits ; having recipients engage in activities that will enhance their ability to compete in the labor market and ultimately leave welfare for work ; and deterring those who have other means of support ( eg , those already working but not reporting income to the welfare office or participating in the underground economy ) from applying and receiving benefits .

most states have generally adopted a "work - first" approach to implementing their programs , emphasizing rapid entry into the labor force through up - front job search .

evaluations of such programs indicate that they do increase employment and reduce welfare receipt .

however , these programs have generally not been found to raise the incomes of participants .

further , tanf data show that participation in activities is not universal .

in fy2004 , states reported that of about 1.4 million adult recipients of cash assistance , 57% were not working or in a job preparation activity for a month .

 ( note that these adults are not reported in an activity .

states may underreport activity that is not countable toward tanf work participation standards. ) .

in 2004 , children in families headed by a single mother had a poverty rate of 41.9% , compared with a rate of 8.9% for children in families headed by a married couple .

the majority of poor children ( in 2004 , 57.2% of all poor children in families ) live in families headed by a single mother .

welfare - to - work initiatives have focused on getting such single mothers into the workforce .

while there has been a sharp increase in work among single mothers , many single mothers and their children remain poor .

the fifth annual tanf report states " welfare reform has been very successful at getting a significant portion of cases into the workplace and into second and sometimes third jobs , but it has been less effective in keeping them employed full - time and in achieving substantial wage or career growth . .

the sixth annual tanf report indicates that in fy2002 the average monthly earnings of tanf recipients who were employed was $678 or $8,136 per year ( the poverty level for a three - person family in 2002 was $1,196 per month or $14,348 for the year ) .

child support payments are now recognized as a very significant income source for single - parent families .

increasingly , attention has focused on the role of the noncustodial parent , usually the father , in the economic support and development of his children .

research has shown that low - income fathers tend to face some of the same issues as do low - income mothers , such as being very likely to work intermittently and / or in low - wage jobs , thereby limiting their ability to help support their children .

these findings , together with a growing sentiment that noncustodial fathers are more likely to be "dead broke" than "deadbeats," have fostered a more sympathetic view of noncustodial fathers .

beginning in 1996 , congress has considered bills that would specifically authorize funding for programs designed to help noncustodial fathers meet both their financial and emotional responsibilities to their children ( also including components related to marriage promotion and effective parenting ) .

these programs are generally referred to as "responsible fatherhood" programs .

in recognition of the often negative , long - term consequences associated with teenage pregnancy , congress has provided funding for the prevention of teenage and out - of - wedlock pregnancies .

reducing nonmarital pregnancy , especially among teenagers , was an important focus of the 1996 welfare law .

in recent years , funding has shifted toward abstinence education rather than comprehensive sexual education as the preferred way to reduce teenage pregnancy .

the 109 th congress continued the debate on which approach is more effective .

the goals of welfare reform include reducing welfare dependency through work , job preparation and marriage ; reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and promoting the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

although the 1996 welfare reform law did reflect a new interest in marriage for welfare families , most of the policy changes implemented after the 1996 law focused almost exclusively on encouraging work and did not directly address the marriage goals .

the deficit reduction act specifically includes funding for programs exclusively designed to promote marriage among low - income persons , which is seen by its supporters as a way to improve the economic well - being and development of children .

blank , rebecca , and ron haskins .

the new world of welfare .

brookings institution press , 2001 .

deparle , jason .

american dream: three women , ten kids , and a nation ' s drive to end welfare .

viking press , 2004 .

duncan , greg j. , and jeanne brooks - gunn , ed .

consequences of growing up poor .

russell sage foundation , 1997 .

crs report rl32817 , child care issues in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22380 , child support enforcement: program basics , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22377 , child support provisions in the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32682 , children in poverty: profile , trends , and issues , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31025 , fatherhood initiatives: connecting fathers to their children , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31698 , transitional medical assistance ( tma ) under medicaid , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30797 , trends in welfare , work , and the economic well - being of female - headed families with children: 1987-2007 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33157 , welfare reauthorization: a side - by - side comparison of current law and pending welfare reauthorization proposals , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

mclanahan , sara , and gary sandefur .

growing up with a single parent: what hurts , what helps .

harvard university press , 1994 .

u.s. department of health and human services .

final synthesis reporting of findings from aspe ' s " leavers " grants , 2001 , at http: / / www.urban.org / uploadedpdf / 410809_welfare_leavers_synthesis.pdf .

u.s. department of health and human services and department of education .

national evaluation of welfare - to - work strategies: how effective are different welfare - to - work approaches ? .

five - year adult and child impacts for eleven programs , 2001 , at http: / / aspe.hhs.gov / hsp / newws / 5yr - 11prog01 / .

united states government accountability office .

gao - 06-414 .

better information needed to understand trends in states ' uses of the tanf block grant .

march , 2006 — gao - 05-821 .

welfare reform: hhs should exercise oversight to help ensure tanf work participation is measured consistently across states .

august 2005 .

