prior to the 1960s , little formal consideration was given to the potential impact of human activity on the environment .

beginning in the late 1950s and into the 1960s , the public became increasingly aware of and concerned about those impacts .

during that time , members of congress debated the need for a national policy on the environment and for an executive - level council or committee that could provide advice to the president on environmental policy issues .

the statute that ultimately addressed these needs was the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321-4347 ) .

signed into law by president nixon on january 1 , 1970 , nepa was the first of several major environmental laws passed in the 1970s .

it declared a national policy to protect the environment .

to implement its policy , nepa requires federal agencies to provide a detailed statement of environmental impacts , subsequently referred to as an environmental impact statement ( eis ) , for every recommendation or report on proposals for legislation and other major federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment .

the act also created the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) in the executive office of the president .

among other duties , ceq provides oversight of nepa's implementation .

in 1978 , ceq was authorized by executive order to issue regulations applicable to all federal agencies regarding the preparation of eiss .

however , ceq was not authorized to enforce those regulations .

as it was subsequently interpreted , nepa is a procedural statute with two primary aims .

first , it obligates federal agencies to consider every significant aspect of the environmental impact of an action before proceeding with it .

second , it ensures that the agency responsible for the action will inform the public what the action is and that it has considered environmental concerns in its decision - making process .

in this capacity , nepa has become one of the primary mechanisms through which the public is able to participate in the federal decision - making process .

as a procedural statute , nepa does not require agencies to elevate environmental concerns above others .

instead , nepa requires only that the agency assess the environmental consequences of an action and its alternatives before proceeding .

if the adverse environmental effects of the proposed action are adequately identified and evaluated , the agency is not constrained by nepa from deciding that other benefits outweigh the environmental costs and moving forward with the action .

most agencies use nepa as an umbrella statute — that is , a framework to coordinate or demonstrate compliance with any studies , reviews , or consultations required by any other environmental laws .

the use of nepa in this capacity can lead to confusion .

the need to comply with another environmental law , such as the clean water act or endangered species act , may be identified within the framework of the nepa process , but nepa itself is not the source of the obligation .

theoretically , if the requirement to comply with nepa were removed , compliance with each applicable law would still be required .

unlike other environment - related statutes , no individual agency has enforcement authority with regard to nepa's environmental review requirements .

this absence of enforcement authority is sometimes cited as the reason that litigation has been chosen as an avenue by individuals and groups that disagree with how an agency meets nepa's mandate or eis requirements for a given project .

 ( for example , a group may charge that an eis is inadequate or that the environmental impacts of an action will in fact be significant when an agency claims they are not ) .

critics of nepa charge that those who disapprove of a federal project will use nepa as the basis for litigation to delay or halt that project .

others argue that litigation only results when agencies do not comply with nepa's procedural requirements .

environmental groups often refer to nepa as the "magna carta" of environmental law .

they view it as an essential tool to help agencies plan and manage federal actions in a responsible way by requiring policymakers and project sponsors to consider the environmental implications of their actions before decisions are made .

environmental groups also view the nepa process as an important mechanism in providing the public with an opportunity to be involved in agency planning efforts .

critics charge that the law creates a complicated array of regulations and logistical delays that stall agency action .

this report provides information about nepa's background and legislative history , provisions of the law , the role of the courts and ceq in its implementation , how agencies implement nepa's requirements , how the public is involved in the nepa process , the means by which nepa is used as an umbrella statute to coordinate or demonstrate compliance with other environmental requirements , and claims by some stakeholders that nepa causes delays in some federal actions .

 ( for a legally oriented overview of nepa requirements , see crs report rs20621 , overview of national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requirements , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in the 1950s and 1960s , congress began to react to increasing public concern about the environment .

in the congressional debates that ensued , a key legislative option considered was the declaration of a national environmental policy .

such a policy would require all federal agencies , whose actions were often seen as significant sources of pollution , to adhere to certain environmental values and goals .

advocates of a national policy argued that without a specific environmental policy , federal agencies were neither able nor inclined to consider the environmental impacts of their actions in fulfilling the agency's mission .

debate also existed regarding the creation of an executive - level board or council that would gather information regarding the state of the environment and provide environmental policy advice to the president .

nepa is a declaration of policy with action - forcing provisions , not a regulatory statute comparable to other environmental laws intended to protect air , water , wetlands , or endangered species .

it establishes the basic framework for integrating environmental considerations into federal decision making .

however , the law itself does not provide details on how this process should be accomplished .

with an initial absence of regulations specifying implementation procedures and no agency authorized to enforce its requirements , federal agencies have reacted in different ways to nepa's requirements .

some initially had difficulty complying with nepa .

others believed that they were not required to comply with nepa's provisions at all .

as a result , litigation to enforce agency compliance with nepa's mandate began almost immediately .

in addition to questions of procedure ( eg , how , when , or why an eis must be prepared ) , another question ultimately to be determined was how the environmental policy goals of the act should be implemented or enforced .

the courts and ceq played significant roles in determining how those questions were answered and , consequently , how nepa was ultimately implemented .

under nepa , an environmental impact statement must be prepared for "every recommendation or report on proposals for legislation and other major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. .

interpretation of each element of this phrase has been the subject of myriad court decisions and guidance from ceq .

two terms of particular relevance are "federal action" and "significantly. .

in determining whether and how nepa will apply to an action , it is necessary to determine whether an action is in fact a federal one and , if so , whether its environmental impacts will be significant .

the nepa process includes the steps a federal agency must take to document that consideration was given to determine the significance of a proposed action's environmental impacts .

for some actions , it may not be readily apparent that environmental impacts will be significant .

some projects clearly have little or no significant impact , but they still require an agency to demonstrate that the level of impacts was considered .

to account for this variability , ceq regulations establish the following three classes of action , which determine how compliance with nepa analysis is documented: actions requiring an eis — when it is known that the action will have a significant environmental impact .

actions requiring an environmental assessment ( ea ) — when the significance of environmental impacts is uncertain and must be determined .

actions that are categorically excluded — those which normally do not individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment .

the requirement to produce an eis is probably the most familiar element of nepa compliance .

however , actions requiring an eis account for a small percentage of all federal actions proposed in a given year .

for example , in 2008 , 543 eiss were filed with epa ( this total includes draft , final , and supplemental eiss ) .

ceq estimates that the vast majority of federal actions require an ea or are categorically excluded from the requirement to prepare an ea or eis .

determining the total number of federal actions subject to nepa is difficult , as most agencies track only the number of actions requiring an eis .

also , as indicated in the figures above , agencies track the total draft , final , and supplemental eiss filed in a given year , not the total number of individual federal actions requiring an eis in a given year .

one agency that does track all projects is dot's federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

according to fhwa , in 2007 , approximately 4% of all highway projects required an eis , 4% required an ea , and almost 92% were classified as categorically excluded .

although projects requiring an eis or ea represent a relatively low percentage of all projects , those projects represented a comparatively large percentage of total fhwa funding .

for example , while projects requiring an eis or ea represented 8% of the total number of projects , they accounted for almost 23% of the funds allocated by fhwa in 2007 .

projects classified as categorical exclusions accounted for almost 77% of fhwa funds .

federal actions to which nepa applies involve the participation of a "lead agency" and "cooperating agencies. .

as stated previously , the lead agency is the federal agency that takes responsibility for preparing the nepa documentation .

state or local agencies may act , with the federal lead agency , as joint lead agencies .

the project applicant may initially develop substantive portions of the environmental document ; however , the lead agency is responsible for its scope and overall content .

a cooperating agency is any federal agency , other than a lead agency , that has jurisdiction by law or special expertise regarding any environmental impact involved in a proposal .

a tribal , state , or local agency may also be a cooperating agency .

table 4 lists selected statutes that may apply to a given federal action and the corresponding agency that could subsequently be required to participate in the nepa process .

as the law has been interpreted , one of the primary goals of nepa is to give the public a meaningful opportunity to learn about and comment on the proposed actions of the federal government before decisions are made and actions are taken .

to meet this goal , ceq's regulations require agencies to encourage and facilitate public involvement in decisions that significantly affect the quality of the human environment ( i.e. , projects that require an eis ) .

specifically , agencies are required to provide public notice of nepa - related hearings , public meetings , and the availability of environmental documents so as to inform public stakeholders that may be interested in or affected by a proposed action .

documentation related to the public's participation in the nepa process ( eg , public comments or hearings transcripts ) must be included in the final eis .

as mentioned above , the lead agency must seek and respond to public comments .

public stakeholders likely to comment on federal actions will vary according to the action .

they may include individuals or groups expected to benefit from or be adversely affected by the project , or special interest groups with concerns about the project's environmental impacts .

for example , a road - widening project may have an impact on adjacent homes or businesses .

such a project may elicit comments from the local business community ( eg , individual businesses , the chamber of commerce , or local development organizations ) and area home owners .

a project with impacts on sensitive environmental resources , such as wetlands or endangered species , may generate comments from environmental interest groups .

if stakeholders have concerns about a project's impacts , their comments may be directed at virtually any element of that project , the nepa process , or related documentation .

if stakeholder comments are not addressed sufficiently , stakeholders may respond by filing suit .

to avoid conflict after a project has reached an advanced stage of development , ceq recommends that continuous contact with nonagency stakeholders be maintained throughout the decision - making process — from the earliest project planning stages to the selection of a particular alternative , including the intervening stages to define purpose and need and to develop a range of potential alternatives .

the need for such contact was illustrated in a 1997 ceq study .

study results found that one element of the nepa process critical to effective and efficient implementation was "the extent to which an agency takes into account the views of the surrounding community and other interested members of the public during its planning and decisionmaking process. .

ceq regulations specify public involvement requirements only for federal actions requiring an eis .

agencies may devise their own policy regarding public involvement in the preparation of an ea or in making a categorical exclusion determination .

 ( for more information , see crs report rl32436 , public participation in the management of forest service and bureau of land management lands: overview and recent changes , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . ) .

large , complex actions , such as bridge and highway construction , mining operations , or oil and gas development on public lands , may require compliance with literally dozens of federal , state , tribal , and local laws .

depending on the resources present at a project site , compliance with various categories of legal requirements may apply to a given federal action , as illustrated in table 5 .

to integrate the compliance process and avoid duplication of effort , nepa regulations specify that , to the fullest extent possible , agencies must prepare the eis concurrently with any environmental requirements .

the eis must list any federal permits , licenses , and other entitlements required to implement the proposed project .

in this capacity , nepa functions as an "umbrella" statute ; any study , review , or consultation required by any other law that is related to the environment should be conducted within the framework of the nepa process .

nepa forms the framework to coordinate and demonstrate compliance with these requirements .

nepa itself does not require compliance with them .

theoretically , if the requirement to comply with nepa were removed , compliance with each applicable law would still be required .

the use of nepa as an umbrella statute can lead to confusion in this regard .

for example , consider a project alternative that requires compliance with the endangered species act ( esa ) .

one required element of the eis may include a demonstration that , among other potential requirements , a biological assessment be prepared in compliance with the esa .

the requirement to comply with the esa , including the involvement of the appropriate agency with jurisdiction over compliance , would simply be identified within the framework of the nepa process , not required by nepa .

stakeholders such as state and local project sponsors and industry representatives with an interest in the implementation of a federal action sometimes charge that nepa implementation is inefficient and overly time - consuming , leading to what they perceive as unnecessary delays in needed government actions .

some agency representatives feel that the nepa process , when implemented as required by the ceq regulations , actually facilitates a more efficiently executed project .

environmental organizations look at the nepa process as a necessary step in ensuring that the public gets a voice in the federal decision - making process and that expediting that process is not necessarily in the best interest of the public or the environment .

further , they argue that blaming the environmental compliance process for project delays is misplaced .

one argument is that federal projects may be delayed because resource agencies , required by law to participate in the compliance process , are overburdened and not sufficiently funded , staffed , or equipped to meet the demand .

nepa is a procedural statute that , along with ceq and individual agencies' regulations , specifies procedures that must be followed in the federal decision - making process .

it imposes no requirement other than to require agencies to consider the environmental impacts of their actions before proceeding with them and to involve the public in that process .

it does not dictate what the decision must be .

more specifically , it does not require the agency to select the least environmentally harmful alternative or to elevate environmental concerns above others .

the role the courts have played in nepa's implementation is arguably more pronounced compared to many other environmental laws because of several unique factors .

these include the initial lack of binding regulations applicable to the eis preparation process , the absence of an agency authorized to enforce its requirements , and nepa's requirement to involve the public in the decision - making process .

with regard to the latter , when members of the public oppose a project or feel that their opinions are not given sufficient weight , their involvement may result in turning to the courts to halt the project until their concerns are addressed .

during the past 35 years , interested stakeholders have challenged the adequacy of nepa documentation and agency compliance with nepa in court and , in some instances , used nepa litigation to try to halt or slow projects to which they were opposed .

as a result , the progress of some federal projects was slowed .

however , particularly in the past 10-15 years , the number of projects affected by nepa - related litigation is very small .

also , unlike other environmental laws , nepa itself cannot stop a project altogether .

this does not mean that , during the course of a nepa - related lawsuit , an agency may not decide to abandon a given project or project alternative .

as a policy statute , nepa supplements other statutes .

consequently , agencies often are required to comply with provisions of other state , tribal , and federal environmental requirements before they can proceed with a given action .

this requirement can lead to confusion when procedures to comply with other laws are integrated with nepa compliance , and it can give the impression that nepa alone is responsible for the time it takes to obtain the appropriate authorization or approval for a federal project .

although stakeholders disagree about the extent to which nepa currently halts or delays federal actions , few disagree that agencies can improve their methods of nepa compliance .

many elements of recent legislative proposals intended to streamline nepa compliance already exist in ceq's regulations .

those include integrating nepa early in the planning process , integrating nepa requirements with other environmental requirements , eliminating duplication with state and local procedures , swiftly addressing disputes with other agencies , and establishing appropriate time limits on the eis process .

debate is likely to continue with regard to if or to what degree further streamlining may be accomplished .

bear , dinah .

"nepa at 19: a primer on an 'old' law with solutions to new problems," 19 environmental law reporter 10060 , february 1989 .

caldwell , lynton .

the national environmental policy act: an agenda for the future .

bloomington , in: indiana university press , 1998 .

council on environmental quality .

"forty most asked questions concerning ceq's national environmental policy act regulations," 46 federal register 18026 , march 23 , 1981 .

council on environmental quality .

"memorandum for general counsels , nepa liaisons and participants in scoping," april 20 , 1981 .

council on environmental quality .

"the national environmental policy act: a study of its effectiveness after twenty - five years," january 1997 .

council on environmental quality's nepa task force .

"report to the council on environmental quality: modernizing nepa implementation," september 2003 .

smythe , robert and isber , caroline .

"nepa in the agencies: 2002 , a report to the natural resources council of america," october 2002 .

