on february 15 , 2007 , the president signed into law the revised continuing appropriations resolution , 2007 ( h.j.res .

20 , p.l .

110-5 ) .

p.l .

110-5 , among other things , funded several agencies including the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

the revised continuing appropriations resolution provides $32.7 billion for the veterans health administration ( vha ) for fy2007 , a $14.7 million increase over the president's request and $3.3 billion above the fy2006 enacted amount ( see table 1 ) .

this amount includes $25.5 billion for medical services , $3.2 billion for medical administration , $3.6 billion for medical facilities , and $413.7 million for medical and prosthetic research .

these amounts are the same as the president's request except for the medical and prosthetic research account , which is $14.7 million above the president's request ( see table 5 ) .

the revised continuing appropriations resolution does not include any provisions that would give va the authority to implement fee increases as requested by the administration's budget proposal for vha for fy2007 .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules , including disability compensation and pensions , education , training and rehabilitation services , hospital and medical care , home lone guarantees , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

va carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible , among other things , for providing compensations , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries , providing grants to states for establishing , expanding or improving state veterans cemeteries , and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

va's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , vocational rehabilitation , and life insurance , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services , including medical care .

in fy2006 , discretionary budget authority accounted for about 48% of the total va budget authority , with most of this discretionary funding going toward supporting va health care .

vha operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system .

va's health care system is organized into 21 geographically defined veterans integrated service networks ( visns ) .

while policies and guidelines are developed at va headquarters to be applied throughout the va health care system , management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the visns .

congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the visns based on the veterans equitable resource allocation ( vera ) system , which generally bases funding on patient workload .

prior to the implementation of the vera system , resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures .

unlike other federally funded health insurance programs , such as medicare and medicaid , which finance medical care provided through the private sector , vha provides care directly to veterans .

in fy2005 , vha operated 156 hospitals , 135 nursing homes , 43 residential rehabilitation treatment centers , and 711 community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) .

vha also pays for care provided to veterans by independent providers and practitioners on a fee basis under certain circumstances .

inpatient and outpatient care is provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the civilian health and medical program of the department of veterans affairs ( champva ) .

in addition , vha provides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities , and collaborates with dod in sharing health care resources and services .

during fy2005 , vha provided medical care to about 4.9 million unique veteran patients , a caseload that is estimated to increase by about 108,000 , or 2.2% in fy2006 ( see table 3 ) .

according to vha estimates , the number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 45,000 in fy2007 .

as shown in table 3 , there would be a 3.6% increase in the total number of unique patients ( both veterans and non - veterans ) , from 5.3 million in fy2005 to 5.5 million in fy2007 .

the total number of outpatient visits reached 52.3 million during fy2005 and is projected to increase to 55.5 million in fy2006 and 58.5 million in fy2007 .

in fy2005 , vha spent approximately 61.7% of its medical care obligations on outpatient care .

since 1946 , vha has been associated with training physicians and other health care professionals and has become an essential component of health care higher education in the united states .

veterans' health care facilities are affiliated with 107 of the nation's 126 medical schools , and participate in graduate medical education ( gme ) through integrated residency programs administered through medical schools and academic health centers .

vha is also affiliated with over 1,200 other schools offering students allied and associated education degrees and certificates in 40 health profession disciplines .

in fy2005 , about 31,000 physician residents and fellows — 17,000 medical students , 24,000 nursing students , and 18,000 allied health residents and fellows — received some or all of their training in va medical centers .

the rest of this report tracks vha's fy2007 appropriations and provides a brief summary of funding levels for vha for fy2006 , including a discussion on supplemental appropriations for fy2005 and fy2006 .

it also discusses the administration's budget proposal for fy2007 , and the final enacted amounts for fy2007 .

the report begins with a brief overview of eligibility for va health care , vha's enrollment process , and its enrollment priority groups .

to understand va's medical care appropriations and the administration's major policy proposals discussed later in this report , it is important to understand eligibility for va health care , va's enrollment process , and its enrollment priority groups .

unlike medicare or medicaid , va health care is not a entitlement program .

contrary to numerous claims made concerning "promises" to military personnel and veterans with regard to "free health care for life," not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from va .

prior to eligibility reform in 1996 , all veterans were technically eligible for some care , however , the actual provision of care was based on available resources .

the veterans' health care eligibility reform act of 1996 , p.l .

104-262 , established two eligibility categories and required vha to manage the provision of hospital care and medical services through an enrollment system based on a system of priorities .

p.l .

104-262 authorized va to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service - connected disabilities , former prisoners of war , veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as agent orange , veterans whose attributable income and net worth are not greater than an established "means test" , and veterans of world war i .

these veterans are generally known as "higher priority" or "core" veterans .

the other category of veterans are those with no service - connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established "means test. .

p.l .

104-262 also authorized va to establish a patient enrollment system to manage access to va health care .

as stated in the report language accompanying p.l .

104-262 , "the act would direct the secretary , in providing for the care of 'core' veterans , to establish and operate a system of annual patient enrollment and require that veterans be enrolled in a manner giving relative degrees of preference in accordance with specified priorities .

at the same time , it would vest discretion in the secretary to determine the manner in which such enrollment system would operate. .

furthermore , p.l .

104-262 was clear in its intent that the provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources .

the committee report accompanying p.l .

104-262 states that the provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations acts for these purposes .

such language is intended to clarify that these services would continue to depend upon discretionary appropriations. .

vha is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

although the appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year , traditionally the appropriation accounts used to support vha include medical care , medical and prosthetic research , and medical administration .

in addition , congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all va facilities .

in fy2004 , "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," congress changed vha's appropriations structure .

the department of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , h.rept .

108-401 ) funded vha through four accounts: ( 1 ) medical services ; ( 2 ) medical administration ; ( 3 ) medical facilities ; and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

provided below are brief descriptions of these accounts .

during the past year , congress considered several appropriation measures to provide funding for vha .

aside from the regular fy2006 appropriations bill that provides funding for vha , congress passed several measures that included funding to bridge the shortfall for vha for fy2005 and provided additional funding for fy2006 .

given below is a brief description tracking congressional action on fy2006 appropriations for vha .

table 5 provides details of funding levels for the various accounts that comprise funding for vha .

in its fy2007 budget request , the administration proposed several legislative changes that it asserts will "refocus the va health care system to better meet the needs of highest priority veterans — those with service - connected conditions , those with lower incomes , and those with special health care needs. .

these proposals are similar to previous ones that were included in the administration's budget requests for fy2003 , fy2004 , fy2005 , and fy2006 , and were rejected by congress .

the president's budget request includes three major policy proposals: assess an annual enrollment fee of $250 for all priority 7 and 8 veterans ; increase pharmaceutical copayments from $8 to $15 ( for each 30-day prescription ) for all enrolled veterans in priority groups 7 and 8 ; and bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice - connected conditions for the entire copayment amount .

a detailed description of these legislative proposals follows .

the administration proposes to establish an annual enrollment fee of $250 beginning october 1 , 2006 , for all priority 7 and 8 veterans .

priority group 7 veterans have incomes above $26,902 for a single veteran ( see appendix c for va income thresholds ) and below the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) geographic means test level .

priority group 8 veterans are those with incomes above $26,902 for a single veteran and above the hud geographic means test amount .

the hud geographic means test is established at a local level such as county or city .

for instance , a veteran with no dependents residing in grant county , arkansas , whose annual income in 2005 was $27,145 , will be placed in priority group 7 , because the veteran's annual income is above va's means test threshold of $26,902 and below the fy2005 geographic means test threshold of $27,150 for that county .

similarly , a veteran with no dependents living in orange county , california , whose annual income in 2005 was $42,250 , will be placed in priority group 7 , because the veteran's annual income is above va's means test threshold of $26,902 and below the fy2005 geographic means test threshold for of $43,000 for orange county .

it should be noted that there is wide variation in annual incomes of veterans placed in priority groups 7 and 8 .

in its fy2004 , fy2005 , and fy2006 budget submissions , the president requested authority from congress to levy an annual enrollment fee on all priority 7 and priority 8 veterans .

however , congress did not approve imposing such a fee .

in its fy2007 views and estimates letter to the house budget committee , the house veterans affairs committee did not support levying an enrollment fee .

the letter states that "while the committee understands the policy arguments providing the basis for the administration's proposal for priority 7 and 8 veterans to assume a greater share of the costs for their health care in the va system , the majority of the committee does not support these legislative proposals. .

the chairman of the senate veterans' affairs committee , in his fy2007 views and estimates letter to the senate budget committee , did agree that "during a time of high deficits and restrained spending in every account unrelated to national security , the president's proposal to shift a small portion of the cost of funding record growth in va's budget on to lower priority veterans is reasonable .

i have no objection to the proposals he has chosen , but i am not necessarily wed to them. .

p.l .

110-5 does not include any language assessing an enrollment fee .

the administration proposes increasing the pharmacy copayments from $8 to $15 for all enrolled priority group 7 and priority group 8 veterans , whenever they obtain medication from va on an outpatient basis for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

the administration put forward this proposal in its fy2004 , fy2005 , and fy2006 budget requests as well , but did not receive any approval from congress .

at present , veterans in priority groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication , including over - the - counter medications .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) authorized va to charge most veterans $2 for each 30-day supply of medication furnished on an outpatient basis for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

the veterans millennium health care and benefits act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-117 ) authorized va to increase the medication copayment amount and establish annual caps on the total amount paid , to eliminate financial hardship for veterans enrolled in priority groups 2-6 .

when veterans reach the annual cap , they continue to receive medications without making a copayment .

on november 15 , 2005 , vha issued a directive stating that effective january 1 , 2006 , the medication co - payment will be increased to $8 for each 30-day supply of medication furnished on an outpatient basis for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition , and that the annual cap for veterans enrolled in priority groups 2-6 will be $960 .

there is no cap for veterans in priority groups 7 and 8 ( see appendixes b and c ) .

p.l .

110-5 does not include any bill language that would give va the authority to increase copayments .

va estimates that about 200,000 veterans in priority groups 7 and 8 would be affected by the $250 annual enrollment fee and the increase in prescription drug copayments .

according to va's estimates , the enrollment fees and increased pharmacy copayments would generate $514 million in revenue and save va an additional $251 million due to reduced demand , resulting in a decrease of $765 million in appropriations for fy2007 .

together two recent studies suggest that veterans may be impacted by increased pharmaceutical copayments .

in one published study it was indicated that patients with access to the va's prescription drug coverage had lower rates of cost - related adherence problems than patients with medicare or no insurance coverage .

this study also found that va patients were also less likely than some non - va patients to report other detrimental consequences of medication cost pressures , such as foregoing necessities to pay for their medication or worrying frequently about how they could pay for their treatments .

in another study that examined the impact of the increased copayment on veterans' use of antidepressant medication , va researchers found that medication cost could be a prohibitive factor for veterans with copayment obligations .

the researchers further state that veterans who had to pay copayments appear to fill the antidepressant prescriptions less frequently than veterans who are exempt from the copayment requirement .

the administration is requesting that congress amend va's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first - party copayment debts with third - party health insurance collections .

va asserts that this proposal would align va with the dod health care system for military retirees and with the private sector .

with the enactment of p.l .

99-272 in 1986 , congress authorized va to collect payments from third - party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities , and it also established copayments from veterans for this care .

under current law , va is authorized to collect from third - party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

if va treats an insured veteran for a nonservice - connected disability , and the veteran is also determined by va to have copayment responsibilities , va will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's copayment debt related to that treatment .

under the current copayment billing process , in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice - connected condition appears to qualify for billing under reimbursable insurance and copayment , va medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance provider .

the veteran's copayment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third - party payer .

if no payment is received from the third - party payer within 90 days , then a bill is sent to the veteran for the full copayment amount .

however , when insurers reimburse va after the 90-day period , va must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill .

on all insurance policies , the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the copayment .

the veteran is then billed only for the portion of the copayment not covered by the insurance reimbursement and the portion of the copayment for services not covered by the veteran's insurance plan ( see figure 1 ) .

according to two reports released by the government accountability office ( gao ) , the practice of satisfying copayment debt with recoveries made from third - party insurers has resulted in reduced overall cost recoveries and increased administrative expenses .

under the administration's proposal , va would bill and collect copayments from patients regardless of any amounts recovered from the veterans private health insurance plan .

as the patient's bill is generated , va would bill the insurer for the full cost of va care provided to a veteran for a nonservice - connected condition ( see figure 2 ) .

according to va's estimates , if this proposal is enacted it would contribute approximately $31.0 million toward va's collections .

this issue was not addressed in the 109 th congress .

appendix a .

priority groups and their eligibility criteria appendix b .

veterans' payments for health care services by priority group appendix c. financial income thresholds for va health care benefit .

