since july 1999 , when the chinese government began detaining thousands of falun gong ( flg ) adherents , the spiritual exercise movement has gained the attention of many u.s. policy makers , primarily as an international human rights concern .

many flg practitioners reportedly have died or remain in prc prisons or other forms of detention .

in 2005 , the united states commission on international religious freedom recommended that china remain as a "country of particular concern" ( cpc ) and stated that crackdowns on the group have been "widespread and violent. .

on the basis of this recommendation , the state department , in its annual international religious freedom report ( november 2005 ) , designated china as a cpc for the sixth consecutive year , noting: "the arrest , detention , and imprisonment of falun gong practitioners continued ; those who refused to recant their beliefs were sometimes subjected to harsh treatment in prisons and reeducation - through - labor camps , and there were credible reports of deaths due to torture and abuse. .

the prc government appears to have been largely successful in not only suppressing flg activity in china but also discrediting falun gong in the eyes of prc citizens and preventing linkages between falun gong and other social protest movements .

nonetheless , flg followers have displayed a remarkable tenacity and dedication both domestically and abroad .

they have become a recurring irritant in china's efforts to project an image of a peaceful world power that abides by international norms , and have raised suspicions among some prc leaders that the u.s. government is colluding with them .

on april 20 , 2006 , at the official welcoming ceremony of prc president hu jintao's visit to washington , d.c. , ms. wang wenyi , a reporter for the epoch times , interrupted hu's speech by shouting in support of falun gong for more than two minutes before being hustled away by u.s. security agents .

although ostensibly not a political movement , falun gong practitioners in the united states have become visible and vocal , particularly in major u.s. cities and in washington , d.c. , in criticizing the prc government and publicizing human rights abuses against their fellow members in china .

the prc government reportedly also has been aggressive abroad , attempting to refute flg claims and counteract their activities .

there has been little , if any , flg activity reported in the past year , although the state department reported that in 2005 , there were still hundreds of thousands of practitioners in the country .

many flg followers are believed to be still practicing in their homes or meeting secretly .

one source estimates that there are 60,000 flg practitioners left in china: half of them are still in detention while the other half remain under surveillance .

according to another expert , there are between 15,000 and 25,000 political or religious prisoners in china , half of whom are linked to the falun gong movement .

flg members in the united states claim that adherents in china continue to disseminate written information about the practice .

the chinese government reportedly referred to falun gong as "the most serious threat to stability in 50 years of [chinese] communist history. .

the practice's popularity in china's northeast and other economically depressed areas was especially worrisome to the party because of the fear that "religious fever" combined with economic unrest could spark widespread political protests .

some observers noted that the crackdown on falun gong deepened anti - government sentiment among not only adherents but also non - adherents , including many reform - minded intellectuals .

however , there has been little indication that falun gong has become a rallying cry for other disaffected social groups or china's small number of political activists .

many chinese , either because of government propaganda or their indifference toward falun gong , have become critical toward the movement or apathetic about the crackdown .

some have charged that li hongzhi has exploited vulnerable people and caused their suffering by exaggerating the healing powers of falun gong or by encouraging followers in prison to attain full enlightenment by exercising "forbearance" or refusing to recant .

the january 2001 self - immolations of six purported falun gong members on tiananmen square was exploited by the official media , further alienating many prc citizens .

since 1999 , some members of the united states congress have made many public pronouncements and introduced several resolutions in support of falun gong .

in the 109 th congress , h.res .

608 , agreed to in the house on june 12 , 2006 , condemns the "escalating levels of religious persecution" in china , including the "brutal campaign to eradicate falun gong. .

h.res .

794 , passed by the house on june 12 , 2006 , calls upon the prc to end its most egregious human rights abuses , including the persecution of falun gong .

h.con.res .

365 , introduced on march 28 , 2006 , would urge the prc government to allow civil rights attorney gao zhisheng to continue practicing law .

prc authorities reportedly revoked gao's license after he provided legal assistance for peasant demonstrators , christian house church worshipers , falun gong practitioners , and others .

for six consecutive years ( 1999-2004 ) , the u.s. department of state has designated china a "country of particular concern" for "particularly severe violations of religious freedom," including its persecution of falun gong .

an ongoing ban on the export of crime control and detection instruments and equipment to china satisfies the requirements of p.l .

105-292 , the freedom from religious persecution act of 1998 , which authorizes the president to impose sanctions upon countries that violate religious freedom .

in april 2006 , prior to prc president hu jintao's visit to the united states , 81 members of congress reportedly co - signed a letter written by representative dana rohrabacher to president bush in support of an investigation into the allegations of organ harvesting of falun gong adherents in china .

