many analysts , policy makers , and politicians argue that the u.s. health care system would perform better if market or market - like institutions played a larger role .

this view is based on the belief held by economists that markets generally work most efficiently when left alone , provided that certain conditions are met .

these conditions essentially state that consumption or production by one person does not affect others , that no one has a privileged position in the market , and that property rights are well - defined .

if those conditions are violated , however , markets may function inefficiently , which is what economists call "market failure. .

government intervention may enhance economic efficiency , although in other cases government action may exacerbate market failure .

the special characteristics of health care often lead to market failures .

the extent of government activity vis - a - vis the health system is seen by many economists and health care analysts as a policy response to the inequalities and inefficiencies associated with such market failures .

health care professionals often view a market orientation as a threat to their traditions , ethics , and culture .

a bottom - line mentality , they argue , cannot deliver the same high quality of care as the so - called traditional approach based on professional ethics and responsibilities .

critics such as arnold relman , editor emeritus of the new england journal of medicine , denounce the "medical - industrial complex" for its dedication to profitability rather than patient well - being .

nevertheless , health care institutions have always cared about their pecuniary interests as well as their patients .

as one historian noted , "in many respects [hospitals] have behaved as businesses .

but , ... hospitals have simultaneously carried symbolic and social significance as embodiments of american hopes and ideals. .

even if some view market forces and the use of the price system to allocate health care services as an intrusion , consumers and providers of health care are strongly affected by economic incentives .

hospitals cut the average length of an inpatient stay sharply after medicare switched from cost - based reimbursement to paying a flat diagnosis - related fee .

physicians increased the volume ( i.e. , number of patient visits ) and intensity of patient care ( i.e. , number or complexity of services provided in an average visit ) seen after reductions in medicare part b payments .

consumers use less health care when they must pay a larger share of the cost .

these behavioral responses , although predicted by economic theory , do not necessarily enhance economic efficiency .

the challenge for those who wish to expand the use of market incentives in health care is to design policies that align material incentives facing consumers and providers of health care so that changes in behavior enhance economic efficiency .

both friends and foes of the expanding role of markets have sometimes relied on crude ideas about what markets can or cannot accomplish .

this report explains what well - grounded economic theory has to say about the limits and capabilities of the market in the health care sector .

these limits and capabilities then outline what the government can or cannot do to improve the health care system's performance .

the report provides an overview of efforts to expand the use of market or market - like institutions in health care and considers effects of these initiatives or proposals on the federal budget .

reforms that are designed to address sources of market failure have better chances of enhancing economic performance than those that are not .

nonetheless , improving the performance and efficiency of the health system presents significant policy and political challenges even to well - designed reforms .

the u.s. health care system is a complex mixture of public and private providers of care , paid for by a mixture of public and private payers , staffed by dozens of health professions , working in clinics , hospitals , nursing homes , private offices , health maintenance organizations , work sites , and home settings , among other venues .

this patchwork system provides patients with a broad set of alternatives ; gives health professionals in general , and physicians in particular , a substantial degree of autonomy ; and assigns separate , if often overlapping , responsibilities among various levels of government .

the complexity of the u.s. health system , which gives it considerable flexibility , is also one of the principal causes of its inefficiencies .

dissatisfaction with the performance of the u.s. health care system has spurred wider interest in using market or market - like institutions to generate better results and lower costs .

economists' belief in the efficiency of markets is based on the invisible hand theorem , which states that market outcomes are efficient , so long as certain conditions hold .

these conditions are: no externalities .

an externality , or spillover effect , exists when one's consumption or production affects the ability of another to consume or produce .

public goods , defined as goods which more than a single person can enjoy at the same time , are a special type of externality .

symmetric information .

everyone knows the same things .

no one has an informational advantage over others .

no market power .

no one acts as if he can influence prices through his actions .

voluntary trade .

property rights are well - defined and individuals can refuse trades that make them worse off .

the invisible hand theorem takes the distribution of buying power as given .

however , to the extent society cares about fairness or the evenness of distribution , it may wish to use taxes and transfers to alter the distribution of buying power .

if transfers and taxes could be made without economic distortions , then society could move to another distribution of buying power , and the economy would run at full efficiency .

in practice , however , all taxes and transfers will cause some economic distortions .

thus , society alters the distribution of buying power to a more "fair" allocation , but at some cost of economic efficiency .

the rapid rise in health care costs is straining public budgets at all levels of government , and projected increases in health care costs promise to intensify pressures on public budgets .

if health care costs continue to grow at past rates , cutbacks in other types of consumption will be inevitable .

even if health care costs moderate , a substantial portion of the gains from economic growth will be directed towards the health care system .

rising costs have stemmed in part from the introduction of medical advances , which have increased longevity and reduced morbidity .

the increasing proportion of the elderly population is another cause of rising medical costs .

finally , third - party reimbursement , by shielding consumers from health care costs , makes consumers less sensitive to price signals .

this , in turn , gives providers incentives to expand the supply of health care and to change practice patterns to a more complex and intensive style of medicine .

rising health care costs have cut into the growth of other types of consumption for most households .

in the decades following world war ii , productivity and incomes grew fast enough relative to health care costs to allow steady increases in health and non - health spending .

in more recent decades , real incomes for most households grew more slowly while health costs continued to rise rapidly and cut into the growth of non - health expenditures .

since 1972 , real incomes for the lower 99% of household grew on average only 1.2% per year to 2002 .

over the same period real national health expenditures rose 4.9% a year .

had health care spending in the u.s. been held to 10% of gdp , a proportion similar that in canada , france , germany , and switzerland , non - health consumption would have grown about 25% faster .

to the extent that choices of rational consumers , or of rational voters and politicians , drive this expansion of the health care system , rising health costs are not necessarily a cause for concern .

in all advanced industrial countries the fraction of the economy devoted to health care has been rising .

if consumers prefer to buy more technologically advanced medical care rather than more advanced cars or refrigerators , then higher medical costs are a natural consequence of rising standards of living .

a 2001 review of studies regarding medical technology for heart attacks , low - birthweight babies , depression , and cataracts indicated that increased benefits of better treatment options far outweigh costs .

for breast cancer , according to that review , increased costs and benefits of new technologies were roughly of the same magnitude .

rising medical costs threaten to price a growing number of americans out of the insurance market .

in the past few decades , the number of uninsured has hovered around 40-46 million .

depending on the definitions used , tens of millions more are underinsured against the risk of having a health emergency become a financial catastrophe .

as health care becomes more expensive , the logic of supply and demand suggests the pool of uninsured persons will grow .

two health economists projected that the number of uninsured persons will grow from 45 million in 2003 to 56 million by 2013 , largely due to the continually rising costs of health care .

absent the political will to increase taxes significantly , rising federal health care expenditures will force major cuts in benefits or fundamental changes in the health delivery system .

economic theory suggests that addressing the root causes of market failure provides the best chance for enhancing system performance .

the following discussion examines the potential of market - based solutions , which address sources of market failure noted above , to help transform the health care system in ways that would lead to better performance and lower costs .

market competition has brought rapid technological change , higher quality , and lower prices to many parts of the economy , leading many to ask why broader application of market principles to the health care system could not reduce costs and improve performance .

as many have noted , health care is not a standard commodity .

unless institutions and reforms are designed to reflect the unique characteristics of the health care market , failures will continue to be the norm .

certainly past experience indicates that patients , insurers , and providers all react to financial incentives .

unfortunately , designing incentives that align behavior of consumers and health care payers and providers is difficult because of the nature of medical care .

broadening financial protection against unexpected health care costs , enhancing access to routine and preventative care , constraining costs , and setting up economic incentives that induce efficient behavior among individuals and firms are all worthwhile goals .

designing policies with a reasonable expectation of reaching each of those goals is difficult .

information asymmetries between patients and physicians as well as between providers and payers stem from the unavoidable need for highly specialized roles .

the specialized expertise of medical personnel gives patients access to sophisticated therapeutic measures , many of which could hardly have been imagined a generation ago .

this specialization of expertise also necessitates an informational asymmetry that requires patients to depend on their physicians to guide them through the system .

thus , the principal - agent relationship lies at the heart of the health care experience .

similarly , because physicians see patient s while payers only see paper claims , physicians possess an important informational advantage over third - party payers .

expanded use of performance measurements and information technology has the potential to reduce these problems .

the health insurance system's ability to spread risks across a broad pool of beneficiaries will continue to face challenges as insurers seek to avoid losses through medical underwriting and related practices .

extending coverage to individuals in poor health , from the point of view of an insurer , is more akin to providing a subsidy than insuring a risk .

insuring such individuals may require either subsidies or pricing schemes that induce private insurers to compete on grounds of efficiency of service rather than ability to avoid those with greater needs for health care .

alternatively , health insurance for those in poorer health could be guaranteed by policies that would create larger and broader pools , such as the canadian single - payer system .

another alternative is the united kingdom's two - tier system , in which all residents are enrolled in the national health service , but those who wish access to more convenient services may buy supplemental policies , such as provided by the british united provident association ( bupa ) .

this system gives all u.k. residents access to a reasonable standard of care , although this may involve some level of inconvenience and waiting in some cases , and restricted access to some care regarded by health planning authorities as of low benefit .

those wishing to bypass such inconveniences can pay for access to more extensive and comfortable care .

some state governments have introduced other reform strategies .

after july 2007 , massachusetts will require all residents to obtain health insurance .

this approach parallels the typical automobile insurance system , which requires citizens to have insurance , but allows them to choose among many approved and regulated insurance providers .

low - income individuals will be eligible for subsidized access to insurance on a sliding scale .

governor schwarzenegger has proposed a health insurance reform plan that also includes a requirement that all individuals obtain health insurance .

even if the design of health care policy requires balancing of goals that present conflicting requirements , policy innovations can deliver better results .

policies that harness market incentives and recognize the nature of health care can enhance efficiency and improve performance .

because asymmetric information is a cause of market failure , policies that provide better information to patients and payers may improve performance .

because market power often serves as a cause of market failure , policies that either reduce or counterbalance market power can help improve performance .

policies that either fail to reflect the nature of the health care or that fail to address causes of market failure are unlikely to lead to lasting improvements .

