the pending debate over reauthorization of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is likely to be a high priority in the 110 th congress .

funding authorizations for aviation programs set forth in vision 100 — the century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 , hereafter referred to as vision 100 ) , as well as authorization of the existing aviation tax structure that provides revenue for the aviation trust fund , are set to expire at the end of fy2007 .

crs has identified nine broad categories of issues that congress may address in the context of faa reauthorization .

these include faa budgeting and finance ; airport development and finance ; faa cost control measures ; system - wide demand and capacity issues ; modernization of national airspace system ( nas ) infrastructure ; aviation safety ; airliner cabin issues ; energy , environment , and noise issues ; and international civil aviation issues .

the airport improvement program ( aip ) , the source of federal airport grants , is one of five major sources of funding for airport development and improvement .

airports also fund capital projects using tax - exempt bonds , passenger facility charges ( pfcs ; a local tax levied on each boarding passenger ) , state and local grants , and airport revenue .

different airports use different combinations of these sources depending on the individual airport's financial situation and the type of project being considered .

small airports are more likely to be dependent on aip grants than large - or medium - sized airports .

the larger airports are also much more likely to participate in the tax - exempt bond market or finance capital development projects with the proceeds generated from pfcs .

each of these funding sources places differing legislative , regulatory , or contractual constraints on the airports that use them .

the two financing sources for airports with the most significant federal involvement are the aip and the pfc programs .

the aip provides federal grants to airports for airport development and planning .

the airports participating in the aip range from very large publicly - owned commercial primary airports to small public use general aviation airports that may be privately - owned , but are available for public use .

aip funding is usually limited to construction or improvements related to aircraft operations , typically for planning and construction of projects such as runways , taxiways , aprons , noise abatement , land purchase , and safety , emergency or snow removal equipment .

commercial revenue producing portions of terminals ( such as shop concessions or commercial maintenance hangars ) , automobile parking garages , and off - airport road construction are examples of improvements that generally are not eligible for aip funding .

airports smaller than medium hub , however , have broader eligibility on terminal projects under certain conditions .

aip money cannot be used for an airport's operational expenses .

the pfc is a local tax imposed , with federal approval , by an airport on each boarding passenger .

pfc funds can be used for a broader range of projects than aip grants and are more likely to be used for "ground side" projects such as passenger terminal and ground access improvements .

pfcs can also be used for bond repayments and in some cases to provide the local match for aip projects .

faced with rising operational costs and future funding needs for infrastructure enhancements and system expansion , the faa and congress have made the identification of methods to reduce or control operational costs a priority over the last few years .

besides general measures to conserve resources , the faa's approaches to controlling operational costs mostly fall into two general categories: ( 1 ) the consolidation of facilities and functions , and ( 2 ) the outsourcing or privatization of certain operational components .

additional options for controlling costs may involve shifting certain operational functions and costs onto private - sector users of the nas and leveraging private - sector capabilities through government - industry partnerships , or other cost - saving arrangements .

the current faa reauthorization cycle comes at a critical time with respect to addressing increasing capacity needs at high - volume airports , in airspace around many major metropolitan areas , and along certain highly congested routes .

after a decrease in air travel brought about by a variety of factors , including , most prominently , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , air traffic is again on the rise , and so are the associated congestion and delays at many commercial airports .

while stopgap measures implemented by the faa have served well to stave off unacceptable congestion and delays thus far , long - term solutions are likely to be needed in consideration of future air traffic growth projections .

a provision in vision 100 created the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) , a multi - agency entity headed by the faa and charged with the task of conceptualizing and integrating the development of the next generation air transportation system ( ngats ) .

the dot envisions ngats as a system capable of tripling effective system capacity by 2025 .

by some estimates , air traffic levels throughout the united states could increase at that pace thereby necessitating these system enhancements .

the jpdo has initiated operations and has made some progress toward identifying an enterprise architecture for building the ngats since the last faa reauthorization .

the specifics of these efforts and the future funding and management challenges facing jpdo and the faa in carrying forth the plans to build the ngats are likely to be a major focus during the current faa reauthorization process .

travel on commercial passenger airlines in the united states is extremely safe , and major aviation accidents are extremely rare .

in fact there have been few major airline accidents in the united states in recent years .

for the most recent five - year period where full final data were available , major accidents in the united states occurred at a rate of less than one in every 8.8 million flight hours .

nonetheless , aviation safety experts are , to some degree , at odds over whether the current level of commercial airline safety can be further improved upon .

experts also have differing views on whether the current low rate of accident occurrence may obscure the potential future effects of a variety of underlying safety trends such as current airline maintenance practices , the adequacy of efforts to address identified critical safety - related aircraft design and operational issues , and current airport design initiatives and operational considerations to prevent ground collisions and runway overruns .

looking beyond commercial passenger operations , the safety of all - cargo operations and other commercial aviation activities has been examined to determine whether targeted safety enhancements can improve the safety record of these sectors of the aviation industry .

for example , some have argued that bringing the safety standards of all - cargo operations on par with those of passenger airline operations could reduce accidents and is needed because the size of aircraft , the range of operations flown by all - cargo operators , and large growth in the all - cargo sector introduce unique risks to operators , airports , and the public .

other commercial aviation activities that have also been the subject of recent safety inquiries include air tour and air ambulance operations .

a variety of approaches to improving safety have been offered and implemented to address these persisting and emerging safety issues in commercial aviation .

options to incorporate these approaches into legislation or to step - up congressional oversight of faa initiatives related to safety may be brought up in congress during the faa reauthorization process .

issues of particular interest in the current context include options for preventing runway overrun accidents , preventing runway incursions and collisions , improving maintenance oversight , mitigating the risk of fuel tank explosions on commercial airliners , monitoring aging aircraft and aircraft systems , and addressing safety concerns in the all - cargo industry .

in vision 100 , congress enacted legislation directing the faa to establish a research program on airliner cabin air quality and establish a cabin air quality incident reporting system .

however , a 2004 gao study found that many experts do not believe that the faa's planned actions will adequately address these recommendations .

further , growing public health concerns over potential human - to - human spread of the deadly avian influenza virus may elevate the issue of preventing the spread of infectious diseases on commercial airline flights during the current reauthorization process .

also , rapidly changing cell phone and wireless technologies and consumer demand for these technologies is placing pressure on policy makers to approve these devices for use on airline flights .

however , significant safety concerns remain , raising the issue of how well research and testing of these devices to determine whether they pose any risk to aviation safety is keeping pace with industry demand to approve these devices for in - flight use .

also , a decade - old debate between the ntsb and the faa regarding whether it is safe to allow infants and toddlers to ride on the laps of adults remains unresolved .

the ntsb argues that children should instead be restrained in child restraints , while the faa believes that the cost to consumers would create a greater safety risk by diverting many families to highway travel , which is statistically less safe .

these various issues related to airliner cabin safety , comfort , and public health may be considered during the course of the faa reauthorization debate in congress .

recent uncertainty over petroleum supply and growing policy interest in identifying alternative fuel sources may generate interest in this issue during debate over faa reauthorization .

although energy issues have not been a major focus of past faa reauthorization processes , a provision allowing the use of passenger facility fees to fund the acquisition of low - emission airport ground vehicles was included in vision 100 .

further assessment of alternative fuels both for airport ground vehicles and for aircraft may arise as an issue during debate in congress over faa reauthorization .

with regard to environmental impacts , concerns over noise have long dominated the policy debate .

however , debate over aircraft emissions policies could play a larger role in this reauthorization process , in response to growing international pressures to set standards and goals for reducing aircraft emissions .

a key policy issue centers on whether current industry demand for more fuel efficient aircraft will result in adequate emissions reductions over time , or whether more proactive policies to curtail aircraft emissions are needed .

debate over aircraft noise policy may focus on whether emerging quiet aircraft technologies can yield substantive noise reductions , whether adequate noise level reductions can be attained through industry demand for more efficient aircraft designs or whether stricter aircraft noise standards may be needed , and whether existing community noise standards and noise policies are sufficient to mitigate noise impacts considering forecast growth in air traffic and possible community growth in noise impacted areas .

although not technically within the jurisdiction of the faa , there are at least three major international aviation issues that may arise as congress considers reauthorization of the agency .

first , there is the potential that the "open skies" agreement with the european union will remain unsigned and unimplemented , which is a major concern for many u.s. airlines given the legal uncertainty that currently surrounds existing agreements with european union members .

second , and closely related to the "open skies" agreement , is the dot's rulemaking relating to foreign ownership and control of domestic carriers , which , although the administrative process has been completed , has not to date yielded a final rule .

the delay has been due in part to strong congressional opposition that has taken the form both of legislation and attempts to prevent the final rule through appropriations riders .

finally , there is the longstanding issue of cabotage , which is defined as the transportation of passengers or cargo by foreign air carriers from one point in the united states to another and is , with a couple of narrow exceptions , generally prohibited by u.s. law .

in light of these pending and unresolved issues , a major piece of aviation related legislation , such as the faa reauthorization , may provide congress with a unique opportunity to legislate and play a major role with respect to these developments in international civil aviation .

in 1992 , the dot introduced the "open skies" initiative and began negotiating and entering into modern civil aviation agreements with foreign countries , as well as individual members of the european union ( eu ) .

currently , the united states is a party to 74 "open skies" agreements worldwide .

among those countries are the netherlands , austria , czech republic , belgium , denmark , finland , germany , luxembourg , norway , sweden , switzerland , and iceland .

as a result of a 2002 european court of justice ruling that several provisions of these bilateral "open skies" agreements violated eu law , the united states and the eu have been negotiating a new open skies agreement .

an agreement appears to exist between the parties that if enacted would , inter alia , allow every eu and u.s. airline to fly between every city in the european union and every city in the united states and would permit u.s. and eu airlines to determine the number of flights , their routes , and fares according to market demand .

in addition , the agreement would allow carriers to freely enter into cooperative arrangements with other airlines , such as code - sharing and leasing .

according to some commentators , as comprehensive as the proposed agreement appears to be , there cannot be meaningful reform in the international aviation market until congress repeals the so - called "citizenship test," which limits foreign ownership and control of u.s. air carriers .

the proposed agreement itself does not appear to address foreign ownership or control , thus it would seem to be left to each party to determine its own rules and regulations independently .

some news reports have indicated disappointment on the part of the eu over the u.s.'s failure to formally adopt changes to u.s. foreign ownership and control rules .

presently , u.s. law requires that , to operate as an air carrier in the united states , an entity must be a "citizen of the united states. .

to be considered a citizen for civil aviation purposes , an entity must be owned either by an individual u.s. citizen , a partnership of persons who are each u.s. citizens , or a corporation ( 1 ) whose president and at least two - thirds of the board of directors and other managing officers are u.s. citizens , ( 2 ) that is under the actual control of u.s. citizens , and ( 3 ) has at least 75 percent of its voting stock owned or controlled by u.s. citizens .

these "objective" citizenship requirements can only be amended by congress enacting a change to the statute .

the dot , however , has initiated a rulemaking proceeding that exercises its discretionary authority to interpret the statute's requirement of "actual control" in a manner that would likely increase opportunities for foreign investment in u.s. airlines .

the dot has received numerous comments , both in favor of , and in opposition to its proposed interpretation of the actual control rule .

commentators have focused specifically on the dot's legal authority to reinterpret the "actual control" requirement .

supporters of the dot's action generally assert that the phrase "actual control," though it appears in the statute , is vague , undefined and , therefore , subject to departmental interpretation .

conversely , opponents of the rulemaking assert that when congress specifically added the phrase "actual control" to the statute , they were in effect codifying the dot's long - standing precedent and not granting any additional authority over the interpretation of the phrase than previously existed .

the proposed rulemaking has also received significant attention from some members of congress , with several members filing written comments with the dot expressing concerns with respect to civil reserve air fleet commitments , airline employees , and consumer protection issues .

additionally , companion house and senate bills were introduced in the 109 th congress to address this issue .

h.r .

4542 and s. 2135 ( 109 th congress ) both contain provisions that would prevent the dot from issuing a final decision on the rulemaking for a period of one year after the date of enactment .

finally , appropriations riders have been drafted that would effectively forestall the dot from finalizing its rulemaking on this issue .

lawmakers were unsuccessful with their attempt at a rider in the 2006 emergency supplemental appropriations bill .

however , attempts to include language in the 2007 transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia appropriations bill continue , and if unresolved could resurface during the drafting and debate on the faa reauthorization language .

another major issue facing international civil aviation law is cabotage .

cabotage is the right of a foreign airline to carry passengers and / or cargo between airports of the same country ( eg , from new york to los angeles ) .

currently , the federal aviation act contains a general prohibition against cabotage activity by foreign air carriers .

congress last amended the cabotage laws as part of vision 100 .

the enacted changes permit "eligible cargo" to be removed from aircraft , including foreign aircraft , in alaska and "not be deemed to have broken its international journey in , be taken on in , or be destined for alaska. .

these provisions provide for a very limited statutory exception to the general prohibition against cabotage activities .

although currently not a major negotiation point with respect to u.s. "open skies" agreements , it appears that statutory changes would be required before the executive branch can enter into any sort of agreement purporting to liberalize the cabotage rules .

although foreign aircraft are allowed to navigate within u.s. airspace , unless specifically authorized either by statute or dot regulations they are not permitted to perform any form of cabotage within the united states .

while it is unclear what , if any , economic effect a more liberal cabotage policy would have on the domestic airline industry , only congress has the legal authority to amend the federal aviation act and permit foreign carriers to have cabotage rights .

aviation is a field rich with acronyms and system specific terms .

this glossary provides a listing of some of the key new technical terms and their acronyms associated with near - term and long - range operational concepts for air traffic management ( atm ) , and communication , navigation , and surveillance ( cns ) infrastructure .

while this is far from an exhaustive list of aviation terminology and acronyms , its purpose is to provide the reader with a reference to several of the key new terms and concepts likely to be encountered during debate over faa reauthorization .

a system for broadcasting aircraft identification , position , altitude , heading , and speed data derived from on - board navigation systems such as a global positioning system ( gps ) receiver unit .

ads - b out functionality refers to a basic level of ads - b aircraft equipage where navigation data is transmitted only .

aircraft reception of ads - b signals from other air traffic or traffic , weather , and flight information from ground stations is referred to as ads - b in .

the ads - b system is envisioned as a future means for air traffic surveillance that may , to a large extent , replace radar surveillance of air traffic in the future .

a proposed major overhaul of the national airspace system ( nas ) relying on new air traffic communications , navigation , and surveillance ( cns ) and air traffic management ( atm ) technologies to greatly enhance effective system capacity .

the dot envisions ngats as a system capable of tripling effective system capacity by 2025 .

a multi - agency office of the federal government headed by the faa that was created under vision 100 that is charged with the tasks of establishing the enterprise architecture or blueprint for the ngats and providing overarching leadership and direction to ensure interagency cooperation and collaboration with industry to bring the ngats vision to its fruition .

a performance standard that defines the required position accuracy needed to keep the aircraft within a specified containment area , or bubble , 99.9% of the time .

the required navigational performance is not tied to any specific technology , but sets a technical standard that can be met using various faa - approved technologies .

while precision satellite - based navigation is currently the principal technology for meeting rnp standards , these standards allow for the use of other technologies — including yet to be developed technologies — to meet navigational performance standards .

a navigational performance standard for aircraft that provides a specific capability to establish very accurate waypoints , or specific navigational reference points , that can be positioned anywhere in the airspace system , thus eliminating the need to define airways and terminal arrival and departure procedures in references to specific ground - based navigational stations .

the rnav concept has been around since the 1970s and has historically rely on ground - based navigational stations and distance measuring equipment ( dme ) to navigate using more direct routing .

at present , the primary aircraft technology being utilized to meet these performance requirements is waas - enabled gps , with dme considered by many to be a possible backup , or secondary means , to determine aircraft position and accurately follow precise flight routes .

a system that utilizes receivers that monitor signals from a constellation of satellites that transmit precise timing signals to compute highly accurate position and time information .

gps is already used for a wide variety of applications , including aerial navigation .

however , augmented gps signals using a signal correction system called wide area augmentation ( waas ) is regarded as an enabling technology for providing initial satellite - based precision navigation capability to fly precise flight paths and approaches and perhaps , for future application to provide accurate surveillance capabilities through the automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) capability .

a system that improves the accuracy of global positioning system ( gps ) data , providing aircraft with accuracy within three meters horizontally and vertically , 95% of the time .

the system was launched throughout the united states in july 2003 , and in march 2006 the faa certified the system for providing primary navigational guidance to descend as low as 200 feet above the ground during precision approach procedures in low visibility and cloud conditions , matching the minimum descent altitudes of standard ( category i ) instrument landing system ( ils ) approach procedures .

a proposed system for aviation system data sharing , consisting of a seamless infrastructure for data exchange , similar to the world wide web , where users can readily access needed data that they are authorized to receive , replacing currently cumbersome and non - integrated databases and communications protocols .

as envisioned , swim will consist of an extensive , scalable data network to share real time operational information , such as flight plans , flight trajectories , weather , airport conditions , and temporary airspace restrictions across the entire airspace system .

