u.s. importers , usually manufacturers or representatives of industry associations , will sometimes ask members to introduce legislation seeking to reduce , repeal , or temporarily suspend duties on certain imports .

since the early 1980s , the house ways and means and senate finance committees , the primary committees of jurisdiction on trade matters , have tended to incorporate these duty suspension requests into omnibus legislation known as miscellaneous tariff and technical corrections bills ( mtbs ) .

mtbs may also include minor technical corrections to u.s. trade laws and specific instructions to u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) regarding shipments of certain imported products .

in order to be included in an mtb , duty suspensions must be noncontroversial ( no domestic producer , federal agency , or member objects ) , revenue - neutral ( defined as revenue loss of no more than $500,000 in foregone tariffs per item ) , and able to be administered by cbp and other agencies .

the previous process for assembling mtbs , which involved members introducing individual duty suspension bills at the request of constituents , has been controversial in recent congresses due to the assertions of some members that the process violated house and senate rules banning earmarks , or congressionally directed spending .

thus , the last mtb to be enacted was the united states manufacturing enhancement act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-227 ) , and efforts since then to pass subsequent mtb legislation have stalled .

this report , first , discusses recent developments on new legislation proposing a revised process for vetting duty suspension bills .

second , the previous mtb process that involved member introduction and vetting by house ways and means and senate finance committee staff , the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) , and other relevant agencies is described .

third , the report tracks mtb legislation introduced from the 109th to the 114th congresses .

legislation and house and senate rules covering "earmarks" and "limited tariff benefits" that may have impact on the current mtb debate are also highlighted .

finally , mtb legislation in congress from 1983 to the present is summarized .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

congress may presently consider a bill to legislatively establish a process to facilitate consideration of mtbs .

on april 13 , house ways and means chairman kevin brady introduced h.r .

4923 , the american manufacturing competitiveness act of 2016 .

the ways and means trade subcommittee held hearings on h.r .

4923 on april 14 , and a full committee markup of the bill was held on april 20 .

the committee passed the bill , as amended , on the same date .

during the markup , chairman brady asserted that "our bipartisan bill creates an open and transparent process that allows the american people to see every part of this process .

our bill upholds our earmark rules because members of congress will no longer introduce bills to begin the mtb process. .

the legislation could reportedly come to the house floor as early as the last week in april .

the trade facilitation and enforcement act of 2015 , p.l .

114-125 , enacted on february 24 , 2016 , included a sense of congress that urged the house ways and means and senate finance committees to "advance , as soon as possible , after consultation with the public and members of the senate and house of representatives , a regular and predictable legislative process for the temporary suspension and reduction of duties that is consistent with the rules of the senate and of the house. .

the mtb consideration process proposed by h.r .

4923 and s. 2794 is different than the previous process for vetting mtbs primarily because ( 1 ) an independent agency , the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) , will directly receive duty suspension petitions from the public ; and ( 2 ) the process would be subject to certain time and reporting requirements .

as in the previous mtb process ( 1 ) the itc — in consultation with the department of commerce , u.s. customs and border protection , the u.s. trade representative , and other relevant agencies — would consider the duty suspension requests ; ( 2 ) the conditions that applied to prior duty suspensions ( i.e. , they must be noncontroversial , revenue - neutral , administrable ) would apply ; and ( 3 ) the final mtb would be drafted through the committee , which would retain authority to exclude duty suspensions to which a member objected or if there were domestic production .

when considering previous mtb legislation , the process was begun by the house ways and means and senate finance committee chairs ( the committees of jurisdiction ) sending out dear colleague letters inviting members to introduce stand - alone legislation on proposed duty suspensions .

members were required to file disclosure forms affirming that neither the member nor spouse had any financial interest in the entity supporting the duty suspension .

the deadline for introduction was usually several months before an mtb was expected to be reported out of committee .

the mtb , when introduced , included all committee - approved measures , including duty suspensions .

the legislative goal of the committees was for an mtb to be "non - controversial" — meaning that the measure was able to pass both houses by unanimous consent or under suspension of the rules .

in recent congresses , due to the large number of bills submitted , the committees of jurisdiction have tended to request comments from interested parties at the subcommittee level , rather than holding hearings on these bills .

the subcommittee considers duty suspensions for inclusion in the mtb only if the corresponding goods or materials are deemed "noncontroversial" or "noncompetitive," meaning that ( 1 ) there is no domestic producer objecting to the duty suspension , and ( 2 ) the suspension or reduction of the tariff is seen to be in the interest of u.s. "downstream" manufacturers and consumers .

furthermore , the volume of imports and corresponding revenue loss must be "revenue neutral" or generally not more than $500,000 per product per year .

for example , the congressional budget office estimated that all duty suspensions and extensions to suspensions in house - passed h.r .

4380 ( p.l .

111-227 ) would cost the government about $286 million in foregone revenue on about 650 products over 10 years , out of about approximately $29 billion collected in tariffs per year .

in accordance with the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 , potential revenue loss was offset by an extension of customs user fees , as well as a small penalty increase for untimely filing of corporate estimated tax payments .

from the 109 th to the 112 th congresses , the number of individual duty suspension bills introduced increased significantly .

for example , in the 109 th congress , duty suspensions were granted for about 680 products , out of more than 1,000 proposed in bills introduced in the house and senate .

during the mtb process in the 112 th congress , about 1,800 individual duty suspension bills were introduced .

mtb legislation introduced in congress since the 97 th congress is listed in table a - 1 .

