the nation's air , land , and marine transportation systems are designed for accessibility and efficiency , two characteristics that make them vulnerable to attack .

the difficulty and cost of protecting the transportation sector from attack raises a core question for policymakers: how much effort and resources to put toward protecting potential targets versus pursuing and fighting terrorists .

while hardening the transportation sector against terrorist attack is difficult , measures can be taken to deter terrorists .

the focus of debate is how best to construct and finance a system of deterrence , protection , and response that effectively reduces the possibility and consequences of terrorist attacks without unduly interfering with travel , commerce , and civil liberties .

for all modes of transportation , one can identify four principal policy objectives that would support a system of deterrence and protection: ( 1 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the passengers and the cargo flowing through the system ; ( 2 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the transportation workers who operate and service the vehicles , assist the passengers , or handle the cargo ; ( 3 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the private companies that operate in the system , such as the carriers , shippers , agents , and brokers ; and ( 4 ) establishing a perimeter of security around transportation facilities and vehicles in operation .

the first three policy objectives are concerned with preventing an attack from within a transportation system , such as occurred on september 11 , 2001 .

the concern is that attackers could once again disguise themselves as legitimate passengers ( or shippers or workers ) to get in position to launch an attack .

the fourth policy objective is concerned with preventing an attack from outside a transportation system .

for instance , terrorists could ram a bomb - laden speedboat into an oil tanker , as was done in october 2002 to the french oil tanker limberg , or they could fire a shoulder - fired missile at an airplane taking off or landing , as was attempted in november 2002 against an israeli charter jet in mombasa , kenya .

achieving all four of these objectives is difficult , at best , and in some modes , is practically impossible .

where limited options exist for preventing an attack , policymakers are left with evaluating options for minimizing the consequences from an attack , without imposing unduly burdensome requirements .

following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , congress took swift action to create the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , federalizing all airline passenger and baggage screening functions and deploying significantly increased numbers of armed air marshals on commercial passenger flights .

to this day , the federalization of airport screening remains controversial .

for example , representative bill shuster , chairman of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , said in 2015 that , in hindsight , the decision to create tsa as a federal agency functionally responsible for passenger and baggage screening was a "big mistake," and that frontline screening responsibilities should have been left in the hands of private security companies .

while airports have the option of opting out of federal screening , alternative private screening under tsa contracts has been limited to 21 airports out of approximately 450 commercial passenger airports where passenger screening is required .

congress has sought to ensure that optional private screening remains available for those airports that want to pursue this option , but proposals seeking more extensive reforms of passenger screening have not been extensively debated .

rather , aviation security legislation has largely focused on specific mandates to comprehensively screen for explosives and carry out background checks and threat assessments .

despite the extensive focus on aviation security for more than a decade , a number of challenges remain , including effectively screening passengers , baggage , and cargo for explosives threats ; developing effective risk - based methods for screening passengers and others with access to aircraft and sensitive areas ; exploiting available intelligence information and watchlists to identify individuals who pose potential threats to civil aviation ; effectively responding to security threats at airports and screening checkpoints ; developing effective strategies for addressing aircraft vulnerabilities to shoulder - fired missiles and other standoff weapons ; and addressing the potential security implications of unmanned aircraft operations in domestic airspace .

bombings of and shootings on passenger trains in europe and asia have illustrated the vulnerability of passenger rail systems to terrorist attacks .

passenger rail systems — primarily subway systems — in the united states carry about five times as many passengers each day as do airlines , over many thousands of miles of track , serving stations that are designed primarily for easy access .

the increased security efforts around air travel have led to concerns that terrorists may turn their attention to "softer" targets , such as transit or passenger rail .

a key challenge congress faces is balancing the desire for increased rail passenger security with the efficient functioning of transit systems , with the potential costs and damages of an attack , and with other federal priorities .

the volume of ridership and number of access points make it impractical to subject all rail passengers to the type of screening all airline passengers undergo .

consequently , transit security measures tend to emphasize managing the consequences of an attack .

nevertheless , steps have been taken to try to reduce the risks , as well as the consequences , of an attack .

these include vulnerability assessments ; emergency planning ; emergency response training and drilling of transit personnel ( ideally in coordination with police , fire , and emergency medical personnel ) ; increasing the number of transit security personnel ; installing video surveillance equipment in vehicles and stations ; and conducting random inspections of bags , platforms , and trains .

the challenges of securing rail passengers are dwarfed by the challenge of securing bus passengers .

there are some 76,000 buses carrying 19 million passengers each weekday in the united states .

some transit systems have installed video cameras on their buses , but the number and operating characteristics of transit buses make them all but impossible to secure .

in contrast with the aviation sector , where tsa provides security directly , security in surface transportation is provided primarily by the transit and rail operators and local law enforcement agencies .

tsa's role is one of oversight , coordination , intelligence sharing , training , and assistance , though it does provide some operational support through its visible intermodal prevention and response ( vipr ) teams , which conduct operations with local law enforcement officials , including periodic patrols of transit and passenger rail systems to create "unpredictable visual deterrents. .

the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) , passed by congress on july 27 , 2007 , included provisions on passenger rail and transit security and authorized $3.5 billion for fy2008-fy2011 for grants for public transportation security .

the act required public transportation agencies and railroads considered to be high - risk targets by dhs to have security plans approved by dhs ( §1405 and §1512 ) .

other provisions required dhs to conduct a name - based security background check and an immigration status check on all public transportation and railroad frontline employees ( §1414 and §1522 ) , and gave dhs the authority to regulate rail and transit employee security training standards ( §1408 and §1517 ) .

in 2010 tsa completed a national threat assessment for transit and passenger rail , and in 2011 completed an updated transportation systems sector - specific plan , which established goals and objectives for a secure transportation system .

the three primary objectives for reducing risk in transit are increase system resilience by protecting high - risk / high - consequence assets ( i.e. , critical tunnels , stations , and bridges ) ; expand visible deterrence activities ( i.e. , canine teams , passenger screening teams , and antiterrorism teams ) ; and engage the public and transit operators in the counterterrorism mission .

tsa surface transportation security inspectors conduct assessments of transit systems ( and other surface modes ) through the agency's baseline assessment for security enhancement ( base ) program .

the agency has also developed a security training and security exercise program for transit ( i - step ) .

the house committee on homeland security's subcommittee on transportation security held a hearing in may 2012 to examine the surface transportation security inspector program .

the number of inspectors had increased from 175 in fy2008 to 404 in fy2011 ( full - time equivalents ) .

issues considered at the hearing included the lack of surface transportation expertise among the inspectors , many of whom were promoted from screening passengers at airports ; the administrative challenge of having the surface inspectors managed by federal security directors who are located at airports and who themselves typically have no surface transportation experience ; and the security value of the tasks performed by surface inspectors .

the number of surface inspectors decreased to 260 ( full - time equivalent positions ) in fy2016 , in part reflecting a reduction in the number of vipr surface inspectors and in part reflecting efficiencies achieved through focusing efforts on the basis of risk .

gao reported in 2014 that lack of guidance to tsa's surface inspectors resulted in inconsistent reporting of rail security incidents and that tsa had not consistently enforced the requirement that rail agencies report security incidents , resulting in poor data on the number and types of incidents .

gao also found that tsa did not have a systematic process for collecting and addressing feedback from surface transportation stakeholders regarding the effectiveness of its information - sharing effort .

in a 2015 hearing , gao testified that tsa has put processes in place to address these issues .

dhs provides grants for security improvements for public transit , passenger rail , and occasionally other surface transportation modes under the transit security grant program .

the vast majority of the funding goes to public transit providers .

crs estimates that , on an inflation - adjusted basis , funding for this program has declined 84% since 2009 , when congress allocated $150 million in the american recovery and reinvestment act , in addition to routine appropriations ( see table 1 ) .

in a february 2012 report , gao found potential for duplication among four dhs state and local security grant programs with similar goals , one of which was the public transportation security grant program .

the obama administration has repeatedly proposed consolidating several of these programs in annual budget requests .

this proposal has not been supported by congress in the appropriations process to date , though appropriators have expressed concerns that grant programs have not focused on areas of highest risk and that significant amounts of previously appropriated funds have not yet been awarded to recipients .

in p.l .

114-50 , congress directed tsa to ensure that all passenger transportation providers it considers as having high - risk facilities have in place plans to respond to active shooters , acts of terrorism , or other security - related incidents that target passengers .

the bulk of u.s. overseas trade is carried by ships and thus the economic consequences of a maritime terrorist attack could be significant .

a key challenge for u.s. policymakers is prioritizing maritime security activities among a virtually unlimited number of potential attack scenarios .

one priority is preventing the smuggling of a weapon of mass destruction in a shipping container .

a less complicated attack scenario is ramming a passenger vessel with a bomb - laden speedboat .

there are far more potential attack scenarios than likely ones , and far more than could be meaningfully addressed with limited counterterrorism resources .

not all terrorist groups have familiarity with the maritime environment .

two port security initiatives the 115 th congress may continue to examine are the 100% container scanning requirement and the effectiveness of a port worker security card system .

cybersecurity is an emerging concern .

section 1701 of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) requires that all imported marine containers be scanned by nonintrusive imaging equipment and radiation detection equipment at a foreign loading port by july 1 , 2012 , unless dhs can demonstrate it is not feasible , in which case the deadline can be extended by two years on a port - by - port basis .

dhs has sought a blanket extension for all ports , citing numerous challenges to implementing the 100% scanning requirement at overseas ports .

in a letter requesting renewal of the two - year extension , dhs secretary jeh johnson stated , i have personally reviewed our current port security and dhs's short term and long term ability to comply with 100% scanning requirement .

following this review , i must report , in all candor , that dhs's ability to fully comply with this unfunded mandate of 100% scanning , even in the long term , is highly improbable , hugely expensive , and in our judgment , not the best use of taxpayer resources to meet this country's port security and homeland security needs .

in an october 2015 hearing , dhs officials reiterated their opposition to a 100% scanning strategy in favor of a risk - based and layered security strategy .

major u.s. trading partners also oppose 100% scanning .

the european commission has determined that 100% scanning is the wrong approach , favoring a multilayered risk management approach to inspecting cargo .

cbp has tested the feasibility of scanning all u.s. - bound containers at several overseas ports and identified numerous operational , technical , logistical , financial , and diplomatic obstacles , including opposition from host government officials .

in a july 2016 hearing , dhs officials restated their opposition to pursuing a 100% scanning strategy .

one - hundred - percent scanning conflicts with dhs's general approach to risk management , which seeks to focus scarce inspection resources on the highest - risk containers .

by scanning a smaller number of containers , dhs may be able to devote additional resources to each individual scan .

this consideration is important because reviewing the scans is labor - intensive , and scanning fewer containers may allow dhs to subject individual scans to greater scrutiny , and to maintain a lower threshold for opening containers with questionable scanning images .

if illicit cargo is estimated to be limited to less than 1% of incoming containers , as cbp believes to be the case , focusing enforcement on the likeliest containers may be the most effective enforcement strategy .

this approach would emphasize risk - based scanning along with investment in cbp intelligence to improve targeting , and / or increase cbp personnel , which would allow ports to conduct a larger number of targeted special enforcement operations .

in january 2007 , tsa and the coast guard issued a final rule implementing the transportation worker identification credential ( twic ) at u.s. ports .

longshoremen , port truck drivers , railroad workers , merchant mariners , and other workers at a port must apply for a twic card to obtain unescorted access to secure areas of port facilities or vessels .

the card was authorized under the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( mtsa ; §102 of p.l .

107-295 ) .

as of october 2015 , the population of twic holders was approximately 2.1 million .

the card must be renewed every five years .

tsa conducts a security threat assessment of each worker before issuing a card .

the security threat assessment uses the same procedures and standards established by tsa for truck drivers carrying hazardous materials , including examination of the applicant's criminal history , immigration status , and possible links to terrorist activity to determine whether a worker poses a security threat .

a worker pays a fee of about $130 that is intended to cover the cost of administering the cards .

the card uses biometric technology for positive identification .

terminal operators were to deploy card readers at the gates to their facilities , so that a worker's fingerprint template would be scanned each time he or she entered the port area and matched to the data on the card .

finding a card reader that worked reliably in a harsh marine environment proved difficult .

on august 23 , 2016 , the coast guard issued a final rule requiring that only the highest - risk maritime facilities — generally , those handling dangerous cargoes in bulk or passenger vessels with space for more than 1,000 passengers — install card readers .

this effectively required about 525 of the roughly 3,200 maritime facilities regulated under mtsa to have card readers .

other facilities , including those handling containerized cargo , would continue to use the twic as a "flash pass," but the biometric data on the card would not be used to positively identify the worker .

potential problems with this approach were highlighted by the february 2016 announcement that federal investigators uncovered a "document mill" producing fraudulent twic cards in los angeles .

the final rule becomes effective on august 23 , 2018 .

currently , the coast guard performs spot checks with hand - held biometric readers while conducting port security inspections .

gao and inspector general audits have been highly critical of how the twic has been implemented .

a 2013 gao audit found that the results of a pilot test of card readers should not be relied upon for developing regulations on card reader requirements because they were incomplete , inaccurate , and unreliable .

this audit was discussed at a hearing by the house subcommittee on government operations on may 9 , 2013 , and by the house subcommittee on border and maritime security on june 18 , 2013 .

another 2013 gao audit examined tsa's adjudication center ( which performs security threat assessments on twic applicants and other transportation workers ) , and recommended steps the agency could take to better measure the center's performance .

a 2011 gao audit found internal control weaknesses in the enrollment , background checking , and use of the twic card at ports , which were said to undermine the effectiveness of the credential in screening out unqualified individuals from obtaining access to port facilities .

similarly , a 2016 inspector general audit found that tsa appeared to be more concerned with customer service matters such as issuing the cards in a timely manner than with careful scrutiny of applicants .

it found that applicants believed to be providing fraudulent identification documents were nevertheless issued a twic .

the 114 th congress enacted the essential transportation worker identification credential assessment act ( p.l .

114-278 ) , which requires tsa to improve its vetting process , including fraud detection .

the law also requires dhs to commission an outside organization to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the benefits and costs of the twic card .

in june 2015 , the coast guard released a document that identifies the agency's plans for addressing cybersecurity in the maritime environment .

vessel and facility operators use potentially vulnerable technologies for navigation , communication , cargo handling , and other purposes .

the strategy document states the coast guard will be developing guidance for vessels and ports to address vulnerabilities , and will incorporate cybersecurity into existing enforcement and compliance programs .

the strategy also states the coast guard will incorporate cybersecurity training in the requirements for mariner licensing and for port security officer qualifications .

according to this document , the coast guard will modify an existing port risk assessment tool ( msram - maritime security risk assessment model ) to incorporate cyber risks .

msram is the primary tool used to assess risk to national infrastructure in the maritime domain , and is used extensively at the local , regional , and national levels , according to the coast guard .

in the 114 th congress , house - passed h.r .

3878 sought to promote cybersecurity risk information sharing among maritime stakeholders and provide industry with risk assessment tools .

house - passed h.r .

5077 would have required dhs to report on u.s. maritime cyber threats and vulnerabilities ( §604 ) .

the senate did not act on either bill .

