in march 2011 , antigovernment protests broke out in syria , which has been ruled by the asad family for more than four decades .

the protests spread , violence escalated ( primarily but not exclusively by syrian government forces ) , and numerous political and armed opposition groups emerged .

in august 2011 , president barack obama called on syrian president bashar al asad to step down .

over time , the rising death toll from the conflict , and the use of chemical weapons by the asad government , intensified pressure for the united states and others to assist the opposition .

in 2013 , congress debated lethal and nonlethal assistance to vetted syrian opposition groups , and authorized the latter .

congress also debated , but did not authorize , the use of force in response to an august 2013 chemical weapons attack .

in 2014 , the obama administration requested authority and funding from congress to provide lethal support to vetted syrians for select purposes .

the original request sought authority to support vetted syrians in "defending the syrian people from attacks by the syrian regime," but the subsequent advance of the islamic state organization from syria across iraq refocused executive and legislative deliberations onto counterterrorism .

congress authorized a department of defense - led train and equip program to combat terrorist groups active in syria , defend the united states and its partners from syria - based terrorist threats , and "promote the conditions for a negotiated settlement to end the conflict in syria. .

in september 2014 , the united states began air strikes in syria , with the stated goal of preventing the islamic state from using syria as a base for its operations in neighboring iraq .

in october 2014 , the defense department established combined joint task force - operation inherent resolve ( cjtf - oir ) to "formalize ongoing military actions against the rising threat posed by isis in iraq and syria. .

cjtf - oir came to encompass more than 70 countries , and has bolstered the efforts of local syrian partner forces against the islamic state .

the united states also gradually increased the number of u.s. personnel in syria from 50 in late 2015 to roughly 2,000 by late 2017 .

president trump in early 2018 called for an expedited withdrawal of u.s. forces from syria , but senior administration officials later stated that u.s. personnel would remain in syria to ensure the enduring defeat of the islamic state .

national security advisor john bolton also stated that u.s. forces would remain in syria until the withdrawal of iranian - led forces .

in december 2018 , president trump ordered the withdrawal of all u.s. forces from syria , contributing to the subsequent decision by defense secretary james mattis to resign , and drawing criticism from several members of congress .

in early 2019 , the white house announced that several hundred u.s. troops would remain in syria .

the collapse of is and opposition territorial control in most of syria since 2015 has been matched by significant military and territorial gains by the syrian government .

the u.s. intelligence community's 2018 worldwide threat assessment stated in february 2018 that , "the conflict has decisively shifted in the syrian regime's favor , enabling russia and iran to further entrench themselves inside the country. .

at the same time , ongoing conflict between the coalition's syrian kurdish partners and turkey has continued to challenge u.s. policymakers , as has the entrenchment of al qaeda - affiliated groups among the opposition and the ongoing humanitarian crisis .

as of 2019 , 5.7 million syrians are registered as refugees in nearby countries , with 6.2 million more internally displaced .

the u.n. has sponsored peace talks in geneva since 2012 , but it is unclear when ( or whether ) the parties might reach a political settlement that could result in a transition away from asad .

with many armed opposition groups weakened , defeated , or geographically isolated , military pressure on the syrian government to make concessions to the opposition has been reduced .

u.s. officials have stated that the united states will not fund reconstruction in asad - held areas unless a political solution is reached in accordance with u.n. security council resolution 2254 .

congress has considered the following key issues since the outbreak of the syria conflict in 2011: what are the core u.s. national interests in syria ? .

what objectives derive from those interests ? .

how should u.s. goals in syria be prioritized ? .

what financial , military , and personnel resources are required to implement u.s. objectives in syria ? .

what measures or metrics can be used to gauge progress ? .

should the u.s. military continue to operate in syria ? .

for what purposes and on what authority ? .

for how long ? .

how are developments in syria affecting other countries in the region , including u.s. partners ? .

what potential consequences of u.s. action or inaction should be considered ? .

how might other outside actors respond to u.s. choices ? .

amid significant territorial losses by the islamic state and syrian opposition groups since 2015 and parallel military gains by the syrian government and coalition partner forces , u.s. policymakers face a number of questions and potential decision points related to the following factors .

since 2011 , u.s. policy toward the unrest and conflict in syria has attempted to pursue parallel interests and manage interconnected challenges , with varying degrees of success .

among the objectives identified by successive administrations and by many members in successive sessions of congress have been supporting syrian - led efforts to demand more representative , accountable , and effective governance ; seeking a negotiated settlement that includes a transition in syria away from the leadership of bashar al asad and his supporters ; limiting or preventing the use of military force by state and nonstate actors against civilian populations ; mitigating transnational threats posed by syria - based islamist extremist groups ; meeting the humanitarian needs of internally and externally displaced syrians ; preventing the presence and needs of syrian refugees from destabilizing neighboring countries ; limiting the negative effects of other third party interventions on regional and international balances of power ; and responding to and preventing the use of chemical weapons .

as syria's conflict has changed over time from civil unrest to nationwide military conflict involving multiple internal and external actors to the apparent resurgence of the asad government , the policies , approaches , and priorities of the united states and others also have changed .

as of late 2018 , the united states and its syrian and regional partners have not succeeded in inducing or compelling syrian president bashar al asad to leave office or secured a fundamental reorientation of syria's political system as part of a negotiated settlement process .

the united states continues to advocate for an inclusive negotiated solution , but has largely acquiesced to asad's resumption of political and security control .

forceful interventions in syria by russia , iran , turkey , the united states , and israel have created a fundamentally different set of calculations for policymakers to consider relative to those that prevailed prior to the conflict .

the united states , the united nations , and others have assessed that the syrian government has used chemical weapons repeatedly against opposition forces and civilians in the country .

expert teams affiliated with the u.n. - opcw joint mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the syrian arab republic ( jim ) and the opcw fact - finding mission ( ffm ) in syria have investigated some of these allegations and have found evidence that in some cases confirms and in others suggests that chemical weapons and / or toxic chemicals have been used in attacks by the syrian regime and by the islamic state .

any use of chemical weapons is prohibited by the chemical weapons convention , which syria joined in september 2013 .

the victory of pro - asad forces in the broader conflict appears likely , and , from a u.s. perspective , that may further complicate several unresolved issues , including the stabilization and governance of areas recaptured from the islamic state ; the resolution of security threats posed by extremist groups in northwest syria ; the return and reintegration of internally and externally displaced syrians ; the reconstruction of conflict - damaged areas ; the management of syria - based threats to syria's neighbors ; and , the terms of a postconflict political order in syria .

in light of current trends and conditions related to these issues , administration officials and members of congress may reexamine appropriate terms and conditions for u.s. investment , force deployment , and the nature of relationships with u.s. partners in and around syria .

carla e. humud , coordinator , analyst in middle eastern affairs ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) christopher m. blanchard , specialist in middle eastern affairs ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) mary beth d. nikitin , specialist in nonproliferation ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

