this report discusses legislation and activity in the 109 th congress aimed at amending the nation's campaign finance laws , primarily under titles 2 and 26 of the u.s. code , the federal election campaign act ( feca ) — the main body of law governing federal campaign finance .

the report comprises four major sections and an index: a summary of legislative highlights in the 109 th congress regarding campaign finance issues ; a checklist of all bills ( in numerical order ) , noting major types of reforms proposed in each , organized by 14 categories ( including "miscellaneous" ) addressed in the bills ; brief summaries of all provisions of every bill under the 14 categories noted in the checklist , with a basic description of the issue area , where needed , and further division of proposals into subcategories .

bills whose provisions fall under a specific category or subcategory are noted accordingly ( with further detail provided elsewhere in the report ) ; a numerical listing and summary of each bill .

for each bill , this section provides the bill number , sponsor , title , a detailed summary of provisions arranged by the 14 categories explained previously , date introduced , committee referral , and any legislative action ; and an index of bills , listed alphabetically by primary sponsor .

during the 109 th congress , 51 bills were introduced ( 43 in the house and 8 in the senate ) to change federal campaign finance law .

legislation relating to 527 organizations received the most prominent legislative and media attention during the 109 th congress .

other bills receiving attention addressed regulation of internet communications , party coordinated expenditures , contributions by indian tribes , and leadership political action committees ( pacs ) .

all are discussed in more detail below .

 table 1 on the following pages provides easy reference to types of provisions in each of the bills listed in this report .

an "x" denotes features in a given bill .

the nature of these categories is described in the introduction to the next section .

as explained previously , campaign finance bills introduced in the 109 th congress covered a wide range of topics .

although many of the bills at first appear to have had little in common , all the bills focused on major campaign finance issues .

this section of the report is organized into 14 subsections , encompassing the 13 major areas of proposed changes in campaign finance regulation found in 109 th congress bills ; the 14 th subsection , "miscellaneous," includes provisions outside that framework .

these are the same categories listed in table 1 .

each subsection contains a brief introductory statement about proposed changes , followed by a listing of bills containing those proposed changes .

 ( later in this report , bills are listed by number , followed by detailed summaries of all major provisions contained in each bill and any action taken on them. ) .

in this section , bills are listed according to what appears to have been the primary nature and goal of a particular provision .

many provisions , however , had multiple purposes .

for example , a bill that would have raised the limit on an individual's contributions to political parties would have empowered both the individual and the political party .

such a provision would be listed here under "individual," because it would have most directly affected what an individual might do , although the parties would have benefitted as well .

categorization and ordering of bills in this report is solely for the purpose of organization and does not reflect any judgement by crs as to the relative importance or merit of the bills themselves .

the first six categories can be examined in the context of hard money , since they pertain to types of activity that are fully regulated under federal election law , which specifies prohibited sources , sets limits on permitted contributions , and requires disclosure .

the six hard money categories are shown on the checklist in table 1 under a larger heading "hard money," with the first four — individuals , pacs , parties , and candidates — further grouped to reflect the principal sources of campaign receipts .

the fifth category deals with in - state or in - district requirements for campaign receipts , while the sixth addresses independent expenditures .

the eighth and ninth categories cover provisions that dealt with soft money , those activities largely or fully outside the framework of federal election law , which have been a major focus of reform efforts in recent years .

the eighth category contains provisions relating to party soft money , which was largely addressed in bcra but where some issues remain .

the ninth category focuses on non - party soft money — activities of unions , corporations , and tax - exempt organizations , particularly 527 organizations , in federal elections ; it also deals with election - related issue advocacy , which is closely related to activities of 527s and other outside groups .

 ( the seventh category — coordination — has applicability to both hard and soft money activities and is so designated. ) .

category 10 addresses proposals for public financing or benefits and spending limits in congressional elections .

the 11 th category — labeled "fec" — addresses proposals to improve enforcement and disclosure by the federal election commission or a proposed successor agency .

the 12 th deals with proposals on campaign advertising , including the internet .

the 13 th contains proposals to change the presidential public funding system .

the 14 th — " miscellaneous" — contains all other proposals .

these bills would have changed limits and offered incentives to encourage a greater role for individual citizens in federal campaign financing .

these bills would have restricted or empowered pacs in their funding roles .

most pacs are considered "nonparty multicandidate committees," referring to the feca status that most pacs have .

pacs sponsored by organizations are called "separate segregated funds," while those that are independent of other entities are labeled "nonconnected. .

these bills would have restricted or empowered political parties in their funding roles .

these bills contained provisions that focused on spending and loans by candidates from personal or family wealth , including the issue of repayment of candidate loans from campaign funds after an election , and permissible use of campaign funds in general .

this category includes a bill that would have required a minimum level of candidates' funds to come from residents of that state or district .

independent expenditures are communications with the public advocating the election or defeat of clearly identified candidates made without any coordination , cooperation , or consultation with the candidate campaigns .

independent expenditures are not subject to limits on amounts spent , but the source restrictions and disclosure requirements of federal law apply .

this hard money activity should not be confused with issue advocacy , which is largely outside federal election regulation and is addressed in the "nonparty soft money" category , below .

these provisions address the issue of what constitutes coordination under feca , which , in turn , triggers an activity's treatment as a contribution or expenditure , subject to relevant limits .

this issue has come to include both issue and express advocacy , hence it contains both hard and soft money components .

the term "soft money" has traditionally referred to money that may indirectly influence federal elections , but that is raised and spent outside federal election law's purview and that would be illegal if spent directly in connection with a federal election .

prior to enactment of bcra , national parties commonly raised money from sources and in amounts that were federally impermissible ; these funds could then be transferred to state parties , where permitted under state election law , and used for grassroots and generic party activity .

party soft money was also used for a share of administrative and overhead expenses and issue advocacy .

since bcra's prohibition on the raising of soft money by national parties and federal officials , the soft money issue has largely been moot .

those few bills that addressed it in the 109 th congress generally sought to adjust existing restrictions .

non - party soft money pertains to direct spending by and activity of groups , as opposed to their donations to another entity ( such as parties ) .

the term long was used to refer to activities by corporations and labor unions , but in recent years has come to refer increasingly to activities by tax - exempt organizations , most notably 527s .

it also has particular relevance to election - related issue advocacy , a practice in which some of 527s are prominently engaged .

traditionally , non - party soft money referred to permissible spending from union and corporate treasuries — despite the long - standing ban on direct union and corporate spending in federal elections — on three exempt activities aimed only at specified restricted classes ( corporate executives and stockholders and families , and union members and their families ) .

the three exempt activities are: setting up and raising money for a pac , internal communications ( including express advocacy ) , and voter registration and get - out - the - vote drives .

in more recent years , the activities of tax - exempt organizations have come under scrutiny for their election - related activities that may be permitted under the internal revenue code ( irc ) but are not regulated under feca .

observers have long noted the potential for 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) and 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations to affect elections indirectly by their permissible activities under the tax code .

since 2000 , particular interest has been focused on "political organizations" defined by section 527 of the irc .

although congress in 2000 required disclosure by 527 groups through the irs , much debate has ensued since 2004 as to whether their election - related activities should require full regulation under federal election law .

in large measure , what has been fueling the issue over 527s and other tax - exempt organizations has been the practice of election - related issue advocacy .

prior to bcra's enactment , some observers became concerned about communications that promoted political issues in reference to candidates , but which , by avoiding specific election advocacy language ( eg , "elect jones" or "defeat smith" ) , were not subject to regulation under federal election law .

these "issue advocacy" communications contrasted with those that explicitly promoted the election or defeat of clearly identified candidates — a class of communications known as "express advocacy. .

since the courts had generally construed "express advocacy" communications in a narrow sense ( i.e. , using explicit phrases advocating election or defeat ) , communications that may have been perceived as constituting thinly veiled election activity could thus avoid federal disclosure and source regulations .

bcra addressed issue advocacy by creating a new term in federal election law , "electioneering communication" — political advertisements that refer to a clearly identified federal candidate and are broadcast within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election .

the act prohibited unions and certain corporations from spending treasury funds for electioneering communications and required disclosure of disbursements of more than $10,000 and the identity of donors of $1,000 or more .

in part because of bcra's narrowly tailored response to issue advocacy , concerns remain .

some believe that bcra went too far and favor the repeal of its electioneering communications provision .

others believe it did not go far enough and favor more regulation in this area .

some proposals address issue advocacy directly , while others address it through proposals aimed at the type of organization practicing issue advocacy .

this section is organized accordingly .

bills in this category would , in general , have provided: ( 1 ) campaign spending limits for house or senate candidates on overall campaign or candidate personal spending ( or advertising time restrictions ) ; ( 2 ) public , cost - saving benefits to candidates , including direct subsidies ( public financing ) ; or ( 3 ) both .

discussion of spending limits and benefits to candidates are grouped together because many bills embodied both concepts , largely because a voluntary system of limits with conditional benefits has been a major response to the buckley v. valeo ruling [424 u.s. 1 ( 1976 ) ] , which overturned mandatory limits .

this grouping should not be construed as an inherent linkage between the two ideas ; there are very distinct principles behind spending limits and public benefits ( or financing ) .

options among spending limit bills included voluntary limits , in response to buckley , with or without inducements to participation through public benefits ; mandatory limits , through a constitutional amendment ; or "benefits only" provisions without adherence to spending limits .

these bills sought to improve enforcement and disclosure provisions of feca , administered by the fec or an alternative body .

bills in this category would have changed terms under which candidates communicated their messages , including rates charged and identification ( disclaimer ) required , and whether certain advertising media , such as the internet , might be regulated .

these bills sought to change the rules for the public financing system available in presidential elections , or to abolish that system .

the preceding section listed all bills , organized by major categories of proposed changes in campaign finance regulation .

by contrast , the following section lists all bills introduced during the 109 th congress numerically , and provides summaries of each major provision of those bills and any action taken .

headings in bold indicate the primary purpose of each summarized provision .

these headings are the same categories used throughout this report .

would have included in definition of "political committee" any 527 organization , unless it: ( 1 ) had annual gross receipts of less than $25,000 ; ( 2 ) was a political committee of a state or local party or candidate ; ( 3 ) existed solely to pay certain administrative expenses or expenses of a qualified newsletter ; ( 4 ) was exclusively devoted to elections where no federal candidate was on ballot , to non - federal elections , ballot issues , or to selection of non - elected officials ; would have made preceding two exemptions ( above ) inapplicable if the 527 organization spent more than $1,000 for: ( 1 ) public communications that promoted , supported , attacked , or opposed a clearly identified federal candidate within one year of the general election in which that candidate was seeking office ; or ( 2 ) for any voter drive effort conducted by a group ; would have required political committees ( but not candidate or party committees ) that made disbursements for voter mobilization activities or public communications that affected both federal and non - federal elections to use generally at least 50% hard money from federal accounts to finance such activities ( but would have required that 100% of public communications and voter drive activities that referred to only federal candidates be financed with hard money from a federal account , regardless of whether the communication referred to a political party ) ; in effect , this would have codified the 2005 fec regulations on this topic and made them applicable to 527s not affected by current rules ; would have allowed contributions to non - federal accounts making allocations ( above ) only by individuals and subject to limit of $25,000 per year ; would have prohibited fundraising for such accounts by national parties and officials and federal candidates and officeholders ; stated that this act was to have no bearing on fec regulations , on any definitions of political organizations in internal revenue code , or on any determination of whether a 501 ( c ) tax - exempt organization might be a political committee under feca ; would have provided special expedited judicial review procedures , similar to bcra's , for a challenge on constitutional grounds , and would have allowed any member to bring or intervene in any such case .

introduced february 2 , 2005 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

ordered reported april 27 , 2005 , by committee on rules and administration , but was later incorporated into s. 1053 , an original bill .

stated that communications over the internet were not to be considered "public communications" and thus not regulated under feca .

introduced march 17 , 2005 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

[amendments adopted in committee in italics with sponsor name .

would have indexed , for inflation , limit on contributions by individ uals to state and local parties   ( bennett ) .

would have increased limit on contribution s to and by pacs from $5,000 to  $7,500 ; would have increased limit on pac contributions to national parties from $15,000 to $25,000 ; would have indexed these limits for inflation ; would have allowed leadership pacs to transfer unlimited funds to national party committees ; would have eliminated twice - a - year limit on solicitations by unions / corporations of their restricted classes ; would have eliminated requirement that trade associations get prior approval of member corporations before solicitations were made to their restricted classes ; would have eliminated requirement that corporations could grant approval to only one association to solicit its restricted class in a year ; would have increased annual contribution and expenditure threshold for determining political committee status to $10,000 ( bennett ) .

would have included in the definition of "political committee" any 527 organization , unless it: had annual gross receipts of less than $25,000 ; was a political committee of a state or local party or candidate ; existed solely to pay certain administrative expenses or expenses of a qualified newsletter ; was composed solely of state or local officeholders and candidates whose voter drive activities referred to state and local candidates but not federal candidates and parties ; was solely involved in voter drive activities , including public communications devoted to such , but did not engage in broadcast , cable , or satellite communications ( schumer ) ; or was exclusively devoted to elections where no federal candidate was on ballot , or to non - federal elections , ballot issues , or selection of non - elected officials .

the preceding exemption would not have applied if the 527 spent more than $1,000 for: public communications that promoted , supported , attacked , or opposed a clearly identified federal candidate within one year of the general election in which that candidate was seeking office ; or for any voter drive activity conducted by a group in a calendar year , unless: ( 1 ) sponsor confined activity solely within one state ; ( 2 ) non - federal candidates were referred to in all voter drive activities and no federal candidate or party was referred to in any substantive way ; ( 3 ) no federal candidate or officeholder or national party official or agent was involved in the organization's direction , fundraising , or disbursements ; and ( 4 ) no contributions were made by the group to federal candidates ; would have required political committees ( but not candidate or party committees ) that made disbursements for voter mobilization activities or public communications that affected both federal and non - federal elections to use generally at least 50% hard money from federal accounts ( or more , if fec so determined ) to finance such activities ( but would have required that 100% of public communications and voter drive activities that referred to only federal candidates be financed with hard money from a federal account , regardless of whether the communication referred to a political party ) ; would have allowed contributions to non - federal accounts making allocations under this provision only by individuals in amounts of up to $25,000 per year  ( and stated that funds in non - federal accounts were not otherwise subject to feca ) ; stated that this act was to have no bearing on fec regulations , on any definitions of political organizations in the irc , or on any determination of whether a 501 ( c ) tax - exempt organization might be a political committee under feca ; would have provided special expedited judicial review procedures , similar to those in bcra , for a challenge to the act on constitutional grounds , and would have allowed any member to bring or intervene in any such case .

would have made tv , cable , and satellite lowest unit rate broadcast time non - preemptible , with rates based on comparison with full prior year , and would have required such rates to be available to national parties for time on behalf of candidates ( durbin ) ; would have provided that communications o ver the internet were not to be  considered " public communications " and thus not regulated under feca   ( bennett ) .

would have provided special expedited judicial review procedures , similar to bcra's , for a challenge on constitutional grounds , and would have allowed any member to bring or intervene in any such case ; declared that if any provision were deemed unconstitutional , the rest of the act would not be affected .

original bill placed on legislative calendar may 17 , 2005 ( in lieu of s. 271 , which was ordered reported april 27 , 2005 by committee on rules and administration ) .

would have required senate candidate disclosure reports that were filed with secretary of the senate and forwarded to fec to be filed electronically .

introduced july 27 , 2005 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

would have amended senate rules to prohibit senators , officers , and staff from raising , soliciting , or directing senate campaign contributions within 18 months of senate general election ; prohibition would not have applied if an opponent spent more than $100,000 , if senator was a candidate for another office and raised funds solely for that purpose , or if senator was targeted in broadcast advertising by outside groups ; in latter case , senator could have engaged in raising funds in amounts equal to what was spent in broadcast ads opposing him or her .

introduced march 16 , 2006 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

would have included in definition of "political committee" any 527 organization , unless it: ( 1 ) had annual gross receipts of less than $25,000 ; ( 2 ) was a political committee of a state or local party or candidate ; ( 3 ) existed solely to pay certain administrative expenses or expenses of a qualified newsletter ; ( 4 ) was composed solely of state or local officeholders or candidates whose voter drive activities referred only to state / local candidates and parties ; or ( 5 ) was exclusively devoted to elections where no federal candidate was on ballot , to non - federal elections , ballot issues , or to selection of non - elected officials ; would have made last exemption ( above ) inapplicable if the 527 organization spent more than $1,000 for: ( 1 ) public communications that promoted , supported , attacked , or opposed a clearly identified federal candidate within one year of the general election in which that candidate was seeking office ; or ( 2 ) for any voter drive effort conducted by a group in a calendar year , unless: ( a ) sponsor confined activity solely to one state ; ( b ) non - federal candidates were referred to in all voter drive activities and no federal candidate or party was referred to in any substantive way ; ( c ) no federal candidate or officeholder or national party official / agent was involved in organization's direction , funding , or spending ; and ( d ) no contributions were made by the group to federal candidates ; would have required political committees ( but not candidate or party committees ) that made disbursements for voter mobilization activities or public communications that affected both federal and non - federal elections to use generally at least 50% hard money from federal accounts to finance such activities ( but would have required that 100% of public communications and voter drive activities that referred to only federal candidates be financed with hard money from a federal account , regardless of whether the communication referred to a political party ) ; in effect , this would have codified the 2005 fec regulations on this topic and made them applicable to 527s not affected by current rules ; would have allowed contributions to non - federal accounts making allocations ( above ) only by individuals and subject to limit of $25,000 per year ; would have prohibited fundraising for such accounts by national parties and officials and federal candidates and officeholders ; stated that this act was to have no bearing on fec regulations , on any definitions of political organizations in internal revenue code , or on any determination of whether a 501 ( c ) tax - exempt organization might be a political committee under feca ; would have provided special expedited judicial review procedures , similar to bcra's , for a challenge on constitutional grounds , and would have allowed any member to bring or intervene in any such case ; declared that if any provision were deemed unconstitutional , the rest of the act would not be affected .

introduced april 5 , 2006 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

would have replaced federal election commission with federal election administration , to administer , seek compliance with , enforce , and formulate policy regarding federal election law ; new agency would have consisted of three commissioners , appointed by president with advice and consent of senate , headed by chairman serving one 10-year term ; other two commissioners would have serve staggered six - year terms ; no two commissioners were to have been of the same political party ; would have required commissioners to have had at least five years of professional law enforcement or judicial experience ; would have allowed enforcement actions to be initiated by majority vote ; would have authorized administrative law judges to hear cases , make findings of fact , impose civil monetary penalties , and issue cease - and - desist orders , subject to appeal to agency ; would have provided for appeals for judicial review by complainants or aggrieved parties , including those adversely affected by advisory opinions ; would have authorized agency to appeal to district court for temporary restraining orders or preliminary injunctions to prevent possible violations ; would have given agency responsibility to administer disclosure laws and presidential public finance system , and to conduct random audits ; would have provided for agency to submit budget directly to congress ; would have required gao to study criminal enforcement of election laws by justice department and to conduct ongoing study on appropriate funding levels for agency .

introduced june 22 , 2006 ; referred to committee on rules and administration .

would have increased limit for coordinated spending by national party on behalf of its presidential candidate to $25 million before april 1 and an additional $25 million after april 1 until candidate was certified for general election public funding ( limits indexed for inflation ) ; would have allowed latter limit to be removed if non - participating primary candidate raised or spent more than 120% of total primary spending limit .

would have lowered amount of individual contributions subject to matching in primary elections from $250 to $200 ; would have increased rate of public funds match in primary elections from 100% to 400% before march 31 of election year , after which the rate of match would have been lowered to 100% of any contribution up to $200 ; would have increased qualifying threshold for presidential matching funds to $25,000 in contributions in each of 20 states , in amounts of $200 or less ( currently $250 ) ; would have required candidates to commit to accepting public financing for the general election as condition for getting matching funds in primaries ; would have moved starting date for payment of matching funds to july 1 of year prior to election year ; would have increased amount of matching funds available to 80% of primary spending limit ; would have required acceptance of primary matching funds as a condition for getting public funding in general election ; would have eliminated state - by - state primary spending limits ; would have raised national primary spending limit to $100 million through april 1 of election year , and $150 million total for primary , indexed for inflation ; would have raised general election spending limit to $100 million , indexed for inflation ; would have changed rules to fully count fundraising costs toward expenditure limits ; for participating candidate opposed by non - participating candidate who made expenditures of more than 120% of primary spending limit , would have increased primary spending limit to $150 million before april 1 and to $200 million for entire primary , with further spending by non - participant triggering further increases in spending limits and additional matching funds ; for participating candidate in general election opposed by non - participating candidate who raised or spent more than 120% of combined primary and general election spending limit , would have provided additional subsidy equal to subsidy already received ( for major party candidates ) ; would have increased tax check - off from $3 to $10 for individuals and from $6 to $20 for couples , with future indexing for inflation ; would have established the friday before labor day as the uniform public funds disbursement date for participating general election candidates ; would have required secretary of treasury to issue regulations to ensure that electronic software used in preparation or filing of tax returns did not automatically accept or decline a check - off to the fund ; would have authorized fec to spend up to $10 million from the fund during a four - year period on public education about the fund ; would have allowed secretary of the treasury to borrow funds in event of estimated shortfall in the fund ; would have repealed prioritization of nominating convention funding over primary matching funds ; would have required participating party committees to spend only public subsidy amount on their presidential nominating conventions , i.e. , would have prohibited solicitation , receipt , and spending of any soft money on conventions ; would have required disclosure of name , address , occupation , and employer of each person making a bundled contribution to a presidential campaign ( would have defined "bundled contributions" as a series of contributions that , in the aggregate , totaled at least $10,000 and were transferred to a candidate by one person or included notification that a person other than donor solicited , arranged , or directed those contributions ) ; would have capped taxpayer subsidies for promotion of agricultural products by $100 million per year to offset additional costs in presidential public funding system .

introduced july 26 , 2006 ; referred to committee on finance .

