hurricane katrina struck the gulf coast in late august 2005 , causing catastrophic wind damage and flooding in several states , and a massive dislocation of victims across the country .

according to government sources , the storm , one of the worst natural disasters in the nation's history , killed at least 1,464 people in louisiana , more than 200 in mississippi , and about 20 more in alabama , florida , and georgia .

hurricane rita made landfall along the gulf coast in late september 2005 .

while not as deadly , rita re - flooded new orleans and impacted other areas where katrina evacuees were struggling to recover .

 ( rita was directly responsible for seven deaths and 55 "indirect" deaths , some during the pre - storm evacuation. ) .

hurricane wilma made landfall in south florida in late october 2005 , killing five people and also causing extensive damage .

these three hurricanes , as well as hurricanes dennis and ophelia and tropical storm cindy , each resulted in federal disaster declarations for affected areas in 2005 .

previous research has shown that substance abuse and various manifestations of mental illness — including anxiety , depression , post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , and suicidality — often occur or worsen following disasters , and that some effects may persist for years .

early studies suggest a similar trend in the aftermath of hurricanes katrina and rita .

these disasters were especially challenging , given the extensive relocation of victims , the loss of the medical records of victims with pre - existing conditions , and the loss of infrastructure and healthcare workers to support the response .

it is reported , for example , that new orleans now has only about one - third of the 462 psychiatric beds it had before hurricane katrina , though the remaining population is at more than half of the city's pre - storm level , and , by some accounts , has an even greater need for the beds .

in 1974 , congress enacted broad disaster assistance legislation , the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) .

section 416 of the act provides authority , when there is a presidentially declared disaster , for federal assistance to state and local governments to address the mental health needs of victims .

called the crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) , the program met its first major challenge with the bombing of the murrah federal building in oklahoma city in 1995 .

funding for the program that was established by oklahoma in response , named project heartland , was extended several times to accommodate the immediate needs of victims as well as the stress experienced by victims in the long term , such as during the trials of the accused bombers .

following the terrorist attack of september 11 , 2001 , new york established a ccp program , called project liberty , to assist victims in the greater new york city area .

funding for project liberty was also extended several times .

ccp programs were established in 29 states in response to hurricane katrina , reflecting the widespread dislocation of the storm's victims .

one year later , with many victims still facing problems with mental illness , 17 states have asked for program extensions .

these include alabama , florida , louisiana , and mississippi , which were directly affected , and 13 states that hosted hurricane evacuees .

the objective of ccp is to help disaster victims understand the breadth of normal behavioral responses to stressful events , recognize which responses may warrant specific intervention ( including professional treatment ) , and locate follow - up services when needed .

ccp is not designed to provide or pay for medical , including psychiatric , treatment for those victims who may need it .

rather , victims needing treatment are to be referred to existing service systems .

given that many americans lack health insurance , and that mental health and substance abuse services may not be adequately covered for those who are insured , congress and others remain concerned that , despite ccp and other federal assistance programs , the mental health and substance abuse treatment needs of many disaster victims may go unmet .

in october 2006 , a local newspaper ran a story questioning a number of aspects of project h.o.p.e . , the ccp program established by the state of florida in response to hurricane wilma .

the story , which raised questions about the effectiveness of the program in targeting victims and in addressing their mental health needs , prompted calls by some members of congress for investigations .

this report describes ccp and other programs administered by the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa , an agency within the department of health and human services , hhs ) to provide federal assistance for the mental health and substance abuse treatment needs of disaster victims .

 ( when a disaster is caused by terrorism or other forms of violence , a number of federal programs to assist victims of violence may be available through the department of justice or other agencies .

those assistance mechanisms are not discussed here. ) .

several issues associated with ccp are discussed , including whether the services provided are well matched to need , and whether the effectiveness of the program has been demonstrated .

the report also analyzes the implementation , effectiveness and coordination of other samhsa disaster mental health programs , and discusses relevant policy issues in ensuring the provision of mental health and substance abuse treatment services following disasters .

this report will be updated as circumstances warrant .

the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) is the lead federal agency providing assistance to meet the mental health and substance abuse treatment needs of disaster victims .

in addition to its regular authorities to fund and support substance abuse and mental health treatment services , the agency has authority to provide emergency assistance through three additional mechanisms , discussed below: the crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) , samhsa emergency response grants ( serg ) , and supplemental appropriations .

for its response to hurricanes katrina , rita and wilma , samhsa received funding to administer ccp programs , and provided serg grants through its regular appropriations , but did not receive a supplemental appropriation .

this section discusses several policy issues , including federal leadership and coordination of mental health and substance abuse treatment and other services in the aftermath of a disaster ; issues regarding ccp , including the scope and duration of ccp services , as well as matters of program administration and effectiveness ; the availability of funds for serg grants ; and , the assessment of resources and needs for mental health and substances abuse services .

hurricane katrina was one of the most devastating natural disasters in the nation's history .

one year later , congress and others continue to study the adequacy of the response and approaches for future improvement .

the field of disaster mental health continues to evolve with lessons learned from the 2005 hurricanes and their aftermath .

the 2005 hurricanes prompted , once again , a familiar set of questions .

what types of mental health and substance abuse problems are victims likely to face after a disaster ? .

how long might these problems last , and how might they change over time ? .

are there interventions that are likely to be of benefit ? .

if so , when should they be delivered , and by whom ? .

how can victims who would benefit from assistance be identified , and how should they be monitored ? .

what can the federal government offer , through assistance to states , individuals , and others , that would be helpful to victims in enabling them to recover and move on with their lives ? .

the federal programs set up to address mental health and substance abuse problems in those affected by the 2005 hurricanes offer opportunities for scrutiny .

careful study of these programs , and those established after the oklahoma city bombing and the 2001 terrorist attacks , could lend clarity to , and improve the effectiveness of future federal responses .

appendix a .

state ccp awards appendix b. drf allocations for ccp since the fall of 2005 , fema has provided weekly reports to congress on its allocations from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) for ccp activities in response to hurricanes katrina , rita and wilma .

the weekly reports provide budget lines for "crisis counseling - nimh" and "crisis counseling - scc" for each disaster .

scc is not defined .

nimh is the national institute of mental health , an institute in the national institutes of health ( nih ) which administered ccp in the past .

nimh staff have told crs that the institute does not administer ccp at this time , and has not received the reported funds from fema .

fema has advised that its reported scc amounts correspond with samhsa's immediate services program ( isp ) awards — amounts that fema provides directly to states — and that its reported nimh amounts correspond with samhsa's regular services program ( rsp ) awards — amounts that fema provides to samhsa .

fema accounts for the discrepancy between its reported nimh allocations and samhsa's reported rsp awards by noting that the rsp awards reflect amounts that have been approved , while the fema allocations reflect current information about states' use of the funds .

the latter is subject to a lag in reporting , and is further complicated by requests for program extensions that have been made by many states .

the table below shows amounts for ccp spending for the three disasters , as reported to crs by samhsa , and as published by fema in its weekly reports to congress .

appendix c. scope of mental health treatment services mental health treatment is a term that has been used in the fields of psychology as well as psychiatry .

while psychiatric services typically include a greater emphasis on pharmacotherapy , mental health services in the aftermath of hurricane katrina were primarily psychological .

in this context , mental health treatment can include any or all of the following services: education and prevention services .

information on predictors and symptoms of mental disorders , where mental health services are available , how to access them .

emergency services .

immediate response service available 24-hours a day for persons having a mental health crisis , or emergency .

this includes the national suicide prevention lifeline , 1-800-273-talk ( 8255 ) .

case management services .

functional assessment , individual community support plan , referral and assistance in getting mental health and other services , coordination of services and monitoring of the delivery of services .

rehabilitative and community support services .

services which enable individuals with serious and persistent mental illness to develop and enhance psychiatric stability , social competencies , adjustment , and independent living and community skills .

assertive community treatment ( act ) .

intensive , non - residential rehabilitative evidence - based mental health service provided by multidisciplinary staff .

treatment venues may include the following: outpatient treatment .

individual , group and family therapy ; individual treatment planning ; diagnostic assessments ; medication management ; and psychological testing .

day treatment .

short - term structured program consisting of therapeutic services to stabilize a recipient's mental health status while developing and improving his / her independent living and socialization skills .

residential treatment .

24-hours - a - day program provided under the clinical supervision of a mental health professional , in a community residential setting other than an acute care hospital or regional treatment center inpatient unit .

partial hospitalization .

time limited , structured program of therapeutic services provided in an outpatient hospital facility or community mental health center to resolve or stabilize an acute episode of mental illness .

acute care hospital inpatient .

short - term medical , nursing and psychosocial services provided in an acute care hospital .

regional treatment center inpatient .

twenty - four - hours - a - day comprehensive medical , nursing , or psychosocial services provided in a regional treatment center .

specialty mental health services .

services provided by mental health providers that focus on mental health issues related to specific cultures or languages , including the deaf and hearing impaired .

