u.s. relations with malaysia have been generally positive over the last few years .

both countries share interests in maintaining regional stability , dealing with militant islamists and separatists , developing close trade and investment relationships , securing the safety of ships passing through the strategically important strait of malacca , and establishing mutually beneficial military cooperation .

however , efforts to negotiate a bilateral free trade agreement ( fta ) appear to be stalled .

in addition , malaysia and the united states appear to have conflicting views of the future of regional economic integration in east asia .

u.s. - malaysia relations improved after former prime minister mahathir mohamad turned over power to his former deputy prime minister datuk seri abdullah badawi on october 31 , 2003 , ending 22 years of rule by mahathir .

however , an unexpectedly weak showing for badawi's political party , the united malays national organization ( umno ) , and its barisan nasional ( bn ) coalition partners in the march 8 , 2008 parliamentary elections may have implications for u.s. - malaysian relations .

this report provides an overview of recent political and economic developments in malaysia , and examines implications for u.s. policy .

umno and its coalition partners have been in power since malaysia's independence in 1957 .

in the first general election in 1959 , umno and its coalition partners received just over half the votes , but won 74 out of the 104 seats in the dewan rakyat ( people's hall ) , the more powerful lower house of malaysia's parliament .

in every parliamentary election from 1959 to 2004 , an umno - led coalition has won at least two - thirds of the seats in parliament — with the exception of 1969 , when the coalition won 95 out of 144 seats ( 66.0% ) .

a two - thirds "supermajority" is important because it allows the bn to amend malaysia's constitution without support from opposition parties .

in the election of 2004 , the bn won 198 out of 219 , or 90.4% , of the seats .

many of the political cleavages of malaysian society , which continue to have relevance to today's political dynamics , find their root in malaysia's colonial past .

malaysia inherited a diverse demographic mix from the british .

through the importation of labor , the british added ethnic chinese and indians to the malay and other indigenous populations of peninsular malaya , sabah , and sarawak .

the demographic composition of sabah and sarawak includes a higher percentage of indigenous groups , such as the iban .

together the malay and indigenous population — collectively known as the bumiputeras — comprise about 58% of the population compared to 24% for the chinese and 7% for the indians .

traditionally , ethnic chinese and indians have controlled a disproportionately greater share of the nation's wealth than bumiputeras .

malaysia has a complex history of inter - communal politics .

a british plan after world war ii to create the malaysian union that incorporated all of the malayan territories except singapore would have provided for common citizenship regardless of ethnicity .

concerns among the malays that they could not compete with the more commercially - minded chinese led to the creation of umno — a conservative , malay nationalist organization that later reformed itself into a political party .

negotiations between the british and umno led to the creation of the federation of malaya in 1948 , which included singapore and provided special rights for the bumiputeras and malaysia's sultans .

sabah and sarawak joined the federation to form malaysia later in 1963 , while singapore left the federation in 1965 .

at independence in 1957 , there was an understanding that malays would exert a dominant position in political life in malaya , while ethnic chinese and indians would be given citizenship and allowed to continue their role in the economy .

this accommodation between malaysia's ethnic groups has not always been tranquil .

between 1948 and 1960 , the communist party of malaysia , which was largely comprised of ethnic chinese , waged a guerilla war against the british .

this came to be known as the "malayan emergency. .

the internal security act ( isa ) , which continues to be used to suppress groups that threaten the regime , originally was put in place by the british to combat "communist subversion. .

the special branch , which malaysia inherited from the british , continues to act as the primary intelligence and security unit under the royal malaysian police .

during the "emergency," malays generally sided with the british against the communists whose ranks were drawn largely from the chinese community .

by the mid - 1950s , the insurrection had collapsed .

added to this history of inter - communal strife were the riots of may to july 1969 in which reportedly 196 were killed .

most of those killed were ethnic chinese .

rioting began on may 13 , three days after the alliance party , a predecessor to the bn , failed to win two - thirds of the seats in the dewan rakyat , and lost control of selangor and perak .

much like the results of the 2008 elections , one of the main losers in the 1969 elections was mca , which lost 14 of its 27 seats in the dewan rakyat .

because of the rioting , elections to be held in sabah and sarawak were suspended and a state of emergency was declared .

partly in response to the 1969 riots , the new economic policy ( nep ) was instituted in 1971 .

nep provided preferential treatment for the bumiputera majority via a kind of quota system in order to increase their share of the economic wealth of the country .

the new development policy ( ndp ) replaced the nep in 1990 .

the ndp retained nep goals , such as 30% bumiputera control of corporate assets .

prime minister mahathir's subsequent vision 2020 policy had similar elements , but was more inclusive and attempted to do more to foster national ethnic unity .

the bn appears to be relying on an expanding economy to be able to disproportionately favor bumiputeras , while not undermining its economic appeal to malaysia's chinese and indian population .

in this way , malaysia's social harmony — and support for the bn — may be linked to economic growth .

for this reason , periods of economic stagnation could carry the prospect of eroding the delicate balance between ethnic groups in malaysia and undermining support for the bn .

malaysia has been playing an active role in international organizations both in its region and beyond .

besides asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , asean , and the world trade organization ( wto ) , malaysia is also a member of the asian development bank ( adb ) , the islamic development bank , the non - aligned movement ( nam ) , organization of islamic conference ( oic ) , the united nations , and the world bank .

in 2006 , malaysia chaired asean , the organization of islamic conference ( oic ) , and the non - aligned movement ( nam ) .

malaysia has been an active contributor to international peacekeeping , including most recently in east timor .

it also sent personnel to assist the aceh monitoring mission in indonesia in 2005 and 2006 .

malaysia has also been seeking to facilitate negotiations between the government of the philippines and the moro islamic liberation front .

malaysia is a relatively mature industrialized nation , whose economy relies on both domestic forces ( personal consumption and private investment ) and external trade for its growth and development .

following a short , severe recession in 1998 and a mild turndown in 2001 , malaysia's real gross domestic product ( gdp ) has grown between 5% and 6% per year for the past five years .

the current official government estimate has its real gdp increasing 6.0% in 2007 and projecting 6.0% - 6.5% growth in 2008 ( see table 1 ) .

malaysia's central bank , bank negara malaysia , projected 2008 gdp growth of 5.0% - 6.0% two weeks after the parliamentary elections , citing "turbulent global financial markets and slowing u.s. growth" as reasons for its less optimistic forecast .

malaysia's gdp and average per capita income classify it as a middle income country according the world bank's system , comparable to mexico and russia .

at official exchange rates , the per capita income in 2007 was $5,740 , but its purchasing power parity value was estimated at $13,289 .

since the 2001 economic downturn , malaysia's economic growth has relied on a combination of strong domestic demand and continued export growth .

in 2007 , the main sources of real gdp growth were ( in order ) : domestic consumption , public consumption , public investment , and private investment .

because imports grew more rapidly than exports , 6.2% compared to 4.1% , external trade actually lowered economic expansion in 2007 .

government forecasts project private investment will play a greater role in economic growth in 2008 , surpassing both public investment and public consumption .

another indication of the maturation of malaysia's economy is its sectoral balance ( see table 2 ) .

while agriculture and manufacturing continue to play an important role in malaysia's economy , the nation's gdp mainly comes from the service sectors .

the sectoral structure of malaysia's economy is more akin to those of south korea and thailand than indonesia , the philippines and vietnam .

although agriculture provides a relatively small portion of malaysia's gdp , it plays an important role in the nation's overall economy .

one out of every three malaysians live in rural areas .

approximately one out of every eight workers in malaysia are employed in agriculture , animal husbandry , fishing , or forestry .

rice and palm oil are two crops of particular importance to malaysia , the former for political reasons because many malaysian farmers are reliant on rice for their livelihood and are opposed to the import of rice .

the latter is important for economic reasons , as palm oil is a traditional major export crop for malaysia .

malaysia's manufacturing sector accounts for nearly a third of the nation's gdp , employs about 30% of its workers , and accounts for over 80% of its export earnings .

it is dominated by the production of automobiles , and electrical and electronic products .

malaysia is a regional leader in the production of automobiles , automotive components and parts .

its two major automobile manufacturers , proton and perodua , export their vehicles to over 40 countries , and malaysia's leading motorcycle manufacturer , modenas , exports to markets around the world , including argentina , greece , iran , malta , mauritius , singapore , turkey , and vietnam .

malaysia's automotive industry benefits from malaysia's tariff and non - tariff trade restrictions on the import of automobiles , motorcycles , and components and parts for automobiles and motorcycles .

the electrical and electronics ( e&e ) industry of malaysia is a world - leader in the production of semiconductors and the assembly of e&e products , much of which is done under contract for leading international electronics companies .

approximately half of malaysia's export earnings come from the e&e industry .

however , over half of malaysia's imports are raw materials , components , equipment , and capital goods to be used by its e&e manufacturers .

as a result , the nation's economy is somewhat dependent on the global demand for electrical and electronic products .

malaysia's service sector is highly diversified , providing services for both the domestic and external segments of the economy .

the service sector provides over 54% of the nation's gdp and more than half of its employment .

following the asian financial crisis in 1997 , malaysia placed severe restriction on foreign participation in some service sectors , including financial services .

over the last five years , malaysia has gradually loosened those restrictions , but access to malaysia's financial markets is still very limited to foreign companies .

foreign trade was a major driver of malaysia's economic growth in the past and continues to be important for its overall economic health .

according to official figures , malaysia's total trade exceeded 1 trillion ringgits for the first time in 2006 .

over the last six years , malaysia's exports increased 81.0% in value , while its imports rose by 80.2% ( see table 3 ) .

malaysia runs a balance of trade surplus of about $30 billion per year .

according to malaysia's trade statistics , the united states was and continues to be its largest export market ( see table 4 ) .

in 2007 , 15.6% of malaysia's exports went to the united states , down from 18.8% in 2006 .

with the exception of the netherlands and the united states , all of malaysia's top 10 export markets are in the asia - pacific , indicating a regional export focus .

japan is historically the largest supplier of malaysia's imports , but the united states was a close second in 2006 ( see table 5 ) .

outside of germany and the united states , all of malaysia's leading suppliers of imports are in asia , more evidence of its regional trade focus .

of malaysia's largest trading partners , china , japan , south korea , and taiwan have a bilateral merchandise trade surplus .

every other nation has a bilateral trade deficit , with the united states running the largest bilateral trade deficit .

according to malaysia's trade figures , both malaysia's exports to the united states and its imports from the united states declined in 2007 , by 14.6% and 9.1% respectively .

malaysia and the united states currently hold similar positions on international trade relations in general , but occasionally differ on specific issues .

both nations support the general concept of trade and investment liberalization and facilitation .

also , both are actively pursuing trade and investment liberalization via multilateral and bilateral fora .

however , on specific issues , there are differences between the united states and malaysia on the goals and means of obtaining those goals .

as a result , the two nations sometimes share the same view on trade issues , and sometimes have different , and even , opposing views .

since malaysia and the united states are members of the world trade organization ( wto ) , there is a shared "baseline" for their bilateral trade relations .

for example , both nations grant the other nation "normal trade relations," or ntr , status as required under the wto .

also , since malaysia and the united states are both members of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , they are both committed to apec's bogor goals of open trade and investment in asia by 2020 .

in addition , the united states and malaysia concluded a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) in may 2004 , are currently negotiating a free trade agreement ( fta ) , and are parties to various regional trade associations that are considering multilateral trade and investment agreements .

bilateral relations between the united states and malaysia are viewed as having improved since badawi came to power .

in the past , the relationship suffered from what a u.s. official called "blunt and intemperate public remarks" critical of the united states by former prime minister mahathir , who generally subscribed to a view of the united states as a neo - colonial power strongly under the influence of a coterie of zionist jews .

however , mahathir's strong expression of sympathy and support following the attacks on september 11 , 2001 , apparently led to a thawing of a previously cool relationship that culminated with an official state visit to the white house by mahathir in may 2002 .

the more cordial relationship between malaysia and the united states has seemingly continued into the badawi administration .

however , there are aspects of u.s. - malaysia relations that periodically raise tensions between the two nations .

in particular , malaysia was and continues to be opposed to the u.s. - led invasion of iraq , and frequently critiques the u.s. approach to counterterrorism as lacking balance .

in addition , the united states has expressed misgivings about malaysia's relationships with certain nations ( in particular , iran and sudan ) and continues to include malaysia in the state department's annual country reports on human rights practices .

prime minister badawi met with president bush at the white house on july 19 , 2004 , during a three - day visit to the united states .

badawi's visit sought to further strengthen the bilateral relationship between malaysia and the united states following this important transfer of political leadership .

malaysian foreign minister syed hamid albar reportedly stated that badawi would "exchange views on how we can deal with islamic issues , how we can avoid the perception of prejudice , [and the] perception of marginalization of muslims. .

badawi has also focused on strengthening already strong bilateral trade and investment ties between the united states and malaysia .

during his 2004 visit to washington , prime minister abdullah badawi and president bush reportedly discussed the need to move the bilateral relationship forward and rebuild confidence .

prime minister badawi reportedly told the president that "we need to find the moderate center , we must not be driven by extremist impulses or extremist elements ... we need to bridge the great divide that has been created between the muslim world and the west. .

during badawi's visit , president bush expressed his opinion that "the united states and malaysia enjoy strong bilateral ties , ranging from trade and investment relationships to defense partnerships and active cooperation in the global war on terrorism .

as a moderate muslim nation , malaysia offers the world an example of a modern , prosperous , multi - racial , and multi - religious society. .

even before the invasion began , malaysia was a vocal critic of a possible u.s. - led war against saddam hussain's government in iraq .

at an extraordinary islamic summit session of the oic held in doha on march 5 , 2003 — two weeks before the war began — then - prime minister mahathir stated malaysia's opposition to war against iraq .

in his speech to umno's 54 th general assembly on june 19 , 2003 , mahathir said , "the hunt for the terrorists has made the world tense and unsafe .

bombs explode in many parts of the world .

afghanistan and iraq were attacked and syria and iran were similarly threatened unless they changed their governments. .

malaysia's opposition to the iraq war and the continued u.s. presence in iraq continued after badawi became prime minister .

in a speech at the oxford centre for islamic studies in january 2004 , badawi said , "the world must never forget that iraq was illegally invaded .

the world was told before the fact that the invasion was necessary because of an imminent threat posed by weapons of mass destruction .

we know today that this reason was baseless. .

during an umno party meeting in september 2004 , badawi reportedly said that western countries had fueled international terrorism through the invasion of iraq and their pro - israel stance on the conflict between israel and the palestinians .

later on that same month , in his speech before the united nations general assembly , badawi stated , "malaysia is convinced that the fight against terrorism cannot succeed through force of arms alone. .

he went on to denounce "the increasing tendency to attribute linkages between international terrorism and islam. .

badawi also indicated that he believed that the united nations should be "given the lead role" in returning iraq to a peaceful , stable nation .

although the rhetoric has changed in tone and tenor over the last four years , malaysia opposition to the u.s. military presence in iraq remains strong , and its disagreement with u.s. approach to terrorism continues .

on january 15 , 2008 , badawi stated: the fundamental point i am making is that religion in general , and the teachings of islam in particular , cannot be faulted as either the reason for economic deprivation in the muslim world or the source of the discord which persists between the muslim world and the west .

the problems which continue to fester in afghanistan , iraq , the golan heights , lebanon and palestine are vestiges of the projections of power by the centres of world power .

the resulting humiliation being felt by muslims is the real cause of their loss of trust and confidence towards the west .

though malaysia opposed the u.s. - led invasion of iraq , the united states considers malaysia a valuable ally in the war against militant islam in southeast asia .

southeast asian islamic populations in brunei , indonesia , and malaysia ( and to a lesser extent in burma , the philippines , singapore , and thailand ) constitute a third of the world's islamic population and are experiencing a spiritual , social , and cultural revival at a time when there is also increased radicalization among some groups in the region as demonstrated by the terrorist group jemaah islamiya ( ji ) and abu sayyaf .

malaysia reportedly estimated that there were 465 members of ji in malaysia in 2003 .

malaysia has detained over 110 suspected terrorists since may 2001 .

the malaysian government believes that it has effectively crippled the kumpulan mujahedin malaysia ( kmm ) , which is thought to have had close ties with the jemaah islamiya ( ji ) terrorist group .

the kmm sought the overthrow of the malaysian government and the establishment of an islamic state over malaysia , indonesia and muslim parts of southern thailand and southern philippines .

two of ji's leaders , noordin mohammad top and azahari husin , the later now captured , are malaysian , though top is thought to be a fugitive in indonesia .

the increasingly perceived comity of interests after september 11 , 2001 , improved the bilateral relationship .

foreign minister syed hamid albar stated in january of 2001 that malaysia was looking forward to closer ties with the united states when president bush assumed office .

the september 11 , 2001 attacks against the united states were strongly criticized by former prime minister mahathir , and the two nations subsequently began to work closely on counter - terror cooperation .

mahathir met with president bush in washington in may 2002 , where they signed a memorandum of understanding on counterterrorism .

some malaysian officials have , in general terms , equated the isa with the usa patriot act .

it has been argued that u.s. criticism of the isa became muted following the passage of the usa patriot act .

in may of 2002 , the united states and malaysia signed a declaration that provides a framework for counterterrorism cooperation .

malaysia has taken a leading regional role in the war against terror by establishing a regional counterterrorism center in kuala lumpur that facilitates access to counterterror technology , information and training .

the concept for the center was announced in october 2002 following a meeting between president bush and then - deputy prime minister badawi at the apec meetings in mexico .

malaysia hosted the asean regional forum inter - sessional meeting on counter - terrorism in march of 2003 .

u.s .

coordinator for counter - terrorism ambassador cofer black emphasized the need to develop "sustained international political will and effective capacity building" to more effectively fight terrorism .

within this context ambassador black made special reference to malaysia's contribution to the war against terror in asia .

he identified malaysia's opening of the southeast asia regional center for counter - terrorism in august 2003 as a key example of counterterrorism capacity building in asia .

other observers have questioned the degree to which the center has established its effectiveness .

since becoming prime minister , badawi has continued malaysia's commitment to fight terrorism .

while attending a regional counter - terror conference in bali , indonesia in february 2004 , then - u.s. attorney general ashcroft reportedly stated that the united states is very satisfied with the role that malaysia has played in fighting terrorism and that malaysia has provided a good example to countries in the region .

however , during an address to a regional defense conference in singapore in june 2004 , malaysian defense minister najib tun razak admonished the west when he stated , "let there be no doubt , there is more ( terrorism ) to come if we continue to ignore the need for a balanced approach to this campaign against terror.... we are concerned that powerful states may not be going about this campaign in ways that will win the hearts and minds of millions of ordinary people worldwide. .

some observers view this exchange as highlighting differences in regional southeast asian states' desires to include more "soft power" approaches to the war against terror as opposed to what they feel is an over reliance on "hard power" by the united states .

military cooperation between the united states and malaysia includes high - level defense visits , training exchanges , military equipment sales , expert exchanges and combined exercises .

the 2007 congressional budget justification for foreign operations states that "exposure to u.s. ideals promotes respect for human rights. .

it goes on to state that "the malaysian military has not been involved in systemic violations of human rights. .

in mid - 2005 , deputy secretary of state zoellick and malaysian deputy prime minster najib witnessed the renewal of an acquisition and cross servicing agreement that provides a framework for bilateral military cooperation .

malaysian officers train in the united states under the international military education and training ( imet ) program and there is a student exchange program between the malaysian armed forces staff college and the u.s. army staff college at fort leavenworth .

united states troops also travel to the malaysian army's jungle warfare training center in pulada .

humanitarian assistance , disaster relief , anti - piracy , and counterterrorism are areas that have been identified as areas of mutual interest .

between 15 and 20 u.s. navy ships visit malaysia annually .

bilateral military exercises include all branches of the service .

malaysia has also bought significant military equipment from the united states , including f - 18 / d aircraft .

recent military procurement is reportedly seeking to narrow the technology gap with small , but well armed , singapore .

such purchases will also likely help malaysia secure its maritime interests in the strait of malacca and the south china sea .

united states warships and u.s. military personnel go to malaysia to participate in joint cooperation afloat readiness and training exercises with malaysia in the south china sea .

the exercise is aimed at bolstering bilateral military ties and improving the ability of the united states navy to operate in regional waters .

in an address in malaysia in june 2004 , admiral fargo pointed to shared concerns over "transnational problems," including "terrorism and proliferation , trafficking in humans and drugs and piracy" and emphasized that "we have tremendous respect for sovereignty. .

the united states has sent coast guard officers to the marine patrol training center in johor baharu to help train malaysian officers in maritime enforcement .

malaysia established a maritime enforcement agency in 2005 to increase maritime patrols .

over 50,000 ships a year pass through the straits of malacca .

some ships have been vulnerable to piracy in the 600 mile long strait .

there is also concern that terrorists could seek to mount an attack against shipping in the strategically vital strait .

after some apparent miscommunication , malaysia and the united states reportedly have come to a mutual understanding on how best to secure the straits of malacca , which are territorial waters from possible terrorist acts .

an estimated 30% of world trade and half of the world's oil transits through the straits of malacca .

testifying before the house armed services committee on march 31 , 2004 , admiral thomas fargo , commander of the u.s. pacific command , identified the straits of malacca off malaysia's coast as an area where there is concern that international terrorists might seek to attack shipping or seize a ship to use as a weapon .

fargo also reportedly suggested the idea that u.s. counterterrorism forces be positioned in the area to be able to deal with such a threat .

this idea reportedly was announced without prior consultation with malaysia , which reportedly responded "coolly" to the suggestion .

malaysia reportedly prefers an arrangement , in the words of defense minister najib , where "the actual interdiction will be done by the littoral states. .

this approach was subsequently supported by fargo during a visit to malaysia , where he reportedly stated that u.s. cooperation would focus on intelligence sharing and capacity building to assist regional states in addressing the potential threat .

on july 20 , 2004 , malaysia , indonesia , and singapore began coordinated naval patrols of the straits of malacca .

the state department report on human rights practices in malaysia stated that the malaysian government "generally respected the human rights of its citizens ; however , there were problems in some areas. .

among the problems remaining are: abridgement of citizens' right to change their government , detentions of persons without trial , restrictions on freedom of the press , restrictions on freedom of assembly and association , ethnic discrimination , and incomplete investigation of detainee deaths .

the report also mentioned that "the civilian authorities generally maintained effective control of the security forces. .

although official bilateral trade in 2007 was small ( less than $53 million in exports and only $42 million in imports ) , prime minister badawi has publically stated that malaysia hopes to increase trade and investment relations with sudan .

malaysia already plays an important role in sudan's trade with other nations .

malaysian companies — along with companies from china , france , india , kuwait , and the united kingdom — are reportedly major investors in sudan's petroleum industry .

in 2005 , the sudanese government received $2.3 billion in revenues from petroleum exports .

the malaysian newspaper , the new straits times , reports that malaysia is the second largest investor in sudan , after china .

malaysian companies reportedly provide substantial construction and transportation services to sudan's oil industry .

petronas , malaysia's state oil company , has interests in nine oil fields in sudan , plus a refinery project on port sudan .

malaysia is the current chair of the organization of the islamic conference ( oic ) ; sudan is also a member .

during an april 2007 trip to sudan , prime minister badawi expressed some support for its fellow oic member , saying the situation in darfur was being exaggerated by the media .

in addition , malaysia would "approach the leaders of the organization of the islamic conference and islamic development bank to extend whatever help that can be given to the government of sudan. .

malaysia also opposes proposed u.n. sanctions on sudan .

in the opinion of prime minister badawi , the sanctions would hurt the people of malaysia .

instead , malaysia prefers to allow more time for talks between the united nations and sudan .

the united states has so far held off on unilateral sanctions on sudan to give the united nations time to convince sudan to permit u.n. peacekeepers into darfur .

however , during prime minister badawi's visit to sudan , sudan's president omer hassan ahmed al - bashir told reporters he hoped malaysia would help sudan "confront western pressure to accept international forces in darfur. .

u.s. assistance to malaysia is relatively modest in size , and has been declining in value over the last four years .

united states foreign assistance to malaysia has included international military education and training ( imet ) , non - proliferation anti - terrorist demining and related programs ( nadr ) , anti - terrorism assistance ( ata ) , and export control and related border security assistance ( exbs ) .

for fy2009 , the bush administration has requested funding for international narcotics control and law enforcement .

imet programs with malaysia seek to contribute to regional stability by strengthening military - to - military ties and familiarizing the malaysian military with u.s. military doctrine , equipment , and management that promotes interoperability .

the u.s. is a leading training partner with malaysia at its southeast asia regional counter - terrorism center .

