the united states is projected to experience two major demographic changes that could substantially affect labor markets in future years .

the demographic changes are the aging of the u.s. population and the slowdown in u.s. population growth .

both are expected to raise the total dependency ratio ( the number of younger and older persons relative to the economically productive population ) .

the old - age dependency ratio ( the number of older persons per 100 individuals in the working - age population ) will account for most of the increase .

because the rise in the dependency ratio reflects an increase in ( generally active ) life expectancy , it represents an unmitigated gain in welfare .

but to some economists and policymakers , a high dependency ratio raises concerns about how a small workforce will provide for a relatively large number of dependents without a decline in the u.s. standard of living .

at least two means have been suggested to prevent this scenario from coming to fruition .

one is that productivity continue increasing at the high average rate attained over the 1960-2000 period .

this outcome is possible given the inverse relationship between labor force and productivity growth .

some suggest , however , that the educational attainment of recent immigrants and their offspring might temper future increases in labor quality which helped spur productivity growth in the past .

another possibility is that the labor force will not be as small as anticipated in the future because older members of the population will extend their working lives to reflect the increase in life expectancy .

healthy older individuals face a number of impediments to spending more years in the labor force , however .

late career employees who involuntarily lose long - held jobs through no fault of their own could also be among those who have the most difficulty delaying retirement .

the ability of older displaced persons to continue working has implications for society beyond mitigating labor shortages .

if these workers exhaust any unemployment benefits for which they might be eligible , they presumably will draw down assets including retirement nest eggs .

as a result , they might remain in the labor force to restore depleted savings and to reach planned retirement asset values ; however , those unable to find new jobs could become eligible for means - tested government assistance ( eg , food stamps and supplemental security income ) .

even older displaced workers who become reemployed — but in jobs with wages substantially below those on their lost jobs — might be unable to save as much as they had intended for their fast - approaching retirements .

thus , they too could eventually qualify for means - tested aid .

this report analyzes the labor market experiences of those older workers who have involuntarily lost long - held jobs for reasons unrelated to their own performance ( eg , veteran factory workers at plants closed because of import competition , experienced information technology workers whose jobs have been outsourced to workers in other countries , and mid - level managers in positions eliminated through corporate restructuring ) .

it examines current policies targeted at the reemployment of older displaced workers which , if successful , might lengthen their stay in the workforce .

there is no single definition of displaced workers or of older workers .

definitions differ by the variables available in surveys and by statute .

shortly after the issue of worker dislocation emerged , the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) developed the displaced worker supplement ( dws ) to the current population survey ( cps ) which queries different groups of households over time .

every two years since the mid - 1980s , the dws has been administered with the january or february cps to determine the number , characteristics , and labor market outcomes of adults who reported that they had lost or left jobs as a result of a plant / company shutdown or move , insufficient work , or position / shift abolished .

in its definition of displaced workers , bls includes only workers who had worked for their employers for at least three years before being discharged , as they are expected to have greater difficulty becoming reemployed than more recent hires .

when utilizing the dws or other databases , analysts sometimes do not apply a tenure screen .

similarly , some researchers may define older workers as having attained a given age minimum ( eg , at least 40 or 55 years old ) , while others also set an upper limit ( eg , below age 65 ) to avoid the complexities introduced by eligibility for public and private retirement benefits .

begun in 1992 , the longitudinal health retirement study ( hrs ) survey focuses specifically on older individuals , which it defines as persons over the age of 50 .

analysts are able to utilize the hrs to examine displacement among older workers because it asks individuals whether their jobs ended as a result of business closings and permanent layoffs ( i.e. , for reasons other than poor performance ) .

researchers have begun to utilize the administrative records of the unemployment insurance ( ui ) system as well .

its major benefit over survey data is that it offers virtually universal coverage of workers on the payrolls of employers in a given state .

having very large database , even when limiting the analysis to older workers , enables analysts to make detailed estimates ( eg , by industry ) .

in addition , the ui records contain earnings histories over several years , which allows determination of long - term changes in earnings .

and , unlike the dws and hrs , the information in ui records is not self - reported .

the dislocated worker program under title i of the workforce investment act ( wia ) and the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program are meant to help displaced workers obtain new employment by providing job search assistance and training among other services .

those eligible for the dislocated worker program are more broadly defined than the group examined in this report .

the taa program , in contrast , is limited to workers who have lost jobs due to imports of articles that compete with u.s. - produced goods and to shifts of production outside the united states .

the wia program does not reserve a portion of its funding for older displaced workers .

similarly , taa does not distinguish between older and other displaced workers , but as an entitlement program , any taa - eligible older worker would be assured of receiving services if they chose to .

the taa program also provides reemployment assistance beyond that offered under wia's dislocated worker program ( eg , relocation allowances ) .

in effect , wia and taa attempt to keep older displaced workers in the labor force by addressing some of the reemployment barriers and financial disincentives discussed above .

in light of employer reluctance to train older workers ( either because of the short time period in which to recoup their investment or because of stereotyping ) , the programs draw upon public funds to do so .

to the extent that employers' high demand for up - to - date computer skills limits older workers' access to jobs , the provision of such training through wia and taa could expand older workers' job opportunities .

training may thus serve a purpose beyond the human capital investment motive of raising workers' skill levels to increase post - displacement wages .

however , taxpayer subsidized training does not come with the guarantee of a job at its end .

fairly few evaluations have been conducted of training programs for displaced workers .

of the displaced worker programs that have been examined , some provided more job search assistance than retraining , solely provided reemployment bonuses , or had methodological shortcomings ( eg , insufficient follow - up periods and failure to differentiate types of training ) .

publicly subsidized training is in one sense intended to compensate workers for the persistent impact on employment and earnings of job loss that is a regularly occurring byproduct of labor market adaptation to economic change ( eg , dissemination of technological and other innovations in the workplace , heightened international competition in provision of goods and services ) .

by contrast , unemployment insurance ( ui ) only compensates displaced workers during the period of job search ; it neither motivates them to find new jobs nor insulates them from the extended effect of displacement on employment and wages .

recognizing that the nation's ui system provides only short - term compensation and that retraining may not be the optimal solution for all displaced workers , some analysts have recommended that experienced workers who lose jobs for reasons unrelated to their performance receive a supplement if the earnings on their post - displacement jobs are less than on their pre - displacement jobs .

 ( a wage supplement is sometimes referred to as wage insurance. ) .

in the trade act of 2002 , congress established a five - year demonstration program specifically for older workers eligible for the taa program — the alternative trade adjustment assistance ( ataa ) program — which allows eligible workers at least 50 years old to receive an earnings supplement for two years .

to obtain the supplement workers must , within 26 weeks of job loss , take a full - time position with wages below those of their former jobs ; the new job must pay less than $50,000 as well .

the supplement , which is funded from the federal unemployment account , equals 50% of the difference between the wages on the old and new jobs , up to a maximum of $10,000 over the two - year period of receipt .

according to its proponents , wage insurance might enhance the reemployment prospects of displaced workers by prompting them to consider even those positions that pay substantially less than the jobs they lost .

during their initial period of employment , these workers also might have the opportunity to receive on - the - job training that makes them more productive and qualifies them for pay increases which narrow the gap between their pre - and post - displacement wages by the end of their eligibility for wage supplements .

if the supplement is available for a limited time from the date of job loss , the payment also could encourage speedier reemployment because its value effectively declines the longer unemployment continues .

thus , in addition to enabling displaced workers to remain in the labor force , a wage insurance program might reduce ui costs .

based upon the extremely limited evidence available thus far , the actual benefits of a wage insurance program appear to be extremely modest .

the canadian earnings supplement project was conducted from july 1995 to october 1998 to estimate whether the availability of a pay supplement promoted and sped reemployment of displaced workers eligible for unemployment benefits .

the two - year supplement was designed to replace 75% of the earnings loss of a displaced worker ( up to $250 per week ) who found a new , lower paying , full - time ( 30 hours a week ) job within a 26-week period .

displaced workers were randomly assigned to a group that was offered the supplement and to a group that was not .

the low take - up rate — about 20% of supplement group members received payments — largely reflects an inability to quickly find new full - time jobs .

the availability of a supplement was not found to affect the timing or intensity of job search among supplement versus control group members .

 ( the only statistically significant impact on job search was to prompt a few displaced workers to consider a broader range of jobs. ) .

absent speedier reemployment of supplement over control group members , then , the program did not lower unemployment insurance costs .

although the program was estimated to produce a small , statistically significant difference in the full - time reemployment rate of supplement compared to control group members , the difference occurred toward the end of the period during which jobseekers were eligible for the supplement .

this difference in full - time reemployment rates — 4.4 percentage points at its widest — was found to gradually diminish ; by one year after the workers had been assigned to the supplement and control groups , their full - time reemployment rates essentially were and remained the same .

the program's most noticeable effect was on the compensation of the few supplement recipients: the supplement , which averaged $8,705 over 64 weeks , represented a large portion of the incomes of these individuals .

some information is available on the experience of older displaced workers ( age 55 and above ) who were included in the canadian earnings supplement project .

the researchers estimated that age was one of the primary determinants of reemployment during jobseekers' eligibility for the supplement: each additional year of age lowered , by about one percent , the likelihood of finding a full - time position .

workers with long tenure at their employers , who tend to be at the older end of the age spectrum , also were found to have a reduced probability of reemployment during the eligibility period .

full - time reemployment rates did not differ significantly between supplement and control group members age 55 and older .

as to the u.s. experience with the ataa program , it thus far appears hampered by implementation problems that may have dampened worker access to wage supplements .

the demonstration went into effect in august 2003 , but a majority of states reported various difficulties ( eg , creating payment systems separate from their existing ui check - issuing systems and tardy guidance from the u.s. department of labor ) .

as a result , only 19 states had the wage insurance program up and running in 2003 .

it should be kept in mind that wage insurance and training operate on the supply side .

they do not address the demand - side barriers to reemployment discussed above .

the only federal program that focuses on the seemingly limited job opportunities of older unemployed workers is the senior community service employment program ( scsep ) , title v of the older americans act .

it creates part - time public service jobs for persons aged 55 and older who have low incomes and poor employment prospects .

to the extent that demand - side rather than supply - side obstacles prevent substantial numbers of older displaced workers from obtaining new jobs , then raising the eligibility age of social security may not succeed at delaying retirements among members of this group .

not only might older displaced workers be unable to ameliorate potential shortages by extending their working lives , but they also might live in reduced circumstances and qualify for means - tested government benefits as a result of their unplanned retirements .

further , older workers voluntarily retiring from long - held jobs who want to extend their stay in the labor force by taking non - career ( bridge ) jobs could be thwarted from doing so by these same demand - side obstacles .

