this crs report discusses renewal of the peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement between the united states and the people's republic of china ( prc ) .

the current agreement was signed in 1985 and implemented in 1998 .

the agreement is set to expire on december 30 , 2015 , and a new agreement was submitted for congressional review on april 21 , 2015 .

the required congressional review period ended on july 31 , 2015 , and the agreement may enter into force .

the discussion in this report focuses on congressional roles in crafting and carrying out the agreement .

such agreements are subject to section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 as amended ( aea , p.l .

95-242 , 42 u.s.c .

2011 et seq. ) .

and commonly are called "123 agreements. .

they are a prerequisite for any significant nuclear cooperation with another country , such as exports of nuclear power plants and components and the transfer of nuclear material .

the first such agreement with the prc was concluded in the mid - 1980s .

on july 24 , 1985 , president reagan submitted to congress the "agreement between the united states and the people's republic of china concerning peaceful uses of nuclear energy. .

president clinton , on january 12 , 1998 , signed certifications ( as required by p.l .

99-183 ) on china's nuclear nonproliferation policy and practices to implement the agreement .

clinton also issued a certification and waived a sanction imposed after the 1989 tiananmen crackdown ( as required by p.l .

101-246 ) .

congressional review ended on march 18 , 1998 , allowing the agreement to be implemented .

in the president's letter of transmittal to congress , he says that the u.s. - china 123 agreement "will advance the nonproliferation and national security interests of the united states. .

once a section 123 agreement is in place , the nuclear regulatory commission or the department of energy approves licenses for specific transfers .

the agreement does not permit the transfer of restricted data or sensitive nuclear technology .

it does allow for the enrichment up to a level less than 20% u - 235 and reprocessing of u.s. - obligated material at safeguarded or safeguards - eligible sites .

the agreement's duration is 30 years .

either country may terminate the agreement with one year's notice .

the proposed agreement includes an agreed minute , which lays out steps that are to be pursued if either side has concerns about the application of international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards on transferred material , including facility design review , exchange of records to ensure material accounting , and the designation of individuals who may access and inspect material accountancy systems .

this is to ensure that fuel and other transferred technology remain in peaceful use .

the agreed minute also addresses byproduct material , and says that there will be annual information exchanges on byproduct material , including tritium , subject to the agreement .

any byproducts shall only be used for peaceful purposes under article 8 of the agreement .

the agreed minute includes a section on retransfers and technology exchanges .

retransfers to a third country are still subject to the requirements of the original supplier country and will need to have written consent .

the united states and china are to implement a process for "obtaining government assurances needed for certain technology or information transfers. .

this includes a pre - approved activity and nuclear technology list ( based on the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) trigger list ) and a pre - approved entity list .

for example , if china or the united states authorizes a transfer of a technology on the preapproved list to an entity on the preapproved list , it will notify the other party of this transfer .

these lists will be updated on a yearly basis .

this transfer will still be subject to transfer conditions .

these measures are to give additional assurance for u.s. consent rights on further transfers within and outside of china .

the renewal of the u.s. - china peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement raised significant issues for the 114 th congress .

this section outlines primarily economic and nonproliferation concerns .

the question for u.s. policymakers since the reagan administration in the 1980s has been whether nuclear cooperation with the prc would be necessary to advance u.s. diplomatic , security , and economic interests .

there were tensions in the framework for bilateral relations that affected u.s. consideration of peaceful nuclear cooperation .

while the prc under the rule of the communist party of china already possessed nuclear weapons , the prc also has had a record of nuclear proliferation to countries such as pakistan and iran .

the united states and the prc have not been allies .

nonetheless , in 1970 , president nixon began a rapprochement with communist party ruler mao zedong , and both countries cooperated in various areas during the cold war until the disintegration of the soviet union in 1991 .

nuclear cooperation involves weighing risks and benefits .

the risks include nuclear proliferation and upgrading technology and knowledge that also might have military uses .

the benefits involve expanding engagement , building mutual confidence , and enabling u.s. businesses to compete for potentially lucrative nuclear power contracts .

increased nuclear power in china also could help reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases .

key developments in the u.s. - china nuclear cooperation agreement were timed for diplomatic summits between u.s. presidents and prc leaders .

on april 30 , 1984 , president reagan witnessed the initialing of the nuclear cooperation agreement .

secretary of energy john herrington signed the agreement on july 23 , 1985 .

on july 24 , 1985 , president reagan submitted the agreement to congress .

consideration of whether a presidential certification ( as required by p.l .

99-183 on china's nuclear nonproliferation policy and practices ) would be the centerpiece of a summit in 1997 advanced the agreement's implementation .

president clinton , on january 12 , 1998 , signed certifications to implement the agreement .

the president also waived a sanction imposed after the 1989 tiananmen crackdown ( in p.l .

101-246 ) .

congressional review ended on march 18 , 1998 , allowing the agreement to be implemented .

almost 13 years passed between the time that president reagan submitted the agreement to congress in july 1985 and its implementation in march 1998 under the clinton administration .

congress played an important role in determining implementation of the agreement , including holding hearings , crafting legislation , and requiring and reviewing presidential certifications .

one of the primary congressional actions was p.l .

99-183 , the joint resolution relating to the approval and implementation of the proposed agreement for nuclear cooperation between the united states and the people's republic of china ( december 16 , 1985 ) , which required a presidential certification and a report followed by a period of 30 days of continuous session of congress before the agreement could be implemented .

after the 1989 tiananmen crackdown , congress enacted sanctions in p.l .

101-246 , the foreign relations authorization act for fiscal years 1990 and 1991 ( february 16 , 1990 ) , suspending nuclear cooperation with china and requiring an additional presidential certification on the prc's nuclear nonproliferation assurances .

in january 1983 , u.s. officials negotiating a nuclear cooperation agreement with china linked possible u.s. nuclear exports to china with its reported nuclear proliferation practices , particularly in pakistan .

before an agreement was finalized , senators gordon humphrey , william roth , and william proxmire wrote to secretary of state george shultz in december 1983 .

they urged that an agreement be drafted so that none of the provisions of the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978 would be waived .

they also wrote that the agreement should include explicit pledges by china not to transfer any nuclear weapons equipment or information to any nation ; to support the u.s. requirement for recipients to accept the international atomic energy agency's ( iaea's ) safeguards on nuclear exports ; and to enter into an agreement with the iaea to place china's civilian nuclear activities under iaea safeguards with terms identical to those of the u.s. - iaea safeguards agreement .

reported concerns about china also included its nuclear proliferation activities in argentina and south africa .

in preparation for president ronald reagan's first visit to the prc in april 1984 to improve the bilateral relationship , u.s. officials sought an agreement on civil nuclear cooperation as the "deliverable" that caught the most attention .

begun in 1981 , negotiations intensified before the visit over the u.s. requirement ( under the atomic energy act ) for china to obtain u.s. prior approval before reprocessing , enrichment , or other alteration of transferred nuclear material .

china objected to perceived infringement of its sovereignty .

at the end of his visit , on april 30 , 1984 , president reagan witnessed the initialing of the nuclear cooperation agreement .

the president said that he was "particularly proud" of the agreement , saying that "it will open broad opportunities for joint work in development of the energy base which china needs for her modernization. .

according to a summary of the terms provided by officials to the new york times , china agreed that it would not enrich or reprocess fuel from u.s. - built reactors or store materials without u.s. consent ; and the united states agreed not to use its control rights to inhibit the growth of china's nuclear industry out of commercial rivalry .

china also took steps in response to u.s. concerns about nuclear proliferation during negotiations for the agreement .

while at the time china opposed the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) , china applied for membership in the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) in september 1983 and became a member on january 1 , 1984 .

the prc did not accede to the npt until march 9 , 1992 .

also , china joined the zangger committee in october 1997 and the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) in may 2004 .

in 2004 , the bush administration supported china's application to join the nsg , despite congressional concerns about china's failure to apply the nsg's "full - scope safeguards" to its nuclear projects in pakistan .

since 1992 , the nsg has required "full - scope safeguards," or iaea inspections of all other declared nuclear facilities in addition to the facility importing supplies to prevent diversions to weapon programs .

in making china's first address to the iaea conference in september 1984 , the prc minister of nuclear industry said , "china will , in exporting its nuclear materials and equipment , request the recipient countries to accept safeguards in line with the principles established in the agency's statutes .

in the same view , when importing nuclear materials and equipment , china will also make sure that they are used for peaceful purposes. .

china did not offer to place its civilian nuclear facilities under iaea safeguards , the only nuclear weapon state that remained outside such arrangements .

also , prc premier zhao ziyang issued a statement when he visited the united states in january 1984 that "we do not engage in nuclear proliferation ourselves , nor do we help other countries develop nuclear weapons. .

that promise left a question about any future activities .

later , on january 19 , 1985 , prc vice premier li peng issued an additional nonproliferation pledge , saying that the prc "does not and will not in the future help any non - nuclear states to develop nuclear weapons" and that china would abide by commitments to the iaea .

still , questions remained about whether there would be written pledges and whether any such assurances would be publicly issued by china , itself , rather than the united states expressing its interpretation of an understanding reached with china either verbally or in writing .

although the agreement was initialed during reagan's visit to china in april 1984 , the president did not submit it to congress until july 1985 , apparently timed for a visit by prc president li xiannian , who arrived in washington , dc , on july 22 , 1985 , and was invited to a state dinner at the white house .

prior to this visit , administration officials briefed congress and the press about supposed new written assurances from china about nuclear nonproliferation .

members included senator alan cranston , who had reported in may 1984 that prc nuclear technicians were in pakistan at a suspected nuclear weapon facility .

the administration , however , did not release the written assurance and said that the language of the agreement remained largely the same .

secretary of energy john herrington and li peng signed the agreement on july 23 , 1985 .

although president reagan's top officials approved the agreement , there were acknowledgments of problems in the agreement as well as disagreements within the administration .

kenneth adelman , director of the arms control and disarmament agency ( acda ) , wrote in his memorandum for the president that "the proposed agreement meets all the applicable requirements of the atomic energy act and the nuclear non - proliferation act and its entry into force will substantially benefit u.s. non - proliferation objectives. .

nonetheless , adelman first acknowledged that the subject agreement is unique among agreements for peaceful nuclear cooperation concluded since the 1978 nuclear non - proliferation act .

it is the first such agreement with a nuclear - weapon state ; and it is with a country that has not , until recently , supported non - proliferation measures .

although the agreement was initialed in april 1984 , we needed to clarify certain matters related to implementation of china's nuclear policies .

those discussions concluded successfully last month .

a major threat to our non - proliferation objectives is the potential for "maverick" suppliers to undercut the safeguards and other controls established through international cooperation and consensus .

in the past , china's policies were a cause for concern because it neither adhered to that consensus nor accepted other non - proliferation norms. .

[emphasis added] adelman also noted that a few of the major provisions in the agreement were subject to long and difficult negotiations .

we have had detailed discussions on what it means in practice not to assist other countries to acquire nuclear explosives.... we understand that china's policy will be implemented in a manner consistent with those basic non - proliferation practices common to the united states and other major suppliers... .

the united states sought china's acceptance of iaea safeguards on u.s. supply under the agreement , but they adamantly refused to accept that condition .

[emphasis added] finally , adelman argued that the agreement for u.s. exports provided for "mutually acceptable arrangements," in the future , " to be established prior to approval of u.s. exports" that "will include exchanges of information and visits by u.s. government personnel to relevant sites in china where material or equipment subject to the agreement will be stored or used. .

he also contended that "reprocessing of u.s. origin material cannot take place without u.s. consent . .

he concluded that "it will be important to ensure that the specific arrangements provide adequate confidence that any material or equipment subject to the agreement will be used only for purposes consistent with the agreement. .

[emphasis added] adelman also submitted acda's "nuclear proliferation assessment statement" that detailed the reagan administration's justification for the agreement with china , pursuant to section 123a of the atomic energy act .

acda reached "a favorable net assessment of the adequacy of the provisions of the proposed agreement to ensure that any assistance furnished thereunder will not be used to further any military or nuclear explosive purpose. .

it also concluded that execution of the proposed agreement "would advance the non - proliferation program , policy , and objectives of the united states. .

in contrast , thomas roberts , acting chairman of the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , wrote a memorandum to president reagan that offered a different assessment .

he referred to reviewing not only the state department's proposed agreement but also an accompanying "agreed minute. .

he wrote that he agreed with the state department that the agreement met the legal requirements of section 123 of the atomic energy act and the nuclear non - proliferation act .

however , roberts wrote of concerns about "the adequacy of certain assurances provided by the prc. .

he wrote that , we also note that , although we believe the requirements of section 123 are satisfied , we would have preferred that the agreement contain a clear statement of u.s. consent rights for the subsequent reprocessing or enrichment of u.s. - supplied nuclear reactor fuel or fuel used in u.s. - supplied reactors .

such a statement would eliminate the potential for future misunderstandings .

our final observation is that the agreement contains a provision which would expressly qualify the authority of the congress to enact subsequent legislation affecting the activities covered by the agreement .

previous agreements for cooperation with other countries have not contained such a provision .

the provision could reduce the flexibility of the united states in the future .

on july 24 , 1985 , president reagan submitted to congress the "agreement between the united states and the people's republic of china concerning peaceful uses of nuclear energy," pursuant to sections 123 ( b ) and 123 ( d ) of the atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended .

in his transmittal message , reagan did not refer to the nrc's concerns ( the memorandum cited above was classified at the time ) .

he noted that the proposed agreement was the first peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement with a communist country and the only such agreement with another nuclear - weapon state ( because cooperation with the united kingdom and france was covered by u.s. agreements with the european atomic energy community , or euratom ) .

the president first cited china's "ambitious plans" for a "substantial number of nuclear power stations. .

he pointed to china's steps to "clarify" its nonproliferation and nuclear export policies , including premier zhao's statement , but reagan did not mention prc practices .

he referred to bilateral "talks" rather than statements or agreements and said that "we can expect" that china's policy of not assisting a non - nuclear weapon state to acquire nuclear explosives will be implemented in a manner consistent with the basic nonproliferation practices common to the united states and other suppliers .

as benefits for u.s. interests , the president wrote that the agreement would "have a significant , positive impact on overall u.s. - china relations" ; "provide the united states and its companies an opportunity to participate in another aspect of china's energy programs , with possible substantial economic benefit" ; and "further the non - proliferation and other foreign policy interests of the united states. .

reagan argued that the agreement would not constitute an "unreasonable risk" to common defense and security .

he noted that he was submitting the agreement to congress "without exempting it from any requirement" in section 123 ( a ) of the atomic energy act .

the agreement's submission began the periods of congressional review: 30 days of continuous session under section 123 ( b ) to be followed by 60 days of continuous session under section 123 ( d ) of the atomic energy act ( p.l .

83-703 ) .

chaired by representative dante fascell , the house foreign affairs committee held a hearing on july 31 , 1985 .

secretary of energy john herrington , acda director kenneth adelman , ambassador for non - proliferation richard kennedy , and assistant secretary of state paul wolfowitz testified .

members debated a number of issues , raised in particular by representative edward markey , chairman of the house energy and commerce subcommittee on energy conservation and power , who testified and submitted his legal analysis of the proposed agreement .

safeguards and prior approvals : representative markey raised objections about the agreement , saying that it contained the same "lax terms" as the draft that was initialed in 1984: objections based on a lack of guarantee that safeguards will be maintained for u.s. nuclear materials and equipment to ensure peaceful use ; lack of a guarantee of prior approval by the united states of any reprocessing , enrichment , or alteration of nuclear material ; and concerns about china's nuclear exports and technical assistance with other countries .

he asserted that , instead of obtaining a tightening of the language of the agreement , the administration reportedly has spent the last year providing itself with classified assurances that the shadowy chinese technicians purportedly working at pakistan's renegade kahuta uranium enrichment plant have disappeared , and that china is no longer exporting unsafeguarded supplies of heavy water and low - enriched uranium to other threshold nuclear - weapon states such as argentina and south africa .

it is not enough that the administration satisfy itself on this count .

unilateral understanding of verbal assurances : representative markey also contended that the assurances from china were actually assurances in a secret memorandum or "non - paper" of the state department .

in his written statement , he reported that "ambassador kennedy reportedly resorted to the device of writing down his own ( classified ) understanding of china's new improved nonproliferation policy .

while declining to sign this ingenious document , responsible chinese officials reportedly nodded their assent , and kennedy raced back to washington to report this triumph of diplomacy to the president. .

ambassador kennedy testified that the chinese "understood" u.s. legal requirements , "said" they had no "plans" to undertake activities in question , and were concerned about whether the united states would give a timely response .

kennedy also testified that the chinese made it "clear" that when they "say" that they will not assist other countries to develop nuclear weapons , "this also applies to all nuclear explosives," acknowledging that it was in question .

 ( during a meeting of the committee to mark up legislation in november 1985 , deputy assistant secretary of state james devine confirmed representative dan burton's assertion of confidential summaries of discussions that were not in writing .

devine said that the prc "assured us orally that they would ... require safeguards on their own exports." ) .

compliance with atomic energy act : representative markey further testified that the proposed agreement did not reconcile with all the requirements of the atomic energy act , and so the president should re - submit the agreement with exemption from the criteria for safeguards and prior consent , as stipulated in the "proxmire amendment" to the export administration act that amended the atomic energy act .

exception for china : representative markey differed with the administration on whether china should be treated as an exception concerning the question of safeguards , stating that "we insisted that the united kingdom , a weapons state and our closest ally , accept [safeguards] as part of our nuclear cooperation agreement .

so why not the chinese ? .

he said that "under the provisions of the atomic energy act , the people's republic , as a nuclear weapons state , is exempted from the iaea safeguards requirement .

however , contrary to the agreement's erroneous implication , china is not altogether exempted from safeguards requirements. .

prejudice : representative markey objected to the lack of a guarantee of u.s. prior approval for any reprocessing or enrichment of nuclear materials by china , along with language to consider the activities "favorably. .

legislative options for congress included requesting the president to re - submit the agreement ; passing a resolution to disapprove the proposed agreement ; passing a resolution to approve it ; or passing a resolution to approve it with conditions .

h.res .

269 .

on september 20 , 1985 , representative markey introduced h.res .

269 to request the president to re - submit the proposed agreement with exemptions from sections 123a ( 1 ) and 123a ( 7 ) of the atomic energy act .

h.r .

3537 .

on october 9 , 1985 , representative edward feighan introduced h.r .

3537 to ensure adequate verification of peaceful uses of nuclear exports to the prc ( modeled on iaea safeguards ) .

the administration opposed the bill .

s. 1754 .

also on october 9 , 1985 , senator john glenn introduced s. 1754 to ensure adequate verification of peaceful uses of nuclear exports to the prc ( modeled on iaea safeguards ) .

the administration also opposed this bill .

senator dave durenberger , chairman of the committee on intelligence , supported the bill .

in a floor speech on october 21 , 1985 , senator alan cranston reported questions about china's assistance for iran's nuclear program .

senators richard lugar and jesse helms reportedly supported the administration .

h.j.res .

404 .

on october 1 , 1985 , representative fascell introduced by request h.j.res .

404 , a joint resolution to approve the proposed agreement .

on november 13 , 1985 , the house foreign affairs committee met to mark up the resolution .

representative don bonker offered an amendment , favoring the agreement with conditions .

the language added requirements for a presidential certification before the issuance of export licenses or approval of retransfers and a waiting period of 30 days of continuous session of congress .

the president was to certify that ( 1 ) the verification was designed effectively to ensure the peaceful use of u.s. exports ; ( 2 ) china provided additional details about its nuclear nonproliferation policies and all information was in conformity with section 129 of the atomic energy act ( prohibiting nuclear exports to any country that engaged in nuclear proliferation ) ; and ( 3 ) the obligation to consider activities favorably shall not prejudice u.s. decisionmaking .

the amendment also declared that each proposed export would be subject to u.s. laws and regulations in effect at the time of each export .

the language also called for a presidential report detailing in unclassified form the prc's past and current nonproliferation policies as well as practices .

finally , the amendment stated that the agreement with china would not provide a precedent for negotiating other agreements .

representative howard wolpe objected to the language as a unilateral attempt to address the agreement's "deficiencies" with u.s. interpretations .

representative solarz defended the language , which the administration accepted , because china already possessed nuclear weapon capability and would have "additional incentives" to refrain from nuclear proliferation .

the committee adopted the amendment by voice vote .

the committee's report on the bill , h.rept .

99-382 , noted that while u.s. nuclear cooperation with the prc will in no way further its ability to use nuclear energy for military or explosive uses , the committee "has long been concerned by reports of chinese nuclear assistance to pakistan's clandestine nuclear program. .

on november 20 , 1985 , the foreign affairs committee reported h.j.res .

404 ( h.rept .

99-382 ) .

the house subsequently passed s.j.res .

238 in lieu .

s.j.res .

238 ( p.l .

99-183 ) .

meanwhile , the senate foreign relations committee passed a resolution identical to that of the foreign affairs committee , s.j.res .

238 , the joint resolution relating to the approval and implementation of the proposed agreement for nuclear cooperation between the united states and the people's republic of china .

the senate passed ( by voice vote ) s.j.res .

238 on november 21 , 1985 .

the house then passed it ( 307-112 ) on december 11 , 1985 .

president reagan signed it on december 16 , 1985 ( as p.l .

99-183 ) .

the agreement took effect on december 30 , 1985 .

in his statement upon signing the bill , the president noted that he was required to submit a one - time certification and a one - time report , with the decision about certification assigned "exclusively to the president. .

however , president reagan did not issue the certification .

on june 4 , 1989 , deng xiaoping and other prc leaders used the people's liberation army ( pla ) to suppress peaceful demonstrators in beijing ( commonly called the tiananmen crackdown in reference to the square that was the focal point of nationwide protests for political liberalization ) .

the military crackdown killed or wounded hundreds , if not thousands , of demonstrators , and mass arrests , executions , and summary imprisonment of demonstrators and sympathizers ensued .

as part of the u.s. response , on june 21 , 1989 , representative markey sought to limit nuclear cooperation with the prc by introducing language to h.r .

2655 , to amend the foreign assistance act .

the language sought to ban the issuance of export licenses and nuclear cooperation unless the president ( 1 ) has made certifications and submitted the report required by p.l .

99-183 ; ( 2 ) has certified to congress that the prc government ended martial law and that the human rights situation has "significantly improved" ; and ( 3 ) has certified to congress that the prc government has provided the united states with a "written declaration that it is not directly or indirectly assisting any nation in testing , developing , or acquiring nuclear explosive devices or the materials and components for such devices. .

on june 29 , representative dante fascell introduced sanctions on china in an en bloc amendment ( h.amdt .

107 ) to h.r .

2655 , which passed the house by 418-0 .

h.r .

2655 was passed in the house but not the senate .

in the senate , on july 14 , 1989 , senators george mitchell and robert dole introduced an amendment ( s.amdt .

271 ) to s. 1160 , the foreign relations authorization act for fy1990 , seeking to impose additional sanctions against the prc .

those sanctions included the limitation of nuclear cooperation .

the senate passed the amendment by 81-10 .

on july 21 , the senate incorporated the bill in the house version ( h.r .

1487 ) and passed it in lieu of s. 1160 .

in the end , congress legislated comprehensive sanctions in response to the tiananmen crackdown in h.r .

3792 , the foreign relations authorization act for fiscal years 1990 and 1991 ( introduced on november 21 , 1989 , and enacted as p.l .

101-246 on february 16 , 1990 ) .

section 902 ( a ) ( 6 ) of p.l .

101-246 suspended nuclear cooperation with china until the president ( 1 ) certified to congress that the prc "has provided clear and unequivocal assurances to the united states that it is not assisting and will not assist any non - nuclear weapon state , either directly or indirectly , in acquiring nuclear explosive devices or the materials and components for such devices" ; ( 2 ) makes the certifications and submits the report required by p.l .

99-183 ; and ( 3 ) makes a report under subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) , reporting that the prc government has made progress in political reforms or that it is "in the national interest" of the united states to terminate a suspension or disapproval .

presidents reagan and george h. w. bush did not issue the certifications to implement the agreement .

after the deterioration in bilateral ties after the tiananmen crackdown of 1989 , the relationship with china again deteriorated in the taiwan strait crisis of 1995-1996 .

questions persisted about u.s. sanctions for prc nuclear proliferation activities in pakistan and iran .

president clinton's 1998 certification to congress conceded that "the united states [had] decided not to proceed with implementation of the 1985 nuclear cooperation agreement because of continuing questions about contacts between chinese entities and elements associated with the pakistani nuclear weapons program. .

he also noted that "nuclear cooperation between china and iran dates from june 1985. .

by the spring of 1997 , washington and beijing discussed efforts to improve ties , including the first formal u.s. - prc summit in the united states in 12 years .

those discussions included china's request for implementation of the agreement .

the clinton administration considered a presidential certification for implementation as the "centerpiece" of a state visit by prc ruler jiang zemin to washington , dc , in october 1997 .

 ( jiang was the communist party general - secretary , central military commission chairman , and prc president. ) .

in congress , representatives markey and solomon led a total of 62 members to write a letter to president clinton in july 1997 , urging him not to certify .

chaired by representative benjamin gilman , the house international relations committee held a hearing on the agreement on october 7 , 1997 .

in the senate , the committee on energy and natural resources , chaired by senator frank murkowski , held a hearing on october 23 , 1997 .

on november 5 , 1997 , the house passed ( by 393-29 ) an amendment sponsored by representative gilman to extend congressional review for implementation of the agreement from 30 to 120 days and provide for expedited review procedures .

the language amended h.r .

2358 , the political freedom in china act of 1997 , which passed the house on november 5 , 1997 .

meanwhile , u.s. firms , such as westinghouse electric corporation , bechtel power corporation , and stone and webster engineering , lobbied congress to allow them to bid in a market worth as much as $50 billion .

on the eve of the u.s. - china summit in october 1997 , the prc advanced its nuclear nonproliferation policy by joining the zangger committee ( the npt's exporters' committee ) on october 16 and promising in writing not to begin new nuclear projects in iran ( in a confidential letter to secretary of state madeleine albright ) .

at the summit on october 29 , 1997 , the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) and the prc state planning commission signed an "agreement of intent on cooperation concerning peaceful uses of nuclear technology. .

later , at a summit in beijing in june 1998 , doe and the prc state planning commission signed an agreement on cooperation concerning peaceful uses of nuclear technologies , including bringing prc scientists to u.s. national laboratories , universities , and nuclear reactor facilities .

on january 12 , 1998 , president clinton signed certifications ( as required by p.l .

99-183 ) on china's nuclear nonproliferation policy and practices to implement the 1985 nuclear cooperation agreement .

the president also issued the certification and waived a sanction imposed after the tiananmen crackdown ( in p.l .

101-246 ) .

president clinton submitted his certifications to congress , contending that "the agreement will have a significant , positive impact in promoting u.s. nonproliferation and national security interests with china and in building a stronger bilateral relationship with china based on respect for international norms. .

under section 902 ( b ) ( 2 ) of p.l .

101-246 ( waiver authority ) , president clinton reported that it was in the "national interest" to terminate the suspension of nuclear cooperation: "it is in the u.s. national interest to consolidate and build on the progress china has made in the nonproliferation area , and the implementation of the agreement for cooperation between the u.s. and the people's republic of china concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy will establish a promising framework for doing so" ; "it is also in the u.s. national interest to build stronger , mutually advantageous bilateral relations with china based on respect for international norms" ; "the united states also has an economic national interest .. .

the agreement will enable u.s. companies to compete for contracts in the world's fastest growing nuclear energy market. .

in making his certification , clinton submitted to congress: presidential determination no .

98-10 ( memorandum for the secretary of state , "certification pursuant to section ( b ) ( 1 ) of p.l .

99-183 and to section 902 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( b ) of p.l .

101-246 " ) dated january 12 , 1998 ; unclassified report on the prc's nonproliferation policies , practices , and assurances required by p.l .

99-183 ; u.s. - prc memorandum of understanding on exchanges of information and visits ( initialed on june 23 , 1987 ) and side notes on protection of business confidential information ( signed on october 22 , 1997 ) ; basis for certification under section ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of p.l .

99-183 ; rationale for report required by p.l .

101-246 .

during debate on the agreement , some members of congress , the nonproliferation community , and other interests were skeptical that prc nonproliferation policies and practices had changed sufficiently to warrant the certifications and that they served u.s. interests .

they also pointed out that china had not joined the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) , which required full - scope safeguards .

the house international relations committee held a hearing on february 4 , 1998 , in which robert einhorn , deputy assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation , testified for the clinton administration .

einhorn testified to congress that we must , therefore , approach implementation of the agreement with a healthy skepticism .

president reagan's advice to trust but verify is clearly warranted here .

so we will be monitoring china's behavior carefully , and the chinese will know that any actions inconsistent with their commitments will jeopardize future cooperation .

congressional review ended on march 18 , 1998 , with no legislation to block the agreement , allowing it to be implemented .

u.s. firms may apply for export - import bank financing and licenses from the nrc and doe for nuclear exports to china , and foreign firms may apply to re - export u.s. technology .

on march 19 , 1998 , 13 members in the house led by representative markey wrote to president clinton to urge him to terminate implementation of the agreement .

also , as amended by representative gilman , section 1523 of the national defense authorization act for fy1999 ( p.l .

105-261 ) , enacted on october 17 , 1998 , requires the president to notify congress "upon" granting licenses by the nrc for nuclear exports or re - exports to a non - nato country that has detonated a nuclear explosive device ( eg , china ) .

as required , the state department , on june 9 , 2000 , issued the first notification to congress that the nrc issued a license on february 3 , 2000 , for the export of tantalite ore to china .

president clinton had submitted his certification with a memorandum of understanding ( pursuant to article 8 of the agreement ) that was initialed in washington , dc , on june 23 , 1987 , but not signed .

the president contended that this initialed memorandum provided for arrangements that met the certification standard of p.l .

99-183 that the arrangements be designed to be effective in ensuring peaceful uses of nuclear material , facilities , or components .

concerning "consultations," article 8 ( 2 ) of the agreement stated that the cooperation would be between two nuclear - weapon states and that bilateral safeguards "are not required. .

it called for "diplomatic channels to establish mutually acceptable arrangements for exchanges of information and visits to material , facilities , and components. .

the memorandum called for annual visits to reactors .

in the event of discrepancies , it called for the parties to "consult" to make "mutually acceptable" arrangements for the addition or reduction of visits , in place of safeguards .

in february 1998 , the office of arms control and nonproliferation of the department of energy published the "proposed subsequent arrangement concerning reciprocal arrangements for exchanges of information and visits under the agreement for cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy" between the united states and the prc , noting that it sought to sign the initialed memorandum which provided the "framework" for arrangements .

the united states and the prc signed the memorandum of understanding on may 6 , 1998 , and doe published it .

given the prc's nuclear cooperation with pakistan that raised questions of u.s. sanctions , the clinton administration apparently did not have adequate assurances from the prc that it would not re - transfer and divert u.s. nuclear technology to another country , potentially for military use .

the administration continued negotiations with china on this issue after the agreement's implementation .

according to a reported nrc memorandum of april 4 , 2000 , doe officials had held up 16 applications for authorization to export u.s. technology since 1998 , due to disagreement about assurances , including a u.s. demand for a blanket assurance and a prc offer of case - by - case assurances .

those cases were called "part 810 cases" in reference to the doe's export controls that are regulated by part 810 of title 10 of the code of federal regulations .

on september 16 , 2003 , in vienna , austria , secretary of energy spencer abraham and the chairman of china's atomic energy authority apparently agreed to assurances from china that u.s. nuclear technology would not be retransferred by china to third parties without prior u.s. consent .

the understanding , however , was reached in an exchange of diplomatic notes to "establish a process for determining what nuclear technologies require government - to - government nonproliferation assurances and set forth procedures for exchanging the assurances. .

afterwards , the bush administration continued to seek assurances to prevent unauthorized re - transfers by china .

in september 2004 , the state department publicly stated that the exchange of diplomatic notes in september 2003 followed as a "second significant event" the 1998 implementation of the agreement , which permitted transfers of nuclear reactor fuel and components "based on case - by - case review. .

then , the diplomatic notes "confirmed conditions and assurances governing transfers of nuclear technology which are not covered by the agreement , and those notes provided as well for a case - by - case review. .

the nrc issued licenses for export of nuclear reactor components under the nuclear cooperation agreement , while the doe authorized transfers of nuclear technology to china for its civilian nuclear power program based on the prc's "written nonproliferation assurances. .

the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act ( cisada ) of 2010 ( p.l .

111-195 ) , which became law july 1 , 2010 , contains additional restrictions on licensing nuclear exports to countries with entities that have been sanctioned for conducting certain types of energy - related transactions with iran .

section 102 ( a ) of cisada prohibits the issuance of nuclear export licenses under a 123 agreement for any country whose nationals have engaged in activities with iran relating to the "acquisition or development of nuclear weapons or related technology , or of missiles or other advanced conventional weapons that are designed or modified to deliver a nuclear weapon. .

the president can waive the provision by making a determination and notification to the appropriate congressional committees that the country did not know or have reason to know about the activity , or if the country is taking "all reasonable steps" to prevent recurrence and penalize the person involved .

