liberia's president , ellen johnson sirleaf , is currently visiting the united states .

her several - day trip is aimed at deepening her high - level contacts with the administration of president barack obama , congress , and other u.s. policy makers .

sirleaf , who also maintained warm ties with former president george w. bush's administration , is scheduled to meet with president obama , possibly to be joined by secretary of state hillary rodham clinton , on may 27 .

she is expected to update u.s. policy makers , including interested members , on liberia's progress since her election , as well as remaining challenges in such areas as security sector reform , anti - corruption efforts , unemployment , economic growth , and legal system capacity building .

her visit is expected to include a millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program pre - signing event and a possible u.s .

global food security initiative country program .

on march 18 , 2010 , president obama extended for 18 months the deferred enforced departure ( ded ) status of eligible liberian u.s. resident aliens , which had previously been set to expire on march 31 , 2010 , allowing them to remain in the united states .

ded is a special immigration status that effectively suspends the deportation of eligible u.s. aliens .

the presidential directive ordering the extension , which had been sought by some members , notably from districts with significant populations of liberian origin , also authorized those eligible to work during the duration of their ded status .

in addition , two bills introduced in the 111 th congress would allow certain liberian aliens to become permanent u.s. residents .

 ( see " immigration issues ." ) .

the trial of former liberian president charles taylor , which began in mid - 2007 , but was beset by procedural delays for a time , is continuing .

cross - examination of defense witnesses by the prosecutor's office of the u.s. - backed special court for sierra leone ( scsl ) , which began in november 2009 , proceeded in early 2010 .

 ( see " taylor trial ." ) .

in her late january 2010 annual address to the liberian legislature , president sirleaf announced that she would seek reelection to a second term in 2011 , as many observers had expected .

her announcement came in spite of a recommendation by liberia's truth and reconciliation commission ( trc ) in its draft june 2009 final report that sirleaf , as one of 49 alleged "political leaders and financiers of different warring factions" party to liberia's civil wars , be "barred from holding public offices" or "elected or appointed" for 30 years .

 ( see " truth and reconciliation commission ." ) .

in early 2010 , the unity party ( up , president sirleaf's party ) , the liberia action party ( lap ) , and the liberia unification party ( lup ) were in the process of holding party conventions and were all expected to ratify an april 2009 agreement among them to merge .

in mid - 2010 , a full - fledged peace corps volunteer ( pcv ) country program for liberia is scheduled to begin .

it will build on the work of a special short - term humanitarian service program that began in october 2008 .

 ( see " peace corps ." ) .

u.s. - liberia flights by delta airlines are slated to begin in mid - 2010 .

the initiation of the new route , originally planned for mid - 2009 , was delayed when the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) announced in june 2009 that due to security deficiencies at liberia's international airport , it would not permit the operation of u.s. - liberian flights .

the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , a dhs unit , is providing liberia with assistance to enhance aviation security .

 ( see " air and communications links ." ) .

in may 2009 , a jury acquitted former national transitional government of liberia ( ntgl ) chairman gyude bryant and four former liberia petroleum refinery company ( lprc ) executives from the ntgl period of corruption charges in a case involving the alleged embezzlement of lprc assets .

bryant faces a separate corruption case related his tenure as ntgl chairman .

 ( see " post - ntgl corruption trials ." ) .

in late 2009 , liberia held a senatorial by - election to fill a vacancy created by an incumbent's death in which president sirleaf's unity party lost in a run - off against the opposition congress for democratic change ( cdc ) .

although the election reportedly featured a low voter turnout , it was viewed as a dry run of the national elections commission's ( nec ) operational capability ahead of national elections in 2011 because nearly half of liberia's electorate was eligible to participate in it .

 ( see " subsequent elections ." ) .

the sirleaf government is negotiating or has in recent years entered into several multi - year , large natural resource or agricultural concession deals , collectively worth multiple billions of dollars worth of investment and potential exports , indicating that large foreign investors' confidence in the country's political progress and prospective stability is strong .

sirleaf has cited strong economic growth — which , she said in may 2010 , had averaged 7% annually over the past four years , in spite of a period of global recession — as a key benchmark of advances made under her administration .

the united states has long - standing ties with liberia that date back to the founding of the modern liberian state by "americo - liberians," black freemen and former slaves from the americas who settled in liberia beginning in 1821 .

liberia was also a close u.s. ally , albeit a relatively minor one , during world war ii and the cold war , and the country hosted u.s. communications facilities in the 1960s and 1970s , and received extensive u.s. development assistance .

the reagan administration cultivated ties with the government of president samuel k. doe during the first half of the 1980s , although these later soured .

the united states also provided meditational support and extensive humanitarian assistance for liberia during its first and second civil wars .

it has also invested substantial amounts of aid in the current united nations peacekeeping operation in liberia , as well as substantial post - war rebuilding and development assistance .

there has generally been strong congressional support for these efforts .

the administration of former president george w. bush formed a close and cordial relationship with the sirleaf government , and similarly close relations have continued under the obama administration .

contemporary u.s. relations with and policy developments related to liberia are discussed in the " u.s. relations " section of this report .

liberia , a small , poor west african country of about 3.4 million people , is undergoing a post - conflict transition and peace - building process after its second civil war within a decade .

the latter conflict burgeoned in 2000 , after several minor border incursions in 1999 .

it pitted the forces of charles taylor , elected president in 1997 after liberia's first civil war ( 1989-1997 ) , against two armed anti - taylor rebel groups: liberians united for reconciliation and democracy ( lurd ) and the movement for democracy in liberia ( model ) .

the war led to an extreme deterioration in political , economic , humanitarian , and human rights conditions .

it also affected neighboring states , which accepted liberian refugees and , in some cases , hosted anti - taylor forces .

the taylor regime also sponsored or facilitated acts of armed aggression against its neighbors , guinea , sierra leone , and cote d'ivoire .

a peace accord was signed on august 18 , 2003 , after months of international mediation .

it was facilitated by two events: charles taylor's resignation of the presidency and departure from liberia on august 11 , after he was granted political asylum in nigeria ; and the early august deployment of an economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) military intervention force , the ecowas mission in liberia ( ecomil ) .

ecomil , with extensive u.s. and u.n. assistance , deployed to liberia to end heavy fighting and alleviate a worsening humanitarian crisis in the wake of a failed june 2003 cease - fire .

it was tasked with monitoring and securing the cease - fire , enabling the delivery of relief aid , and preparing the way for the u.n. mission in liberia ( unmil ) .

the august 30 , 2003 , comprehensive peace agreement ( cpa ) , signed by the three warring factions and 18 political parties , laid out a peace process , provided for the creation of the national transitional government of liberia ( ntgl ) , and allocated leadership positions within it .

the ntgl was mandated to reestablish functioning government authority and prepare for national elections that were held in mid - october and november 2005 .

the elected government of president sirleaf replaced the ntgl in late january 2006 , as described below .

the ntgl consisted of an executive branch , presided over by a chairman , gyude bryant , and an interim parliament , the national transitional legislative assembly .

bryant , a businessman and church layman who led the liberian action party , oversaw the functions of the central government and various public corporations , agencies , and commissions .

bryant was given the title of ntgl "chairman" to differentiate his unelected ntgl role and authority from that of a constitutionally elected president .

the transition faced many challenges , most related to the extremely destructive effects of many years of war in liberia .

others included the dominant role within the ntgl of the three former armed factions , which were prone to internal rivalries ; political discord over the allocation of state positions and resources ; very limited state capacities ; and reported public sector corruption .

peaceful senate , house of representatives , and presidential elections were held on october 11 , 2005 , and a presidential runoff vote was held on november 8 .

the 22-candidate presidential poll led to a runoff race .

it pitted george manneh "oppong" weah , 39 years of age , a former professional top soccer player whose star status and rags - to - riches history make him a hero to liberian youth , against ellen johnson sirleaf , then 67 years of age , a harvard - trained economist and former businesswoman who had served as liberian finance minister and as a united nations and world bank official .

on november 15 , 2005 , the national elections commission ( nec ) declared sirleaf the winner of the presidential race , with 59.4% of votes against weah's 40.6% , making her the first - ever female president of an african country .

despite its declaration in favor of sirleaf , the nec subsequently probed and later rejected claims by weah that the election was fraudulent .

a presidential election will next be held in 2011 .

in contrast to the presidential race , election results for seats in the bicameral legislature were disparate ; no party received more than 24% of seats in either chamber , and none dominated in both the senate and the house of representatives .

the largest party in the 64-member house , in which members serve six - year terms , is weah's congress for democratic change ( cdc ) , which won 15 seats .

the liberty party ( lp ) won nine house seats , while sirleaf's unity party ( up ) and the coalition for transformation of liberia ( cotol ) each won eight .

seven other parties each won between one and five house seats , and seven independent candidates each won a seat .

in the 30-seat senate , in which members normally serve nine - year terms , cotol won seven seats and the up won four ; all other parties won between one and three seats .

political party mergers in 2009 and 2010 , discussed below , have changed the allocation of seats among parties .

notable among the newly elected legislators were several former taylor regime officials and leaders of former armed factions or security services .

these include senators jewel howard - taylor , a former wife of charles taylor ( npp ; bong county ) ; prince yormie johnson ( independent , bong county ) ; and saye - taayor adolphus dolo ( cotol , nimba county ) .

johnson is the former leader of a faction that splintered from taylor's early in the first civil war , and is infamous for personally presiding over the bloody , videotaped murder of former head of state samuel doe .

he returned to run in the election from exile in nigeria , where he had professed to have become a born - again christian evangelist .

dolo is a former pro - taylor militia leader , known by the nom de guerre general peanut butter , who reportedly committed war - time atrocities and recruited child fighters , and who is said to have aggressively opposed unmil peacekeeping activities .

in the house , they include edwin snowe ( independent , montserrado county ) ; saah richard gbollie ( npp , margibi county ) ; and kai g. "white flower b - 50" farley , ( cdc , grand gedeh county ) .

snowe , who was elected speaker of the house in mid - january 2006 but has since stepped down , is a former taylor in - law .

he is also the former head of the liberian petroleum and refining corporation ( lprc ) , from which taylor regime officials reportedly diverted significant amounts of funds , some of which may have benefitted taylor during his exile in nigeria .

gbollie is a former taylor fighter and taylor administration police official accused of human rights abuses .

farley is an ex - model commander and ntgl official accused of threatening the 2003 peace accord .

jewel taylor , dolo , snowe , and farley are subject to u.n. travel sanctions .

humanitarian conditions are much improved from the context of severe and widespread post - war need that was prevalent in the years after the war , but high rates of poverty remains endemic .

liberia continues to receive substantial international food aid and is highly donor - dependent .

international assistance is , however , increasingly supporting resettlement and socioeconomic recovery , rather than emergency humanitarian needs .

according to a u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) briefing note , about 200,000 liberian refugees had repatriated by mid - february 2006 .

by late april 2006 , over 321,000 liberian internally displaced persons ( idps ) , including over 59,000 families , had returned to their places of origin or resettled .

most had received resettlement assistance , usually consisting of basic non - food items , transport aid , and two months of food supplies .

u.n. agencies , together with non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) and ntgl ministries have implemented a wide range of reconstruction and capacity building projects relating to nutrition , water and sanitation , primary health care services , and transport infrastructure .

numerous schools have reopened nationwide , with extensive assistance from unicef .

nearly all child ex - combatants were reportedly been reintegrated into their communities of origin , and many received follow - up aid in the form of social services .

in mid - march 2006 , the u.n. secretary - general reported ( s / 2006 / 159 , march 14 , 2006 , op .

cit. ) .

that 65,000 of 101,495 demobilized ex - combatants had benefitted from donor - financed reintegration and rehabilitation projects , and that about 37,000 were still waiting to be placed in such programs .

the secretary - general reported that although funding was available for most of these ex - combatants , about $5 million was "urgently needed" to provide such assistance to some 5,125 ex - fighters .

liberia's supreme law is its 1984 constitution , effective since 1986 .

it provides for a political and legal system that is substantially modeled on that of the united states , though not entirely ; for instance , federalism is absent .

liberia's government is made up of three branches that exercise separate powers and authorities: a bicameral legislature , which consists of a 64-member house and a 30-member senate ; a presidentially led executive branch that controls multiple line ministries and several independent agencies ; and a judiciary .

legislators are directly elected by voters in each of liberia's 15 counties , while the president is directly elected by universal suffrage .

the president and house members are each elected to six - year terms , and senators serve nine - year terms , except in cases of irregular vacancies of elected positions .

presidents may serve up to two terms .

although the sirleaf government's mandate is derived from the constitution , that of the ntgl was extra - constitutional .

during its tenure , those provisions of the constitution and laws of liberia that were inconsistent with the provisions of the 2003 comprehensive peace agreement were suspended , though all other provisions of the constitution remained in force .

although liberia's constitution provides for a system of checks and balances among the three branches of government , in practice the executive branch has historically exerted extensive influence over the legislature , the judiciary , and local governments .

historically , liberian presidents have wielded exceptional , sometimes extra - constitutional powers and closely controlled the legal system , the security forces , and the economy , as well as headed majority ruling parties .

liberia has also long suffered from the effects of public sector corruption and a tradition of political patronage .

this often resulted in uneven , urban - centered socioeconomic development and often deprived large segments of the population , notably the rural indigenous majority , of access to public goods and services .

given this history , president sirleaf could have attempted to aggregate predominant power in her office , but doing so would have run counter to her emphasis on building national unity , constitutional and institutionally robust governance , fighting corruption , and institutionally developing the state .

her emphasis on developing state institutions and processes , rather than exerting presidential command authority may mean that she is both less likely and less able to rule in the largely unilateral manner of her predecessors .

however , she also came to power with a weaker electoral mandate than those of past presidents ; neither sirleaf's unity party nor any other party commands a legislative majority .

similarly , no candidate was able to command majority support in the initial 22-candidate presidential first round presidential vote .

the relative strength of opposition parties in the parliament initially led some observers to hypothesize that liberia's legislators might bridge their party differences and cooperate in furtherance of their collective institutional power vis - à - vis the executive branch , and take on a more engaged and assertive role in policy - making than has been traditional .

to date , however , president sirleaf has often been able to dominate the national policy agenda .

this is attributable , in part , to a tradition of strong executive leadership ; limited capacity within the legislature ; the limited legislative experience of many current legislators ; the fractionalized party make - up of the legislature ; and to the governing experience of sirleaf and many in her cabinet .

most bills continue to be originated by the executive branch and passed with presidential priorities intact .

a notable exception to this pattern was the legislature's september 2007 rejection of the asset seizures bill targeting former president taylor and his associates .

as discussed elsewhere in this report , liberia's current congress could potentially play a more prominent role in governance than have its predecessors , in part because president sirleaf's party does not enjoy a majority in either chamber of the legislature .

many members are enthusiastic about their representative role and are determined to assertively exercise the constitutional powers and responsibilities of the legislature .

a range of challenges may , however , impede the realization of such goals .

a key impediment is the relative inexperience of many of liberia's legislators .

although a number of members are professionals with varying private or public sector experience and a few served previously in the legislature as members or staff , the vast majority have never previously held elected office and have no lawmaking or policy - making experience .

in meetings attended by the author in july 2006 , many members expressed a need for instruction or information regarding the basic functions of being a legislator , the workings of the committee system , and the legislature's oversight , appropriations , authorizing , and constituent relations roles .

in many cases , members are unable to turn to their personal staffs to provide expertise on legislative functions because , as is common across the public sector in liberia , many staff lack appropriate training or job - specific skills .

in many instances , the professional work of the legislature is carried out by university students , reportedly because pay levels are viewed as too low to attract trained , professional staff .

in other cases , staff reportedly lack appropriate skills because they were hired "based solely on contacts and family relationships," with little regard to competence or training , "rendering [many offices ... ] dysfunctional. .

there is also a paucity of institutional resources available to members .

committee staff are virtually nonexistent , and the legislature as a whole lacks many of the assets necessary to independently carry out its principal roles .

the two chambers largely lack bill drafting expertise , and most bills are drafted by the executive branch or by outside organizations .

parliamentary record keeping capacity is also limited ; legislative debates and votes are recorded by hand , in part due to a lack of audio or stenographic recording equipment .

legislative debates and decisions , therefore , are reportedly often documented incompletely and sometimes erroneously .

the manner in which legislative resources are allocated also appears to curtail the institution's potential effectiveness .

in comparison to many countries , the size of liberian members' office staffs is large , and a high proportion of members' staffs perform non - legislative services , such as food preparation , gardening , and driving .

similarly , despite a general lack of resources , the two chambers of the legislature maintain duplicate services ; each , for instance , has its own research department .

these institutional challenges are compounded by a dearth of office space and equipment .

the legislature's capitol building , which was looted and suffered decay due to neglect during the civil war , lacks most basic functional infrastructure elements , such as water and electricity , though it is currently undergoing an upgrade ( see below ) .

some liberians , including some legislators , as well as outside observers are also concerned that legislators' lack of knowledge regarding their normative and constitutional roles as representatives of the public might cause some to seek use their offices for purposes of private gain , rather than to serve the public .

such concerns were highlighted in october 2006 when , just prior to the slated start of a u.s. - supported project to rehabilitate the capitol building ( see below ) , several liberia news reports described acts of alleged "looting" of the capitol building by some members and staff of the legislature , who were reported to have removed and appropriated government property for personal use from the capitol .

similar concerns reportedly arose in relation to legislative negotiations relating to the recently enacted forestry law reforms .

according to informed observers , during talks prior to the passage of the forestry reforms , some legislators made remarks suggesting that they viewed a successful outcome of the reform process as being one in which they personally — as persons representing the public , in contrast to the general liberian public itself — would directly benefit from processes at issue , such as the allocation of forestry concessions or revenues .

a certain amount of on - going public skepticism about government transparency in general may be attributable to public perceptions formed of the ntgl and of the transitional legislature , the decision - making conduct of which was often opaque and sometimes allegedly corrupt ( see " transitional government " ) , and to widespread reports of corruption under previous liberian governments .

such views may be spurred by on - going investigations of alleged corruption under the ntgl .

the united states and liberia have a long - standing historical relationship .

the united states has long provided liberia with substantial assistance , and u.s. - liberian bilateral ties have often been close , with some exceptions , including the final years of late president samuel k. doe's regime and during the tenure of former president charles taylor .

official u.s. interactions with the ntgl were also guarded , due to real or perceived problems of corruption within the ntgl and due to the participation in it of members of the armed parties to the conflict , some suspected of human rights abuses .

current u.s. - liberian relations are warm , as they were during the administration of former president george w. bush .

the sirleaf administration's close working relationship with the bush administration began with her inauguration in 2006 , which former u.s. first lady laura bush and former secretary of state rice attended , among other prominent u.s. guests .

former president bush — whose administration had played key roles in ending liberia's second civil war and in stabilizing and helping the country to rebuild in the immediate post - war years , backed by substantial , congressionally supported u.s. post - war rebuilding assistance — admired sirleaf's leadership and achievements , and awarded the u.s. presidential medal of freedom to her in november 2007 .

in february 2008 , then - president and mrs. bush traveled to liberia , among other african countries .

diverse u.s. officials have repeatedly voiced support for president sirleaf's government since her election , most recently in april 2010 , when under secretary of state for political affairs william j. burns visited liberia .

during his visit , he stated that it was "remarkable to see how far the country has come since it held its first free and open post - conflict election in 2005," but added that it is "equally evident is that much work remains for liberia to fully recover after years of horrific civil war. .

burns stated that the core purpose of his trip was to send the message that "the united states will stand by liberia as it continues to make progress towards reaching its full potential as a democratic state. .

his comments echoed those of secretary of state clinton , who , after meeting with president sirleaf in april 2009 , stated that sirleaf's leadership had "been exemplary and extraordinary" and had "made an enormous contribution" to liberia's advancement , and that "president obama and i are very committed to the future of liberia and to president sirleaf's continuing leadership. .

during his trip , burns also announced a u.s. commitment to "provide $19.75 million in funding to further advance liberia national police force training," which , he said fulfilled "a promise made by secretary clinton during her visit last august. .

clinton's 2009 trip was the second most recent visit by a high - level u.s. official to liberia , and the most senior leadership visit to date to the country during the obama administration .

during the visit , in a speech to the liberian parliament , she related the importance of expanding democratic participation and institution - building to liberia's prospective success in meeting its substantial challenges , among the most pressing of which she cited as corruption and the need for land tenure reform , and lack of access to jobs , electricity , housing , education , and law enforcement .

she specifically called on the legislature to develop its budgetary oversight role , counter corruption and promote transparency , and pass a code of conduct in order to ensure "ethical standards that guide the pursuit of the common good. .

she also called on the legislature to help ensure "credible ... free and fair elections in 2011," in part by passing a threshold bill .

in remarks delivered at the liberian national police ( lnp ) academy , she discussed the importance , challenges , and achievements of u.s. , multilateral , and liberian partnership in rebuilding liberia's police force during the on - going post - conflict period .

in particular , she emphasized the importance to the united states of its investment in assisting in the development of the lnp emergency response unit , and announced a prospective increase in u.s. financial support for lnp training ( discussed previously in this report ) .

president sirleaf has made several official visits to the united states , including one in february 2007 , when she attended a world bank - organized liberia partners' forum donor meeting in washington d.c. she made another such visit in march 2006 , during which she addressed a joint session of congress on march 15 and met with president bush on march 21 .

she reportedly closely consulted with u.s. officials regarding her priorities for liberia and the status of charles taylor .

during a pre - inaugural december 2005 trip to the united states , sirleaf also met with key u.s. and international financial institution officials .

president sirleaf is expected to undertake a further official visit the united states in late may 2010 .

while her itinerary has not been released , the trip is expected to focus on deepening sirleaf's high - level contacts with obama administration officials .

sirleaf is expected to update u.s. policy makers , including interested members , on liberia's progress since her election , as well as remaining challenges in such areas as security sector reform , anti - corruption efforts , unemployment , economic growth , and legal system capacity building .

her visit may occasion the announcement of a possible millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program and a possible u.s .

global food security initiative country program ( see " development assistance and related bilateral cooperation " ) .

liberia - related activities in the 111 th congress have focused on liberian u.s. immigration issues ; support for liberian female legislators ; transparency in liberia's natural resource sector ; and the appropriation of u.s. assistance for liberia and the scsl ( on the latter , see table 2 ) .

other liberia - related issues likely to continue to draw the attention of some members in the 111 th congress — and in the forthcoming 112 th congress — include liberia's relative progress with regard to security sector reform , anticorruption and transparency efforts , and democratization ; its economic growth prospects ; and its politico - military stability prior to the eventual drawdown of unmil .

in addition to appropriating funds for foreign operations that are normally allocated , in part , for programs of assistance to liberia , the 111 th congress laid out several liberia - related provisions in its fy2009 and fy2010 appropriations .

the explanatory statement accompanying p.l .

111-8 , omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( passed as h.r .

1105 , obey ) specified that marquette university be made eligible for consideration as one of multiple potential recipients of funding for "exchanges between united states and liberian officials" under a one - time $6 million international exchange grant program ; allocated $90.3 million in economic support fund ( esf ) assistance for liberia ; directed , with respect to esf funding for liberia , that "usaid should support efforts to increase access to electricity , and should expand programs that promote and strengthen the rule of law , consistent with country plans" and "consider the work of north carolina state university" ; stated that "usaid and the department of state should support international efforts to trace and freeze assets allegedly confiscated and controlled by former liberian president charles taylor , and by his family members and associates .

funding is encouraged to support programs that work with the liberian solicitor general to identify and recover these funds" ; and stated that the trade and development agency "should consult with the committees on appropriations on the next phase of work related to the mount coffee hydro power station and the construction of a proposed fiber optic ring around monrovia. .

p.l .

111-117 , consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( passed as h.r .

3288 , olver ) allocated for liberia $153 million in esf assistance and $10 million in regional peacekeeping operations funding .

it also directed that funds appropriated in the law that are available for assistance for liberia... shall be made available to promote and support transparency and accountability in relation to the extraction of timber , oil and gas , cacao and other natural resources , including by strengthening implementation and monitoring of the extractive industries transparency initiative and the kimberley process certification scheme .

as in previous congresses , some members have argued in favor of measures to allow certain liberian refugees to reside in the united states , either on a temporary or permanent basis .

most recently , some members have urged that deferred enforced departure ( ded ; see text box ) , a special immigration status under which certain eligible liberian aliens may legally reside and work in the united states , be extended by president obama for such persons upon its current scheduled expiration on march 31 , 2010 .

two bills would also provide permanent residence status to liberian refugees in the united states .

on march 10 , 2010 , a liberian national immigration conference was held on the capitol to "highlight the need for an immediate extension of ded for the approximately 3,600 eligible liberians living in the united states and ... efforts supporting the extension. .

in a dear colleague letter announcing the forum , representative donald m. payne invited members to participate in the event .

he also stated that he would be "sending a letter to president obama urging an extension of ded. .

in late february 2010 , over 20 members also wrote a similar letter to president obama .

two bills , s. 656 ( reed ) , the liberian refugee immigration fairness act of 2009 , introduced march 19 , 2009 , and h.r .

2258 ( kennedy ) , the liberian refugee immigration protection act of 2009 , introduced may 5 , 2009 , seek to adjust the immigration status of various categories of liberians in the united states .

s. 656 would direct the secretary of homeland security to adjust the u.s. residency status of qualifying liberian aliens to that of lawful permanent residents .

the bill would require qualifying applicants to be non - criminals , as defined in the bill ; to be present in the united states since january 1 , 2009 ; and to apply for adjustment before april 1 , 2011 , among other criteria .

it would also authorize the secretary to authorize applicants to work in the united states while their cases are pending and would not trigger a reduction in the number of immigrant visas available to liberians not eligible for adjustment under the act .

h.r .

2258 provides for a broadly similar immigration status adjustment process for qualifying liberians as those that set out in s. 656 , but defines eligibility differently , and similarly provides that such adjustments will not offset the number of immigrant visas otherwise available to liberians .

in contrast to s. 656 , eligibility for adjustment under h.r .

2258 would be limited to liberian u.s. alien residents who were granted tps on or after march 27 , 1991 ; or were eligible to apply for tps on or after march 27 , 1991 .

liberia - related bills or measures introduced in the 111 th congress that have not been passed into law include the following: as passed by the house , h.r .

2410 ( berman ) , the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , introduced may 14 , 2009 , would establish a new state department exchange program , to be undertaken in cooperation with the liberian women's legislative caucus .

it would fund scholarship - based exchanges for female legislators and congressional staff from liberia in order to increase active female participation in liberian politics and democratic processes .

h.r .

2475 ( ros - lehtinen ) , the foreign relations authorization and reform act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , introduced may 19 , 2009 , contains an almost identical measure .

according to h.rept .

111-136 , which accompanies h.r .

2410 , the congressional budget office estimates that this program would cost under $.5 million per year , and total $1 million between 2010 and 2014 .

s. 1434 ( leahy ) , department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2010 , introduced july 9 , 2009 , would mandate that assistance funds appropriated under the act for liberia , among three other west african countries , "be made available to promote and support transparency and accountability in relation to the extraction of timber , oil and gas , cocoa and other natural resources , including by strengthening implementation and monitoring of the extractive industries transparency initiative ( eiti ) and the kimberley process certification scheme," and prohibits such funds from being used to support "industrial - scale logging. .

the house report ( h.rept .

111-105 ) accompanying p.l .

111-32 ( passed as h.r .

2346 , obey ) called for liberia , among nine other countries , to "receive priority consideration" with respect to receiving a potential portion of a $300 million fy2009 esf appropriation to assist developing countries affected by the global financial crisis .

such language , however , did not appear in p.l .

111-32 or the conference report accompanying it .

liberia - related activities by the 110 th congress built on those pursued by the 109 th congress .

congress continued to monitor the activities of the scsl and , in particular , the taylor war crimes case , and provide funding for the scsl .

congress's focus on liberia also centered on aiding liberia's efforts to consolidate its post - war governance and economic rebuilding processes .

issues that drew particular congressional attention included efforts to rehabilitate schools , clinics , roads and other public facilities ; progress under the gemap transparency initiative ; progress of u.s. - backed security sector restructuring , and possible expansions of related assistance , eg , for the creation of a quick reaction gendarme unit ; increased mobility capacity building for the police and military ; and maritime waters and land border monitoring and interdiction capacity building .

consideration of potential continued support for unmil and the pace of its projected draw - down ; and u.s. decision - making on debt relief for liberia and the status of future brooke amendment restrictions on liberia .

the 110 th congress provided continuing appropriations for the purpose of assisting liberia's post - war rebuilding process when it passed p.l .

110-5 ( h.j.res .

20 / revised continuing appropriations resolution , 2007 ) , which provided approximately $120.81 funding for fy2007 foreign operations .

the congress also provided $48.95 million in supplementary fy2007 funding for liberia under p.l .

110-28 ( h.r .

2206 / u.s .

troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ) .

in fy2008 , congress allocated $125.35 million in fy2008 liberia funding for liberia , as laid out in its joint explanatory statement for p.l .

110-161 ( h.r .

2764 / consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ) .

the final amount allocated to liberia , which included funds allocated for liberia from central appropriation accounts under the law , totaled $163 million in fy2008 .

the liberia stabilization , economic empowerment , development and security act of 2008 ( liberia seeds act of 2008 , or h.r .

6655 , jackson , 110 th congress ) would have authorized assistance to liberia for the following: ( 1 ) roads and bridges ; ( 2 ) rehabilitation of monrovia freeport ; ( 3 ) water and sanitation ; ( 4 ) the electricity sector ; ( 5 ) vocational education programs for war - affected youth and ex - combatants ; ( 6 ) establishment of a government employee training institute and enhancement of government accountability and effectiveness ; ( 7 ) narcotics control and law enforcement ; ( 8 ) educational exchanges ; and ( 9 ) the truth and reconciliation commission of liberia .

other liberia - related bills introduced in the 110 th congress include the following: h.r .

1941 ( kennedy ) , liberian refugee immigration protection act of 2007 ; h.r .

1591 ( obey ) , u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ; h.r .

3123 ( kennedy ) , to extend the designation of liberia under section 244 of the immigration and nationality act so that liberians can continue to be eligible for temporary protected status under that section ; s. 396 ( dorgan ) , a bill to amend the internal revenue code of 1986 to treat controlled foreign corporations in tax havens as domestic corporations ; s. 554 ( dorgan ) , act for our kids ; s. 656 ( reed ) , liberian refugee immigration fairness act of 2007 ; s. 965 ( byrd ) , u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ; s. 1508 ( dorgan ) , clean energy production tax incentives act of 2007 ; and s. 1903 ( reed ) , a bill to extend the temporary protected status designation of liberia under section 244 of the immigration and nationality act so that liberians can continue to be eligible for such status through september 30 , 2008 .

h.r .

1941 and s. 656 would have provided permanent residency status to certain liberian nationals who were granted or were eligible for tps , while h.r .

3123 and s. 1903 would have extended the status of persons eligible for tps .

on july 30 , the house passed h.r .

3123 , which was received in the senate on august 3 .

on september 12 , 2007 , president bush , citing the continued fragility of "the political and economic situation in liberia," directed that eligible liberians resident in the united states and subject to a loss of tps as of october 1 , 2007 , be granted ded for 18 months , until march 31 , 2009 .

he also directed that such grantees be allowed to work in the united states .

his action fulfilled basic underlying aims of the tps - related bills discussed above .

in december 2008 , a number of house members co - signed a letter to former president bush and similar one to the transition team of then - president - elect obama calling for an extension of ded for eligible liberians resident in the united states and subject to a loss of tps on march 31 , 2009 .

u.s. assistance to liberia , which is broken out by accounts and amounts for fy2004-fy2010 , appear in table 3 .

the obama administration's assistance agenda for liberia , which continues many of the same kinds of activities that had been pursued by the bush administration , centers on "fostering peace and security , strengthening democratic institutions , and rebuilding the economy in a country recovering from 14 years of civil war. .

in addition to security sector assistance , which is discussed elsewhere in this report , current usaid and state department assistance is focused on increasing good governance and democratization ; advancing economic growth through assistance to capacity - building and investments related to agriculture , sustainable natural resource management , energy , and infrastructure ; and investments in the education and health sectors .

apart from elections support and legislature strengthening , which are discussed elsewhere in this report , focal governance - strengthening activities center on rule of law judicial system strengthening and in creasing access to justice through support for magistrate and legal assistance training , notably through a long - term american bar association program called the judicial training institute ( jti ) , and alternate dispute resolution , notably with regard to land disputes .

efforts to bolster government transparency and accountability are another key component of such programs .

such assistance is provided through support for the anti - corruption commission and usaid follow - on support for gemap ( discussed elsewhere in this report ) , under a usaid program called the financial management and capacity building program ( fimcab ) and other civil services training programs .

there are also usaid - supported civil society and media capacity building efforts to increase human rights education .

economic growth and related programs center on agriculture capacity - building and the small business sector ( eg , tree crop rehabilitation , livestock re - stocking , and small business training and credit programs , notably in rural and farm areas ) ; and food - for - work initiatives targeting rural areas and food aid for vulnerable groups .

another key program provides capacity - building assistance to the ministry of agriculture .

programs in this area also support community - based land and forest management ; transparent regulation and governance of commercial forest management ; and support for biodiversity conservation goals .

according to the fy2011 cbj , as part of the new global hunger and food security initiative , the united states will help liberia design and implement a country - led comprehensive food security strategy to help the country increase long - term food security and provide support to entire value chains , in order to bring produce to markets and enable liberia's farmers to feed all the country's citizens .

usaid energy and infrastructure assistance is another key component .

activities in this area focus on rebuilding roads and bridges to enable farm to market transport ; rehabilitation of government buildings , eg , schools , clinics , and training institutions ; and increasing access to electricity .

the latter centers on increasing access to electricity through increased power distribution and generation , notably through the use of clean and renewable energy technologies , eg , solar , water - based and biomass power generation , and technical energy efficiency use gains .

support is also provided to enhance energy - related government policy - making capabilities and public utility effectiveness .

micro - power generation , particularly in rural areas and in support of other usaid activities , is also a key focus of these efforts .

health and education programs form the final two main pillars of u.s. development assistance in liberia .

health assistance seeks to rebuild and improve basic health services through support for staffing , equipment and supplies , and training , and facilities upgrades , notably in rural areas ; ensure child welfare , notably for orphans and other vulnerable or special needs children ; and increase access to clean water and sanitation .

there are special programs for family planning and reproductive health ; nutrition ; and for prevention and intervention programs aimed at combating malaria , tuberculosis , and hiv / aids .

usaid also supports efforts to bolster the program planning and management capabilities of the ministry of health .

education programs center on teacher training , with a special program aimed at improving reading instruction and testing ; increasing professional public service worker access to higher education ; providing financial support and mentorship to poor children and programs to facilitate the access of older youth to access formal education and life skills training ; and a book distribution program .

usaid also supports ministry of education policy - making , program management , and financial capacity - building , and broader community outreach education programs pertaining to health , nutrition , hygiene , and sanitation .

liberia has been eligible for millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program assistance since late 2008 .

as of early april 2010 , mcc and usaid were working with liberia's ministry of planning and economic affairs to develop a country threshold program , for which an agreement may be signed by mid - 2010 .

the program is currently conceived of as a three - year program ( 2010-2013 ) that would focus on girl's primary education ; land rights and access ; and trade policy .

the peace corps is expanding its presence in liberia .

in august 2008 , the peace corps — which had deployed over 3,832 peace corps volunteers ( pcvs ) to liberia from 1962 to 1990 , when war - related security conditions led to a suspension of the program — officially reopened its program in liberia .

in october 2008 the first group 12 volunteers , of an eventual total of 13 , deployed to liberia under the new program , which was initiated under the peace corps response ( pcr ) program ( formerly called crisis response ) , a special short - term humanitarian service deployment program .

under the program , veteran pcvs called peace corps response volunteers ( pcrvs ) deploy to countries that have special needs , typically ones recovering from armed or political conflict or natural disasters , but which may eventually host a regular peace corps country program .

in liberia , pcrvs have worked on health and education system reconstruction , mentoring teacher trainers , training health professionals , and supporting parent teacher associations and resource libraries for teachers , among other education capacity - building projects .

the program helped lay the groundwork for a transition to a full peace corps country program that is expected to receive its first group of pcvs in july 2010 .

the new pcvs , whose services will overlap with the continuing pcrv program , will support secondary education , working as english , science , and math teachers .

funding for peace corps activities in liberia is estimated at $1.44 million in fy2010 and projected to rise to $2.45 million for fy2011 , when the program is expected to support 41 volunteers .

the united states is also supporting president sirleaf's market - based economic growth agenda in a variety of other ways .

in late february 2006 , the u.s. trade representative announced that president bush had reinstated duty - free generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) trade benefits for liberia .

ustr said that the action was intended to provide "strong support to recently elected president ellen johnson sirleaf's efforts to increase employment , diversify exports , and stabilize society. .

it was made , according to the ustr , because sirleaf had repealed a decree prohibiting strikes and invited the international labor organization ( ilo ) to help liberia to conform with ilo obligations , thus making "improving worker rights a high priority. .

on january 1 , 2007 , liberia became eligible to receive u.s. trade benefits under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) .

in february 2007 , liberia and the united states signed a bilateral trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) .

its aim is to bolster bilateral economic cooperation , primarily by creating a u.s. - liberia council on trade and investment charged with monitoring bilateral trade and investment developments and opportunities , related policy problems , and identifying and working to remove impediments to bilateral investment .

in february 2007 , the u.s. trade and development agency ( ustda ) announced that it would provide a $400,000 grant to the liberian ministry of lands , mines and energy to fund a technical and economic feasibility study of the rebuilding and expansion of the mount coffee hydropower station .

the station , once a key national source of electricity , was destroyed during the first civil war .

ustda had first announced plans to support such a study in mid - may 2006 .

this announcement had been preceded by a february 2006 announcement by the u.s. export - import bank ( ex - im ) stating that it had renewed its short - term insurance pilot program for africa ( stipp ) for three years beginning march 31 , 2006 , and that liberia had been added to the program .

similarly , in march 2006 , the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) had announced that "following the election of president ellen john sirleaf and the conclusion of its long civil war," it had "reopened its programs in liberia for the first time since 1990" as part of an effort of "[r]eaffirming u.s. government support for liberia. .

opic is now involved in a public - private commercial and investment business development lending project , the liberia enterprise development fund ( ledf ) , together with the rlj companies of black entertainment television founder robert l. johnson , chf international , and the u.s. african development foundation ( adf ) .

the purpose of ledf is to create a projected $30 million loan portfolio aimed at supporting small businesses in liberia .

opic has committed to provide $20 million in debt financing to ledf , and mr. johnson and the adf have committed , respectively , to provide $3 million and $1 million annually over three years .

chf international will administer the program in liberia .

opic also co - sponsored a liberia private sector investment forum in february 2007 .

another effort aimed at fostering bilateral ties , including commercial ones , was the february 2007 signing of an open skies aviation agreement between the united states and liberia .

in october 2008 , delta airlines announced plans to initiate u.s. - liberia flights , an outcome that would fulfill some of the goals of the open skies agreement .

flights were originally slated to begin in mid - 2009 , but delta's plans faced delays , and flights are now slated to begin in mid - 2010 .

delta's initial plans were deferred in june 2009 , when the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) announced that it would not authorize the operation of the planned route , pending further dhs evaluation of delta's request to initiate the flights .

the decision followed an assessment of roberts international airport ( rob ) , outside monrovia , by the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , a dhs unit .

it indicated that rob did not meet international security and international civil aviation organization ( icao ) standards .

tsa is providing liberia with technical assistance to enhance aviation security and compliance with icao standards .

it has deployed an aviation security sustainable international standards team ( assist ) to liberia to assess local needs and help build national capacities in this area , and is slated to conduct a reassessment of rob capabilities in these areas .

rob services and infrastructure are also being upgraded , in part with the u.s. - supported , contract - based assistance of lockheed martin global services .

another key benchmark necessary prior to the initiation of flights to monrovia was met in october 2009 , when the tsa reportedly gave provisional approval for the operation of delta flights at amilcar cabral international airport in cape verde , which is slated to function as a refueling stop for delta's planned flights to liberia and other african destinations .

the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) , in cooperation with the departments of defense and state , is also helping to boost u.s. - liberian communications and help rebuild liberian government capacity .

usps has donated postal equipment to liberia , trained liberian postal workers , and provided recommendations regarding its future development .

in february , 2007 , the united states , other governments , and several multilateral organizations co - hosted the liberia partners' forum , a meeting between the liberian government and liberia's public sector creditors and bilateral assistance donors in washington , d.c .

the aim of the event , following a similar one held in july 2006 , was to review liberia's achievements and challenges in the areas of economic governance , fiscal policy implementation , general economic development , and related matters .

during the meeting , bush administration officials announced their intention to cancel $391 million in debt owed by liberia to the united states , both under the heavily indebted poor countries ( hipc ) initiative and in cooperation with other donors , such as the world bank , the african development bank , and the international monetary fund .

in early june 2008 , the united states acted on its pledge , writing off $394 million of liberian debt under hipc and paris club agreements .

the u.s. treasury has also provided over $185 million to support liberian imf debt relief financing and provided $17.5 million to clear liberia's african development bank debt .

as of mid - 2009 , official bilateral debt owed to the united states , slated to be cancelled after liberia completes the hipc process , totaled $29.26 million .

several multilateral and bilateral creditor deals both prior to and after the u.s. action had also reduced liberia's debt substantially , and as april 2010 , bilateral debt reduction deals with all with all paris club creditors except switzerland had been reached .

in april 2009 , liberia was able to finalize negotiations to buy back $1.2 billion in outstanding government commercial debt held by hedge funds and other distressed debt investors ( sometimes called vulture funds ) at a deep discount of 97.5% , after the world bank and several bilateral donors , including the united states , agreed to provide $38 million to pay off 25 outstanding commercial claims .

the balance of its sovereign debt , $1.7 billion , was expected to be written off when liberia reaches its hipc completion point .

the imf also reported in april 2010 that the liberian government planned to reach agreements with remaining official non - paris club creditors , holding debt of $129 million , and private creditors holding $21 million of commercial debt , and was on target to reach its hipc completion point in mid - 2010 , providing it met certain conditions .

the $21 million ( reported elsewhere as $20 million ) is held by two vulture funds , wall capital ltd. and hamsah investments , who were awarded a claim for that amount by a uk court after suing the liberian government for repayment .

the government has announced that it would be unable to pay the award , as doing so would violate its hipc commitments , although it was seeking a waiver to do so .

the original debt associated with the claim totaled $15 million , and had been resold several times .

levels of u.s. bilateral and u.n. peacekeeping assistance for liberia , for fy2004 through fy2011 , appear in table 3 .

