the concept that all americans should be able to afford access to the telecommunications network is commonly called the "universal service concept. .

this concept can trace its origins back to the 1934 communications act .

since then the preservation and advancement of universal service has been a basic tenet of federal communications policy , and congress has historically played an active role in helping to preserve and advance universal service goals .

in 1996 congress passed the telecommunications act of 1996 ( p.l .

104 - 104 ) , which not only codified the universal service concept , but also led to the establishment of a federal universal service fund ( usf or the fund ) to meet the universal service objectives and principles contained in the 1996 act .

according to fund administrators , since 1998 almost $73.7 billion in support has been disbursed by the usf , with all 50 states , the district of columbia , and all territories receiving some benefit .

over the past decade the telecommunications sector has undergone a vast transformation fueled by rapid technological growth and subsequent evolution of the marketplace .

a wide range of new services have become available , offered by a growing list of traditional as well as nontraditional providers .

one of the results of this transformation is that the nation's expectations for communications services have also grown .

in the past , access to the public switched network through a single wireline connection , enabling voice service , was the standard of communications .

today the desire for simple voice connectivity has been replaced by the demand , on the part of consumers , business , and government , for access to a vast array of multifaceted fixed and mobile services .

consumers are also demanding greater flexibility and may choose to gain access to the same content over a variety of technologies , whether it be a computer , a television , or a mobile telephone .

the trend towards sharing information , such as music , movies , or photographs , is also growing , making it necessary to ensure that network upload speeds match download capabilities .

these advances require that networks transition into converged next - generation wireline and wireless broadband networks capable of meeting these demands .

one of the challenges facing this transition is the desire to ensure that all citizens have access to an affordable and advanced telecommunications infrastructure so that all members of american society may derive the benefits .

technological advances such as the ability of the internet to provide data , voice , and video , the bundling of service offerings , the advancement of wireless services , and the growing convergence of the telecommunications sector have , according to many policy makers , made it necessary to reexamine traditional policy goals such as the advancement of universal service mandates .

these changes in technology and the marketplace , a declining funding base , and significant increases in the amount of support disbursed by the fund , have led to concerns that the usf is in need of reform .

there is a growing consensus among policy makers , including some in congress , that significant action is needed not only to ensure the viability and stability of the usf , but also to address the numerous issues surrounding such reform .

how this concept should be defined , how these policies should be funded , who should receive the funding , and how to ensure proper management and oversight of the fund are among the issues expected to frame the policy debate .

since its creation in 1934 the federal communications commission ( fcc , or commission ) has been tasked with "mak[ing] available , so far as possible , to all the people of the united states ... a rapid , efficient , nation - wide , and world - wide wire and radio communications service with adequate facilities at reasonable charges. .

this mandate led to the development of what has come to be known as the universal service concept .

the universal service concept , as originally designed , called for the establishment of policies to ensure that telecommunications services are available to all americans , including those in rural , insular and high cost areas , by ensuring that rates remain affordable .

during the 20 th century , government and industry efforts to expand telephone service led to the development of a complex system of cross subsidies to expand the network and address universal service goals .

the underlying goal of the cross - subsidization policy was to increase the number of subscribers to the network by shifting costs among network providers and subscribers .

profits from more densely populated , lower cost urbanized areas helped to subsidize wiring and operation costs for the less populous , higher cost rural areas .

higher rates and equipment charges for business and long distance customers helped to subsidize the charges for residential local calling .

the funding for universal service objectives was built into the rate structure , and effectively most telephone subscribers have contributed to universal service goals for decades .

with the advent of competition and the breakup of the bell system , the complex system of cross subsidies that evolved to support universal service goals was no longer tenable .

the telecommunications act of 1996 ( p.l .

104 - 104 ; 47 usc ) codified the long - standing commitment by u.s. policymakers to ensure universal service in the provision of telecommunications services ( §254 ) .

the 1996 act also required that every telecommunications carrier that provides interstate telecommunications services be responsible for universal service support [§254 ( d ) ] and that such charges be made explicit [§254 ( e ) ] .

the 1996 act also expanded the concept of universal service to include , among other principles , that elementary and secondary schools and classrooms , libraries , and rural health care providers have access to telecommunications services for specific purposes at discounted rates [§254 ( b ) ( 6 ) and 254 ( h ) . .

over the years this concept fostered the development of various fcc policies and programs to meet this goal .

a new federal universal service fund ( usf or fund ) was established in 1997 to meet the specific objectives and principles contained in the 1996 act .

the usf is administered by the universal service administrative company ( usac ) , an independent - not - for - profit organization , under the direction of the fcc .

the fcc , through the usf , offers universal service support through a number of direct mechanisms that target both providers of and subscribers to telecommunications services .

the usf provides support and discounts for providers and subscribers through four programs: high - cost support ; low - income support ; schools and libraries support ; and rural health care support .

the fcc is required to ensure that there be "specific , predictable and sufficient ... mechanisms to preserve and advance universal service. .

however , changes in telecommunications technology and the marketplace , while often leading to positive benefits for consumers and providers , have had a negative impact on the health and viability of the usf , as presently designed .

these changes have led to a growing imbalance between the entities and revenue stream contributing to the fund and the growth in the entities and programs eligible to receive funding .

the desire to expand access to broadband and address what some perceive as a "digital divide" has also placed focus on what role , if any , the usf should take to address this issue .

the current policy debate surrounding usf reform has focused on four major concerns: the scope of the program ; who should contribute and what methodology should be used to fund the program ; eligibility criteria for benefits ; and concerns over possible program fraud , waste , and abuse .

a separate and more narrowly focused issue , the impact of the antideficiency act ( ada ) on the usf , also has become an issue of concern .

provisions contained in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) called for the fcc to develop , and submit to congress , a national broadband plan ( nbp ) to ensure that every american has "access to broadband capability. .

this plan , connecting america: the national broadband plan , submitted to congress on march 16 , 2010 , calls for the usf to play a major role in achieving this goal .

the nbp calls for the usf to be transformed , in three stages over a 10-year period , from a mechanism to support voice telephone service to one that supports the deployment , adoption , and utilization of broadband .

more specifically , two new funds , the connect america fund and a mobility fund , are created , the high cost program is phased - out , while the low income , e - rate , and rural health care programs are modified and assume wider responsibilities .

before these transitions should occur , however , the nbp recommends that the fcc continue to take steps to improve usf performance and accountability through stronger oversight and management and enhanced data collection and reporting .

it is anticipated that universal service fund reform will continue to be a topic of congressional interest .

both the house energy and commerce committee and the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee have included usf reform on their agendas of issues for consideration and oversight .

the senate commerce committee held a hearing on october 12 , 2011 , on reforming the usf , with a particular focus on the high cost fund .

the chairman and ranking members of the house energy and commerce committee and the subcommittee on telecommunications and technology have requested , in a june 22 , 2011 , letter to the fcc , usf data focusing on the high cost and low income programs to assist them to better understand the usf and its operations .

three stand - alone measures ( h.r .

2163 , h.r .

3118 , s. 297 ) relating to usf have been introduced to date .

representative matsui introduced , on june 14 , 2011 , h.r .

2163 , the "broadband affordability act of 2011. .

this measure expands the usf's low - income lifeline program to include subscribership to broadband services at reduced rates .

eligibility requirements are the same as those used for the current lifeline telephone program .

provisions require the fcc to establish regulations to prevent eligible households from receiving more than a single subsidy per household .

the fcc is tasked with establishing the amount of support and determining whether state matching funds will be required for participation as well as determining how broadband service is defined .

broadband service providers are required to obtain fcc authorization to participate in the program , but the program is neutral as to what type of technology is used and does not require a provider to be classified as eligible telecommunications carrier to participate .

h.r .

3118 , introduced on october 6 , 2011 , by representative farenthold , contains provisions to freeze usf funding at 2011 levels and reform the low income program more specifically the bill will: rescind the forbearance authority which is used by eligible carriers to offer prepaid wireless lifeline service ; freeze usf funding at 2011 levels and transfer , on a yearly basis , $500 million of those funds to the general fund of the treasury ; and implement reforms to the low income program , including the establishment of a database , to help prevent fraud , waste , and abuse .

s. 297 , introduced february 7 , 2011 , by senator rockefeller , amends section 254 of the communications act of 1934 to provide for a permanent exemption for the usf from the antideficiency act .

the house subcommittee on communications , technology , and the internet and the senate commerce committee are among the committees that held hearings on usf reform and the fcc's national broadband plan .

former house communications subcommittee chairman boucher and representative terry released , on july 22 , 2010 , a bill ( h.r .

5828 ) which addressed comprehensive reform of the usf .

h.r .

5828 , the "universal service reform act of 2010," provided for a major restructuring of the usf .

included among its provisions were those that expanded the usf to include support for broadband services ; widened the contribution base to support the usf ; required the fcc to develop new cost models for calculating usf support ; limited fund eligibility ; prohibited the fcc from adopting a primary line restriction ; and directed the fcc to establish performance goals and measures for each program to strengthen accountability .

the house communications subcommittee held a hearing , september 16 , 2010 , on the measure , but no further action was taken .

then - house energy and commerce committee chairman waxman and other committee members also expressed interest in examining usf reform and released usf data requested by committee and subcommittee members from the fcc , focusing on usf support , that is being used to better understand the usf and its operations .

legislation ( h.r .

3646 , h.r .

4619 , s. 2879 ) to expand the role of the usf was introduced .

in a move to address the issue of affordability of broadband for low - income households representative matsui introduced , on september 24 , 2009 , h.r .

3646 , the "broadband affordability act of 2009. .

this measure expanded the usf's low - income lifeline program to include subscribership to broadband services at reduced rates .

eligibility requirements were the same as those used for the current lifeline telephone program .

the fcc was tasked with establishing the amount of support and determining whether state matching funds will be required for participation .

broadband service provider were required to obtain fcc authorization to participate in the program , but the program was neutral as to what type of technology is used and did not require a provider to be classified as eligible telecommunications carrier .

h.r .

4619 , the "e - rate 2.0 act of 2010," introduced february 9 , 2010 , by representative markey , expanded the e - rate program to address access to broadband .

this bill created three temporary pilot programs to expand access to broadband by: extending funding to qualifying low - income students for vouchers to be used for monthly service fees for broadband services at home ; expanding the e - rate program to include discounts for community colleges and head start programs ; and funding an electronic books project .

h.r .

4619 also called for the fcc to take steps to "streamline and simplify" the e - rate program application process and adjusted the current $2.25 billion annual program cap to account for inflation .

s. 2879 , the "broadband opportunity and affordability act," introduced on december 11 , 2009 , by senator rockefeller , directed the fcc to conduct a two - year pilot program by expanding the lifeline program , to include broadband services .

the fcc was tasked with establishing the amount of support , determining whether state matching funds would be required for participation , and ensuring that the program is technologically neutral in terms of providers .

after 18 months of operation the fcc was required to submit a report to the senate commerce and the house energy and commerce committees on the status of the pilot program .

s. 2879 also required the fcc to initiate a notice of inquiry to determine whether the link up program should be expanded to reduce the cost of initiating broadband service and report its findings to the senate commerce and house energy and commerce committees .

action to address the antideficiency act ( ada ) exemption was also undertaken .

in keeping with previous congressional efforts legislation to extend the ada exemption for one year periods was enacted .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , which was enacted into law ( p.l .

111-117 ) , contained a provision to extend the usf ada exemption until december 31 , 2010 ; this exemption was extended once again , until december 31 , 2011 , as part of the continuing appropriations and surface transportation extensions act , 2011 ( h.r .

3082 ; p.l .

111-322 ) .

s. 348 , introduced january 29 , 2009 , by senate commerce committee chairman rockefeller , and h.r .

2135 , introduced april 28 , 2009 , by representative rehberg , as well as provisions contained in h.r .

5828 , provided for a permanent ada exemption for the usf , but none of these measures received further consideration .

an additional provision pertinent to the usf is also contained in p.l .

111-117 .

this provision prohibits the fcc from using its fy2010 funds to limit usf support to a primary , or single , line .

appendix a. usf contribution factors and state support appendix b .

congressional activity: 110 th congress the 110 th congress took an active role regarding usf oversight and reform .

legislative measures to address the reform , restructuring , and expansion into broadband of the usf were introduced ( s. 101 , s. 711 , s. 3491 , h.r .

42 , h.r .

2054 , h.r .

5806 , h.r .

6320 , h.r .

6356 , h.r .

7000 ) , but not enacted .

the senate commerce committee held a march 1 , 2007 , hearing on the challenges facing the usf and the house telecommunications subcommittee held a june 24 , 2008 , hearing focusing on the future of universal service including the role of broadband and its role in the future of the program .

fcc oversight hearings held by the senate commerce committee and the house telecommunications subcommittee , as well as hearings on broadband deployment held by the house small business committee included examination of usf issues .

furthermore , the senate commerce committee held a june 12 , 2007 , hearing to examine the federal - state joint board's recommendation that the fcc place an interim , emergency cap on the amount of high - cost support that competitive eligible telecommunications carriers receive for each state from the high cost program .

 ( for a further discussion of this proposal see the section on " capping ," above. ) .

the house oversight and government reform committee under the direction of then - chairman waxman requested information from industry recipients as part of an oversight investigation of the usf .

the inquiry focused on the high cost fund portion of the program and requested information from 24 companies that , according to the fcc , are the top 10 recipients of federal high cost funds from 2006 through 2008 as well as the those that have received the 10 highest per - line subsidies , by location , for 2006 and 2007 .

according to a memorandum chairman waxman sent to the committee , he was not accusing any of these companies of wrongdoing , but felt that the gathering of additional information about and committee oversight of the usf program will "benefit" the program and "may offer useful information to the state and federal policymakers as they formulate proposals for usf reform. .

this inquiry , he further stated , "is consistent with the committee's strong interest in ensuring accountability in both the government and private sector. .

a provision to extend for one year ( until december 31 , 2007 ) the usf exemption from the antideficiency act ( ada ) was passed as part of the fy2007 continuing resolution ( h.j.res .

20 ) and was signed into law ( p.l .

110-5 ) .

another one - year extension ( until december 31 , 2008 ) was passed as part of the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 ( h.r .

2764 ; p.l .

110-161 ) .

two stand - alone measures ( h.r .

278 , s. 609 ) as well as provisions contained in s. 101 and h.r .

2054 calling for a permanent ada exemption were introduced , but not enacted .

two additional provisions pertinent to the usf are also contained in p.l .

110-161 .

one provision prohibits the fcc from using its fy2008 funds to limit usf support to a primary , or single , line .

the other provision permits the transfer of up to $21,480,000 of fy2008 funds from the usf to monitor the usf to prevent and remedy fraud , waste , and abuse , and to conduct audits and investigations by the oig .

p.l .

110-161 ( h.r .

2764 ) consolidated appropriations act , 2008 .

for the usf extends for one year ( until december 31 , 2008 ) the usf exemption for the antideficiency act ( title v , §510 ) ; prohibits the fcc from using its fy2008 funds to limit usf support to a primary , or single , line ( title v , §511 ) ; permits the transfer of up to $21,480,000 of fy2008 funds from the usf to monitor the program to prevent and remedy fraud , waste , and abuse , and to conduct audits and investigations by the oig ( title v , fcc salaries and expenses ) .

signed by president , december 26 , 2007 .

p.l .

110-5 ( h.j.res .

20 ) revised continuing appropriations resolution , 2007 .

extends for one year ( until december 31 , 2007 ) the usf exemption for the antideficiency act ( §20946 ) .

signed by president , february 15 , 2007 .

h.r .

42 ( velázquez ) the serving everyone with reliable , vital internet , communications , and education act of 2007 .

a bill to amend the communications act of 1934 to continue in effect and expand the lifeline assistance program and the link up program , and for other purposes .

introduced january 4 , 2007 ; referred to the subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet february 2 , 2007 .

h.r .

278 ( cubin ) a bill to amend section 254 of the communications act of 1934 to provide that the funds received as universal service contributions and the universal service support programs established pursuant to that section are not subject to certain provisions of title 31 , united states code , commonly known as the antideficiency act .

introduced january 5 , 2007 ; referred to the subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet february 2 , 2007 .

h.r .

2054 ( boucher ) the universal service reform act of 2007 .

a bill to reform the universal service provisions of the communications act of 1934 , and for other purposes .

introduced april 26 , 2007 ; referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

2829 ( serrano ) the financial services and general government appropriations bill , 2008 .

a bill to provide for fy2008 appropriations for selected agencies including the fcc .

the house - passed version contained a provision to authorize the fcc to transfer up to $20.98 million from the usf to monitor and conduct audits of the usf to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse ; passed ( 240-179 ) the house , june 28 , 2007 .

the senate appropriations committee - passed version contains language that extends for one year ( december 31 , 2008 ) the exemption of the usf from the antideficiency act ( title v , §501 ) and prohibits limiting usf funding to a single , or primary line ( title v , §502 ) .

reported out of committee july 13 , 2007 ( s.rept .

110-129 ) .

h.r .

5806 ( rush ) the school emergency notification deployment act .

a bill to permit universal support ( e - rate funds ) to public and nonprofit elementary and secondary schools under the communications act of 1934 to be used for enhanced emergency notification services .

introduced april 15 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

6320 ( markey ) the twenty - first century communications and video accessibility act of 2008 .

a bill to ensure that individuals with disabilities have access to emerging internet protocol - based communication and video programming technologies in the 21 st century .

introduced june 19 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

6356 ( barton ) the universal service reform , accountability , and efficiency act of 2008 .

a bill to reform the collection and distribution of universal service support under the communications act of 1934 .

introduced june 24 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

7000 ( waxman ) the universal roaming act of 2008 .

a bill to require any eligible carrier receiving universal service support for the provision of services for rural , insular , and high cost areas to offer automatic roaming services to any technically compatible carrier upon request .

introduced september 23 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

s. 101 ( stevens ) the universal service for americans act , or usa act .

a bill to update and reinvigorate universal service provided under the communications act of 1934 and to exempt universal service contributions and disbursements from the antideficiency act .

introduced january 4 , 2007 ; referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation january 4 , 2007 .

s. 609 ( rockefeller ) a bill to amend section 254 of the communications act of 1934 to provide that funds received as universal service contributions and the universal service support programs established pursuant to that section are not subject to certain provisions of title 31 , united states code , commonly known as the antideficiency act .

introduced february 15 , 2007 ; referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation february 15 , 2007 .

s. 711 ( smith ) the universal service for the 21 st century act .

a bill to amend the communications act of 1934 to expand the contribution base for universal service , establish a separate account within the universal service fund to support the deployment of broadband service in unserved areas of the united states , and for other purposes .

introduced february 28 , 2007 ; referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

s. 3491 ( stevens ) the telehealth for america act of 2008 .

a bill to amend the communications act of 1934 to improve the effectiveness of rural health care support under section 254 ( h ) of that act .

introduced september 16 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

