the primary source of federal aid to k - 12 education is the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , particularly its title i , part a program of education for the disadvantaged .

the esea was initially enacted in 1965 ( p.l .

89-10 ) , and was most recently amended and reauthorized by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) .

the nclb authorized virtually all esea programs through fy2008 .

during the 112 th congress , both the house and senate considered legislation to reauthorize the esea .

it is widely expected that the 113 th congress will consider whether to amend and extend the esea .

the nclb initiated a major expansion of federal influence on several aspects of public k - 12 education , primarily with the aim of increasing the accountability of public school systems and individual public schools for improving achievement outcomes of all students , especially the disadvantaged .

accountability requirements included in title i - a of the esea require states to implement content and performance standards and assessments aligned with these standards for reading / language arts and mathematics for multiple grades .

the results of these assessments are used to make complex annual adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) determinations for each public school and local educational agency ( lea ) .

a series of increasingly substantial consequences must be applied to schools and leas that fail to meet the ayp standards for two consecutive years or more .

accountability requirements also extend to virtually all public school teachers and aides with respect to their qualifications .

as discussed in a subsequent section of this report , the administration has taken actions to alter many of these requirements .

beyond title i - a , other major esea programs provide grants to support the education of migrant students ; recruitment of and professional development for teachers ; language instruction for limited english proficient ( lep ) students ; drug abuse prevention programs ; after - school instruction and care ; expansion of charter schools and other forms of public school choice ; education services for native american , native hawaiian , and alaska native students ; impact aid to compensate local educational agencies for taxes forgone due to certain federal activities ; and a wide variety of innovative educational approaches or instruction to meet particular student needs .

annual appropriations for esea programs are provided through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations act .

table a - 1 provides fy2010 , fy2011 , fy2012 , and fy2013 appropriations for programs authorized by the esea based on line - item amounts included in appropriations tables .

this list of "programs" does not take into account the number of programs , projects , or activities that may be funded under a single line - item appropriation , so the actual number of esea programs , projects , or activities being supported through appropriations is not shown .

this report provides a brief overview of major provisions of the esea .

it is organized by title and part of the act .

other crs reports provide much more detailed discussions and analyses of major esea provisions .

appendix b provides a list of selected acronyms used in the report .

while congress has not enacted legislation to reauthorize the esea , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states and described the principles that states must meet to obtain the included waivers .

the waivers apply to school years 2011-2012 , 2012-2013 , and 2013-2014 .

states have the option to apply for a one - year waiver extension for the 2014-2015 school year .

the waivers exempt states from various academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through nclb .

state educational agencies ( seas ) may also apply for an optional waiver related to the 21 st century community learning centers program .

however , in order to receive the waivers , seas must agree to meet four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law .

as of may 2013 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 37 states and the district of columbia and was reviewing applications from several other states .

if congress continues to work on esea reauthorization during the 113 th congress , it is possible that provisions included in any final bill may be similar to or override the waivers and principles established by the administration .

the remainder of this report focuses only on current law and does not discuss the details of the esea flexibility package or how it modifies current law .

for more information about the esea flexibility package , see crs report r42328 , educational accountability and secretarial waiver authority under section 9401 of the elementary and secondary education act .

the introductory text for esea title i includes the authorization of appropriations for fy2002-fy2007 for each part of the title , including school improvement grants ( sigs ) , and authority for states to reserve 1% of grants under parts a , c , and d , or $400,000 ( whichever is greater ) , for state administration .

title iii of the esea authorizes funds to support the education of lep and immigrant students .

for fiscal years in which appropriations equal or exceed $650 million , title iii , part a , the english language acquisition , language enhancement , and academic achievement act , is in effect .

if appropriations are less than $650 million , title iii , part b , improving language instruction educational programs , is in effect .

since fy2002 , appropriations have exceeded $650 million , meaning only title iii , part a has been in effect .

therefore , only part a is discussed below .

title iv of the esea authorizes the safe and drug - free schools and communities program ( part a ) and the 21 st century community learning centers ( part b ) .

it also includes requirements related to the provision of services for children in smoke - free environments ( part c ) .

title viii of the esea , impact aid , compensates leas for "substantial and continuing financial burden" resulting from federal activities .

these activities include federal ownership of certain lands , as well as the enrollments in leas of children of parents who work and / or live on federal land ( eg , children of parents in the military and children living on indian lands ) .

the federal government provides compensation because these activities deprive leas of the ability to collect property or other taxes from these individuals ( eg , members of the armed forces living on military bases ) even though the leas are obligated to provide free public education to their children .

thus , impact aid is intended to compensate leas for the resulting loss of tax revenue .

title viii authorizes several types of impact aid payments .

these include payments under section 8002 , section 8003 , section 8007 , and section 8008 .

each of these types of payments is discussed briefly below .

section 8002 .

section 8002 compensates leas for the federal ownership of certain property .

to qualify for compensation , the federal government must have acquired the property , in general , after 1938 , and the assessed value of the land at the time it was acquired must have represented at least 10% of the assessed value of all real property within an lea's area of service .

section 8003 .

section 8003 compensates leas for enrolling "federally connected" children .

these are children who reside with a parent who is a member of the armed forces living on or off federal property ; reside with a parent who is an accredited foreign military officer living on or off federal property ; reside on indian lands ; reside in low - rent public housing ; or reside with a parent who is a civilian working and / or living on federal land .

two payments are made under section 8003 .

section 8003 ( b ) authorizes "basic support payments" for federally connected children .

basic support payments are allocated directly to leas by ed based on a formula that uses weights assigned to different categories of federally connected children and cost factors to determine maximum payment amounts .

section 8003 ( d ) authorizes additional payments to leas based on the number of certain children with disabilities who are eligible to receive services under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

payments are limited to certain idea - eligible children , most notably those whose parents are members of the armed forces ( residing on or off military bases ) , and those residing on indian lands .

section 8003 payments account for more than 90% of total impact aid appropriations .

section 8007 .

section 8007 provides funds for construction and facilities upgrading to certain leas with high percentages of children living on indian lands or children of military parents .

these funds are used to make formula and competitive grants .

section 8008 .

section 8008 provides funds for emergency repairs and comprehensive capital improvements to 24 schools that ed currently owns but leas use to serve federally connected children .

two of the schools are located on closed military bases and operated by ed , and the remaining facilities are operated by leas .

statutory language requires ed to transfer ownership of these facilities to leas or other entities .

part a provides definitions of a variety of terms used frequently throughout the esea , such as "local educational agency," "state educational agency," "highly qualified teacher," "limited english proficient," "professional development," "scientifically based research," and "state. .

part b authorizes seas and leas to consolidate and jointly use funds available for administration under multiple esea programs .

in order to qualify for this flexibility , seas must demonstrate that a majority of their resources are provided from nonfederal sources .

part c authorizes seas and leas to prepare single , consolidated plans and reports for all "covered" esea programs ( in general , these are the formula grant programs administered via seas ) .

under this provision , the secretary of education is authorized to waive most requirements associated with any program authorized by the esea , if specifically requested by seas , leas , indian tribes or schools ( via their leas ) .

subpart 1 of part e contains provisions for the participation of private school students and staff in those esea programs where such participation is authorized .

under the relevant esea programs , services provided to private school students or staff are to be equitable in relation to the number of such students or staff eligible for each program ; are to be secular , neutral and nonideological , with no funds to be used for religious worship or instruction ; and are to be developed through consultation between public and private school officials .

provision is made for bypassing seas and leas that cannot or have not provided equitable services to private school students or staff , and serving private school students and staff in these areas through neutral , third - party organizations .

provision is also made for the submission of complaints regarding implementation of these requirements .

subpart 1 also prohibits federal control of private or home schools , or the application of any esea requirement to any private school that does not receive funds or services under any esea program .

subpart 2 of part e contains a general definition of "maintenance of effort," as applied in several esea programs ; requires ed to publish guidance on prayer in public schools , and requires leas receiving esea funds to certify to their seas that they do not limit the exercise of "constitutionally protected prayer" in public schools ; requires recipient seas , leas , and public schools that have a "designated open forum" to provide equal access to the boy scouts ; prohibits the use of esea funds to "promote or encourage sexual activity ; " prohibits federal control of educational curriculum , content or achievement standards , building standards , or allocation of resources ; prohibits federally sponsored testing of students or teachers ; and requires leas receiving funds under any ed program to provide to the armed services access to directory information on secondary school students , unless students or their parents request that such information not be released ( this provision does not apply to certain religiously affiliated private schools ) .

finally , under an "unsafe school choice option," students in states receiving esea funds who attend a "persistently dangerous" public school , or who are victims of violent crime at school , are to be offered the opportunity to transfer to a safe public school .

part f authorizes ed to reserve 0.5% of the funds appropriated for esea programs , other than titles i and iii , for program evaluations , if funds for this purpose are not separately authorized .

appendix a. appropriations for programs authorized by the esea appendix b .

selected acronyms used in this report amao: annual measurable achievement objectives amo: annual measureable objectives ayp: adequate yearly progress bia: bureau of indian affairs bie: bureau of indian education ed: u.s. department of education esea: elementary and secondary education act housse: high objective uniform state standard of evaluation hqt: highly qualified teacher idea: individuals with disabilities education act ihe: institution of higher education lea: local educational agency lep: limited english proficient naep: national assessment of educational progress nclb: no child left behind act reap: rural education achievement program rlis: rural and low - income school program sea: state educational agency ses: supplemental educational services srsa: small , rural school achievement program tap: targeted assistance progra .

