as early as his senate confirmation hearing , homeland security secretary michael chertoff advocated a risk - based approach to homeland security .

under secretary chertoff's direction , the use of risk assessment has become pervasive throughout dhs .

increasingly , risk assessment and subsequent risk mitigation efforts influence many aspects of the department's work intended to enhance our nation's ability to prevent , respond to , and recover from future terrorist attacks and natural disasters .

indeed , secretary chertoff has stated "dhs must base its work on priorities driven by risk. .

the purpose of this report is to analyze how dhs assesses risk .

in the absence of sound risk assessment methods , the prioritization of homeland security activities at the federal , state , and local level is problematic .

if dhs is to "prevent terrorist attacks within the united states," one of its primary statutory missions , it needs to assess risk in an accurate manner .

however , risk assessment does not occur in a vacuum ; the end goal is to reduce and mitigate risk .

all of dhs's employees work to reduce risk , respond to a terrorist attack or natural disaster should one occur , and / or protect the country by preventing dangerous materials or individuals from crossing u.s. borders .

the primary tool dhs has to "buy down" or minimize risk and to influence the behavior of state and local public safety and law enforcement officials who collectively represent substantial "force multipliers" is the homeland security grant program .

others have written extensively about dhs grant programs and the allocation of such programs across the country .

the purpose of this report is not to re - construct grant program research , but to examine the concept of dhs risk assessment itself and how the evolution of risk assessment flows through the dhs grant programs .

the report has three sections ( 1 ) the evolution of risk assessment from the department of justice in fy2002 to dhs in fy2007 , ( 2 ) fundamental questions about risk analysis as applied to homeland security , and ( 3 ) possible options for congress .

it will examine strategic questions about risk , and how risk is defined and distinguishable from other terms , such as vulnerability .

finally , the report will discuss a possible range of approaches for congress with respect to dhs risk assessment practices , dhs's organization to assess risk , and the implementation of risk mitigation efforts using the dhs grant tool .

given the focus of this report , an analysis of the dhs's risk assessment methodology through the lens of the homeland security grant process , some background information on the grant process is necessary .

as previously stated , the risk assessment process cannot be examined in isolation .

rather , the context of the homeland security grant program is discussed to illuminate the homeland security risk assessment methodology and its implementation throughout various homeland security initiatives .

this report may be updated .

in fy2004 , the allocation of homeland security grant monies inspired debate in states across the country .

one often - reported anecdote noted that wyoming's fy2004 state homeland security grant program ( shsg ) award was $14,360,000 , while new york and california received $78,827,000 and $133,964,000 , respectively .

on its face , it seemed intuitive that new york and california would receive more money than wyoming .

but when examined in light of 2004 census bureau estimates , it appears that wyoming received approximately $28.34 in shsg funding per capita while new york and california received $4.10 and $3.73 per capita , respectively .

the rationale behind the disbursement of funds seemed counterintuitive to many , especially given the recent attacks and continued plots against locations in new york and california , to include the 1993 world trade center bombing , the 1994 blind sheikh plot , the millennium plot against los angeles international airport ( lax ) , and the september 11 th attacks , amongst others .

numerous interested stakeholders at all levels of government sought to learn more about the homeland security grant allocation methodology and process .

figure 1 provides a time line to track major milestone events in the evolution of risk assessment in a homeland security context .

risk experts appear to agree that all communities have some level of risk from terrorism .

yet , homeland security officials acknowledge that it is impossible to protect every target and harden every community to the extent that they become impervious to future attacks .

it seems clear that it is necessary , from a national perspective , to identify the areas and entities across the country most at risk and to work to reduce that risk .

what is less clear is the best way to evaluate relative homeland security risk , and establish an acceptable level of risk while attempting to close the most dramatic gaps between risk and capabilities .

what follows is a chronological overview of the dhs risk assessment methodology examined through the prism of the homeland security grant program .

more than natural disasters , assessing risk emanating from manmade actions is an extremely difficult task .

methodological tension is created when attempting to apply a quantitative formula to human - driven activities that require subjective assessments of enemy capabilities and intentions .

were a truly effective risk assessment tool to be created to help decision - makers manage risk , it would have to recognize that "management of risk is not elimination of risk. .

whether focused on an "all - hazards" or counterterrorism approach , tools that attempt to quantify risk will always be inexact .

however , sound data , a well thought - out formula , and consistent application of the methodology are important when attempting to measure terrorism risk to the u.s. and systematically buy down the risk to a particular location or asset .

such clarity and consistency are particularly important as the funds granted based on the dhs's risk methodology are the primary tools the federal government has to influence the behavior of state and local partners who will be the first on the scene of a terrorist attack and will be responsible for returning the community to pre - incident conditions .

congress has a number of apparent options concerning dhs's risk methodology efforts , including the following .

congress may wish to maintain the current policy and practices associated with dhs's existing risk assessment methodologies , and their affect on hsgp allocations .

some might argue that in the absence of measures to assess historical effectiveness of dhs grant programs , changing formulas and methodologies may be premature .

others might argue that with more than $12 billion worth of investment aimed at risk reduction and preparedness , state and local governments should have achieved a level of preparedness and capability that can allow room for negotiation on financial burden - sharing with the federal government for those programs deemed worthy of future support .

by fy2008 , more than $12 billion will have been provided to states , localities , and regions to buy down risk and enhance preparedness and capabilities to prevent a terrorist attack or to respond to such an attack or natural disaster should one occur .

while audits have been conducted to determine how allocated funds have been spent , a national assessment of how much risk has been reduced as a result of such expenditures has not been undertaken .

how much has risk been bought down ? .

what investments have yielded the highest rate of return ? .

what is the risk profile of each grant recipient moving forward ? .

how are their existing capabilities measured against extant risk ? .

what capabilities gaps exist , and how can resources best be targeted to address those gaps ? .

there are at least two possible precursors to the drafting of such an impact assessment: ( 1 ) a defensible methodology that can ( a ) reasonably define and measure risk , ( b ) provide a means for measuring how developing capabilities are reducing that risk , and ( c ) illustrate how to identify specific capability gaps which might serve as an input for future allocation of homeland security grants ; and ( 2 ) articulation of this methodology , including the data necessary to conduct such an assessment , to grant recipients .

with the results of such an assessment , federal , state , local , and regional authorities might arguably be in a better position to understand the most effective and efficient way to target relatively scarce homeland security resources .

while safeguarding the intelligence , law enforcement , and other sensitive information weighted and analyzed through dhs's risk methodology , disclosure of the mathematical equation used to determine threat , vulnerability , and consequence may allow all applicants and stakeholders to understand and have a basis to confirm or challenge the results prior to funds being allocated .

it could be argued that providing this level of detail regarding the methodology and underlying equation may allow those who would seek to attack u.s. facilities to reverse - engineer the formula , thus increasing the probability of a successful terrorist attack .

others might maintain that allowing the risk formula equations to be revealed would encourage state and municipalities to manipulate the data provided to dhs , thus increasing their chances of receiving additional funding without a sufficient risk - based justification .

homeland security observers could counter these arguments by suggesting that though there may be the potential for those wishing to take advantage of the transparency of the system , the positives include possible increases in information sharing between dhs and state and local governments due to an understanding of how data is used and as such result in increased confidence in the other entity .

some could argue more transparency would allow dhs to more confidently allocate resources , as enhanced transparency may reduce the surprised outcries that seem to arise with each cycle's award announcements .

this argument is based on the assumption that grant applicants that are comfortable with the risk assessment process and familiar with the data streams used to calculate risk .

as a result , the applicants may be less likely to be surprised by their jurisdiction's ranking and awards .

since the establishment of dhs in march of 2003 , the department's risk formula has evolved .

though it could be argued that these changes are indicative of a maturing organization and process , it is possible that the lack of a coherent , long - term , overarching risk strategy , which forms the foundation of departmental activities , could have negative repercussions for buying down risk .

without a clearly articulated risk methodology based on fundamentals intrinsic to risk , yet adaptive to changing threats , a baseline understanding of the nation's risk profile may never be achieved and the department's risk assessment process could potentially be vulnerable to budget fluctuations and political influence .

this is especially important given the apparent division of risk assessment responsibilities throughout various offices and directorates within the department .

arguments can be made that such an overarching risk philosophy needs to be adopted throughout the federal government .

in a december 2005 report on homeland security risk management , gao concluded that for the results of a risk management system to be meaningful and useful , all related agencies should be using similar methods .

if agencies' methods are not compatible , then comparisons between agencies become difficult and sector or national risk assessments becomes less reliable .

in our earlier work , we concluded that a structured , systematic approach to risk management offers the best assurance that activities designed to protect the homeland and combat the effects of terrorism will produce the most effective and efficient results .

a cohesive risk strategy and agreement on core terms amongst disparate agencies is desirable because many aspects of the risk assessment process are dependent on functions performed by agencies outside the department .

however , the necessity of common definitions and standards goes beyond the federal government .

as states and localities continue to provide information to be included in the risk assessment process , to include , information on critical infrastructure sites within their respective jurisdictions and , eventually , investigative information , the rationale for attempting to develop national - wide risk assessment strategy at all levels of government becomes stronger .

with regards to dhs's risk assessment efforts , the department might potentially create a risk assessment manager ( ram ) position charged with better integrating the various elements working on aspects of the risk assessment process .

in addition , the ram might be assigned the responsibility of creating and subsequently implementing a department - wide strategic risk strategy .

such a position could be in an advisory capacity to the secretary or entail operational and oversight functions of a permanent dhs risk assessment center ( see below ) .

the creation of a ram within dhs responsible for coordinating all inter - departmental risk methodology activities would provide congress , other federal government agencies , and state and local homeland security leaders with a single person accountable for explaining the complexities of future risk management strategy efforts and a specific office to receive suggestions regarding improving current processes .

the ram could also serve in a liaison capacity to ensure external agencies are familiar with dhs's approach to risk and facilitate agreement on key terms and processes amongst other agencies .

as previously stated , secretary chertoff has made it clear that risk assessment underlies all elements of the department's operations .

risk management and assessment are disciplines which are relatively well - developed across the private sector .

moreover , within the u.s. government , there are numerous experts on risk assessment .

to ensure that the secretary is getting the best possible advice as to how dhs should continue to refine its risk management activities , a formal board of senior - level risk management professionals might be established to advise the secretary .

while not having program management responsibilities , the risk advisory board ( rab ) might advise the secretary on the best risk management practices across industry and government .

it could also lead the dhs effort , with substantial input from a potential risk assessment center ( see below ) , to draft a long - term risk management strategy .

while the proposed rab would operate on a strategic level , it could be beneficial for dhs to examine its current efforts to apply risk strategy to its various programs and initiatives .

risk is central to dhs's operations .

dhs may not necessarily have the appropriate resources dedicated full - time to ( 1 ) pro - actively assess the dynamic drivers of risk , ( 2 ) lead the collection of the right types of data to assess risk , and ( 3 ) develop a methodology to analyze how effectively past homeland security grant investments have "bought down" risk .

these tasks are relatively complex and , it could be argued , require the formation of a group of professional methodologists whose sole function is risk assessment .

while elements of this capability may exist now within the preparedness directorate , no single group has this sole responsibility .

for example , hitrac is charged largely with mapping vulnerabilities to threats , which is an essential function unto itself .

there are several potential benefits offered by a risk center: first , a permanent center would likely help dhs to think strategically about the current risk assessment process .

second , continued attention to this issue and sufficient time to address it would probably allow dhs to create more effective assessment tools and use those multiple tools in tandem to analyze various risk areas .

third , the risk center would potentially allow dhs to draw on the existing expertise and resources of all the offices and divisions within dhs , as well as external entities , such as other intelligence community agencies .

as mentioned above , the 9 / 11 commission recommended that "...homeland security assistance should be based strictly on an assessment of risks and vulnerabilities...but federal homeland security assistance should not remain a program for general revenue sharing .

it should supplement state and local resources based on the risks or vulnerabilities that merit additional support. .

some homeland security observers could interpret this literally to mean that after six years and $12 billion of homeland security investments , most states should be at some minimal level of security and capability .

therefore , some might argue , the time may be appropriate to revisit the usa patriot act formula which results in 40% of the total dhs grant funding being allocated based on formula which is not based primarily on risk .

others might argue that until a methodology is developed to ascertain how prior years' grant allocations have decreased each state's risk levels , it may be premature to alter the formula .

questions that might be addressed when considering this options include what duration did congress originally intend when it created the doj and now dhs homeland security grants ? .

what measures are in place to ensure that state and local governments are spending resources in a manner that is consistent with congressional intent ? .

to what extent , if at all , has congressional oversight yielded any indications that state and local governments have come to view homeland security grants as entitlements ? .

has dhs or congress entered into discussions with state and local governments about sustainable burden - sharing arrangements with respect to state and local programs assessed as being worthy of continued financial support ? .

secretary chertoff recently stated that one of the unique areas in which the dhs can add value is in the area of prevention .

he stated , "...obviously , when it comes to terrorism , our best solution is a solution that prevents a terrorist act before it actually comes about .

and a critical element in that is our early warning system , which is intelligence...." notwithstanding this statement , a review of aggregate budget data for homeland security expenditures suggests that less than 1% of what the u.s. government spends on homeland security is dedicated to intelligence and warning , an essential element in the prevention component of homeland security .

while there are many similarities in the response capability , whether the response be to a successful terrorist attack or natural disaster , terrorist acts can be prevented , natural disasters cannot .

information related to meteorology is different from intelligence related to national security .

the threat element of the risk reduction formula is what differentiates terrorism from all other hazards .

as mentioned throughout this report , terrorist threats are dynamic and evolve over time ; some might argue the risk assessment methodology and attendant grant allocation process should be as agile as the adversary against which its resources are directed .

dhs currently has an intelligence enterprise strategic plan , and the fy2007 grant application kit provides guidance for state , local and regional intelligence fusion centers .

yet , the linkages between these two documents and the grant process , some would argue , is tenuous .

one of the homeland security presidential directive ( hspd ) - 8 derived "universal tasks" is prevention .

drawing upon the national strategy for combating terrorism , congress may ultimately consider recommending that dhs provide a specific and articulable strategy and approach to terrorism prevention , which would include a focus on how the grant allocation process is tailored to fully leverage intelligence across levels of government to prevent terrorist acts .

