the u.s. government regulates the marketing of pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicalsin the interest of public health .

 ( 33 ) under this regime , the developer of a new drug - - known as its"sponsor" - - must demonstrate that the product is safe and effective before it can be distributed tothe public .

this showing requires a sponsor to conduct both preclinical and clinical investigationsof drugs that have not been previously tested .

 ( 34 ) in deciding whether to issue marketing approval or not , the fdaevaluates the test data that the sponsor submits in a so - called new drug application ( nda ) .

the fda maintains the test data incorporated into a nda in confidence .

 ( 35 ) in addition , because therequired test data is ordinarily quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarilydo not disclose them to the public .

otherwise the sponsor's competitors could file their own ndasusing that test data , and thereby avoid the expenses of developing the information themselves .

 ( 36 ) prior to the introduction of the hatch - waxman act , federal law contained no separateprovisions addressing generic versions of brand - name drugs that the fda had previously approvedfor marketing .

 ( 37 ) theresult was that a would - be generic drug manufacturer had to file its own nda in order to market itsdrug .

 ( 38 ) some genericmanufacturers could rely on published scientific literature demonstrating the safety and efficacy ofthe drug .

because these sorts of studies were not available for all drugs , however , not all genericfirms could file these so - called paper ndas .

 ( 39 ) further , at times the fda would request additional studies toaddress safety and efficacy questions that arose from experience with the drug following its initialapproval .

 ( 40 ) the resultwas that some generic manufacturers were forced to prove independently that their pharmaceuticalswere safe and effective , even though their products were chemically identical to those of previouslyapproved drugs .

some commentators believed that the approval of a generic drug was a needlessly costly,redundant , and time - consuming process prior to the hatch - waxman act .

 ( 41 ) these observers noted thatalthough patents on important drugs had expired , manufacturers were not moving to introducegeneric equivalents for these products due to the level of resource expenditure required to obtainfda marketing approval .

 ( 42 ) as the introduction of generic equivalents often causes pricesto decrease , the interest of consumers was arguably not being served through these observed costsand delays .

 ( 43 ) in response to these concerns , the hatch - waxman act created a new type of application formarket approval of a drug .

this application , termed an "abbreviated new drug application" ( anda ) , may be filed at the fda .

 ( 44 ) an anda may be filed if the active ingredient of the genericdrug is the bioequivalent of the approved drug .

an anda allows a generic drug manufacturer torely upon the safety and efficacy data of the original manufacturer .

the availability of the andamechanism often allows a generic manufacturer to avoid the costs and delays associated with filinga full - fledged nda .

andas also allow a generic manufacturer , in many cases , to place itsfda - approved bioequivalent drug on the market as soon as any relevant patents expire .

 ( 45 ) the hatch - waxman act placed certain limits upon the ability of generic competitors toreference the data generated by the manufacturers of brand - name drugs .

these limitations - - termedmarketing exclusivities - - consist of a period of time during which a competitor's ability to obtainfda permission to sell a generic version of a previously approved brand - name drug is restricted .

the federal food and drug laws establish several different sorts of marketing exclusivities , relatingto new chemical entities , new clinical studies , orphan drugs , and pediatric studies .

 ( 46 ) this report describes eachof these marketing exclusivities below .

two decades of experience with the hatch - waxman act have resulted in diverse opinionsconcerning the system of incentives for innovation within the pharmaceutical industry .

aspharmaceutical firms may obtain patents from the uspto , some observers question the need for thefda to grant marketing exclusivities as well .

 ( 95 ) other observers essentially take the opposite view , asserting thatthe marketing exclusivities available under u.s. law should be lengthened to match europeanstandards .

 ( 96 ) issueshave also arisen with respect to the use of marketing exclusivities to encourage the private sector todevelop bioterrorism countermeasures , as well as whether other nations are obligated by worldtrade organization ( wto ) agreements to grant marketing exclusivities similar to u.s. law .

thisreport reviews these issues in turn .

in combination , patents and marketing exclusivities provide the fundamental framework ofintellectual property incentives for pharmaceutical innovation in the united states .

due to thetrips agreement's obligation of technological neutrality with respect to the patent system , ( 127 ) marketing exclusivitiesprovide congress with a more flexible option for stimulating specific sorts of desirable privateactivity than do patents .

as such , marketing exclusivities have been , and likely will continue to be,the most viable option for encouraging the development of discrete classes of products regulated bythe fda .

the potential for expanded use of marketing exclusivities in turn raises a number ofinnovation policy issues .

in the united states , marketing exclusivities are viewed primarily assupplementing patent protection , in that they provide more limited protections for inventions thatdo not meet patent act requirements , or effectively delay the onset of patent litigation for inventionsthat do .

 ( 128 ) expanding the availability of marketing exclusivities , in addition to lengthening their term toeuropean levels , increases the possibility that marketing exclusivities will trump patents as theprimary form of intellectual property protection for certain fda - regulated products .

the decisionto supplant the primacy of the current regime of uspto - procured and judicially enforced patentrights with a system of automatic , fda - administered marketing exclusivities presents a number oftrade - offs that policy makers may wish to consider .

among them are the impact of the contemplatedexclusivity periods upon both the incentives for pharmaceutical innovation and the availability ofmedications to consumers ; the desirability of individualized determinations about the technicalmerits of the pharmaceutical invention ; and whether the uspto or fda is the better institution forawarding proprietary rights to pharmaceutical innovators .

international harmonization provides another significant issue with respect to marketingexclusivities .

even as some commentators have expressed concerns over the use of ftas toencourage trading partners to establish marketing exclusivities at domestic levels , others observe thateuropean levels of protection are substantially longer than their hatch - waxman analogues .

futuredialogue may concern setting global marketing exclusivity standards in view of national goals andpriorities .

finally , policy makers may appreciate that general patent reform legislation has been thesubject of significant discussion during the 109th congress .

 ( 129 ) current legislativeproposals do not appear to impact the fundamental landscape of patents and marketing exclusivitieswithin the pharmaceutical industry .

because legislative reform efforts are still underway , however,congressional attention to the impact of broadly oriented patent reforms upon the pharmaceuticalindustry may be appropriate .

