real estate investment trusts ( reits ) are mutual funds made up of real estate and mortgageassets .

in recent years , their performance has been stronger than broader market indicators , leadingto calls for inclusion of a reit alternative in the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) for federal workers .

h.r .

1578 , the real estate investment thrift savings act , was introduced april12 , 2005 , to provide for an reit option in the tsp .

hearings were held on the legislation april 19,2005 , by the house government reform subcommittee on the federal workforce and agencyorganization .

further hearings are scheduled for april 26 , 2006 .

a companion bill , s. 2490 , was introduced in the senate on april 13 , 2006 .

this report summarizes the legal and economic history of reits and the factors that havecontributed to recent strong performances of reits as investment vehicles .

it then addresses thearguments behind their possible inclusion as an investment alternative in the tsp .

introduced in the 1960s , real estate investment trusts ( reits ) applied the mutual fundconcept to real estate .

by buying an interest in a reit , an investor could own a share of a numberof real estate assets , reducing the risks and transaction costs that accompany investment in a singlepiece of real estate .

congress made the reit concept financially viable by enacting the real estateinvestment trust act of 1960 , which exempted reits from double taxation of shareholderdividends .

that is , reit income is not taxed at the trust level , but only after it has been distributedto shareholders .

 ( stock and bond mutual funds receive similar tax treatment. ) .

to qualify for thistax exemption , reits are required to distribute at least 90% of their income in the form ofdividends .

a second piece of legislation critical to the development of the reit market was the taxreform act of 1986 , which permitted reits to operate and manage property themselves .

 ( previously , they were permitted to be only passive investors. ) .

the tax reform act also channeledinvestment funds into reits by restricting the use of limited real estate partnerships as tax shelters .

individual reits tend to specialize in certain kinds of real estate , but taken as a whole , thereit industry invests in the broad range of commercial and residential ( primarily multi - family ) properties .

figure1 shows the distribution of reit assets at the end of 2005 .

figure 1 .

reit assets by type , december 31 , 2005 source: national association of reits .

there are two basic types of reits: equity and mortgage .

equity reits develop , own , andoperate income - producing real estate and provide tenant services , whereas mortgage reits lendmoney to real estate owners and operators or acquire loans or mortgage - backed securities .

a few hybrid reits operate in both modes .

the investment characteristics of the two typesdiffer: mortgage reits are highly sensitive to interest rates because their profits depend on thespread between the income from their loans and other debt assets and their own cost of funds .

asinterest rates have risen since 2004 , the returns on investment in ( and share prices of ) mortgagereits have fallen sharply .

equity reits , on the other hand , are affected by a range of economic fundamentals besidesinterest rates .

for example , reits that invest in hotels are sensitive to corporate profits and otherfactors that affect business travel .

similarly , returns on investment in hospitals , office buildings , andshopping malls depend on a host of sector - specific , uncorrelated trends .

reits may be either private or publicly held companies .

 ( 2 ) shares of publicly held reitsare traded on the stock markets like shares of any other corporation .

as of the end of february 2006,there were 202 reits listed on the stock exchanges , with a total market value of $368 billion .

 ( ofthe 202 , 156 were equity reits , 40 were mortgage reits , and the remaining 6 were hybrids .

market capitalization of the classes was $335 billion , $27 billion , and $5 billion , respectively. ) .

 ( 3 ) table 1 summarizes thegrowth of the publicly traded reit market since 1975 .

table 1 .

number and market capitalization of publicly tradedreits , 1975-2005 source: national association of reits .

the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) is a tax - deferred retirement savings vehicle for federalworkers , akin to "401 ( k ) " plans for private sector employees .

although available to all federalemployees , it is particularly important to those covered by the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) , whose contributions are partially matched by their federal agency .

at present , the tsp hasfive investment vehicles , three of which are broad stock indexes .

one of the stock funds tracks thes&p 500 index of major u.s. - listed companies ( the c fund ) .

the i fund tracks international stocksand the s fund invests in stocks not included in the s&p 500 , including shares of small and mid - sizecompanies .

the remaining two funds invest in bonds ( the f fund ) and government securities ( theg fund ) .

in addition , the tsp has five automatic "lifecycle" arrangements of investing among the fivevehicles , each geared toward a projected time frame over which accounts will remain in the tsp .

at this time , the tsp does not allow for investment in individual stocks , nor in funds made up ofparticular economic sectors or industries ( such as biotech , or aeronautics ) .

the tsp hasapproximately 3.5 million participants and more than $180 billion in assets .

on april 12 , 2005 , chairman jon porter of the house government reform subcommitteeon the federal workforce and agency organization introduced h.r .

1578 , the realestate investment thrift savings act , which would provide for a real estate stock index investmentoption under the tsp .

the subcommittee held a hearing on april 19 , 2005 .

chairman porter madethe case for the legislation as follows: what we are talking about today is a simple concept:diversification .

basic economic principles dictate that investors should not place all of theireggs in one basket , but must spread their money and risk among different types of assets .

a fewyears ago - - during the tech bubble collapse - - many federal employees experienced setbacks in theirinvestment portfolio and did not have the option to invest substantially in reits .

federal employeesshould not be left out in the cold .

adding a reit fund option to the tsp is the next logical step.with its resilient earnings and lower volatility , real estate provides a sound investment over the longhaul .

such an investment is a valuable diversification tool , providing the possibility of strong returnsand risk reduction .

 ( 10 ) chairman porter also noted that the tsp offered five investment options , versus 16 for theaverage corporate 401 ( k ) plan .

investment diversification is the cornerstone of modern portfoliotheory , which holds that the inclusion of highly risky assets in a portfolio can enhance overall returnsand does not imply a high level of risk to the portfolio , as long as the risks are not positivelycorrelated .

if the correlation between reits and the stock market has declined , as the ibbotson studycited above finds , a reit fund would offer tsp participants a way to hedge their investments instock funds: if the stock funds fell , the reits would rise ( or at least not fall as far ) , easing the painof stock market episodes such as the bear market of 2000-2002 .

at the same time , based on theirexpectations of future reit performance , participants could move funds into reits in search ofhigher yields .

thus , as chairman porter stated , a reit fund may offer both "the possibility of strongreturns and risk reduction. .

 ( 11 ) the tsp governing board and ceo , however , have recommended against the addition of areit fund .

their arguments , as set out at the 2005 hearing mentioned above , ( 12 ) may be summarized asfollows .

the view of reits as a hedge against stock market declines is complicated by the fact thatreit stocks are already included in both the large and small stock funds currently offered by thetsp .

 ( for example , nine reit stocks are included in the s&p 500 , which the tsp's c fund tracks. ) .

gary amelio , the tsp executive director , noted in his 2005 testimony that the c and s stock fundsheld over a billion dollars in reit shares , making tsp the thirteenth - largest holder of reits in theunited states .

thus , the hedging value of reits is to an extent already built into the tsp: if reitsrise when other stocks fall , the aggregate indexes mirrored by the tsp funds will fall less than theywould have otherwise .

similarly , superior returns earned by reits over any period are captured inthe aggregate return to the tsp stock funds .

what the creation of a reit fund would do is allow tsp participants to increase theproportion of reit stocks in their portfolios beyond their weighting in broad indices such as thes&p 500 .

if their timing were right , tsp participants who chose the reit option could outperformtheir peers who remained in the stock funds .

but figure 2 suggests that they would be choosing avolatile investment option that could lead to losses as well as gains .

by offering only a few investment alternatives , the tsp is structured in a way thatdiscourages "return chasing. .

conventional wisdom in financial theory is that many investors - - particularly small investors - - tend to buy the stocks or mutual funds that did well in the lastreporting period and that this is generally an unsuccessful strategy , for two reasons: return chasersare always paying top - of - the - market prices and , by frequently reallocating their investments , theyincur high transaction costs .

gary amelio noted that educational programs to discourage suchcounterproductive investment behavior would be expensive .

 ( 13 ) another argument regarding the hedging and diversification benefits offered by new tspfunds is that such alternatives ought to be offered ( if they are needed ) as part of a comprehensive,considered program , rather than piecemeal .

if tsp investors would be better off with a reit choice,observers ask why not add funds based on emerging markets , hedge funds , commodities , junk bonds,and so on ? .

two general arguments against such multiplication of investment options are made .

onedeals with fund expenses .

current tsp expenses are extremely low by industry standards - - "off thecharts," according to andrew saul ( 14 ) - - partly because the number of funds is limited .

if annualexpenses go up by even a fraction of a percentage point , the effect on total investment returns overa 20- or 30-year time frame can be dramatic .

testimony from barclays global investors , whichserves as a tsp investment manager , indicated that administration of a reit fund , while desirablefrom a "pure investment perspective," would likely incur management and transaction costsconsiderably above present levels .

 ( 15 ) second , there is some question whether a wide menu of investment choices is in the interestof tsp participants , many of whom are not ( and do not care to become ) expert in financial markets .

presenting unsophisticated investors with many choices may result in less - than - optimal behavior,including the chasing of returns ( discussed above ) or the selection of an unsuitable initial investmentallocation , which the participant may not correct later because the perceived costs of obtainingexpertise are too high .

these arguments can be countered by the charge of "paternalism," and thecase for investor choice and self - direction is intuitively attractive .

if , as neoclassical economicsassumes , individuals act rationally in their own self - interest , why should the government , or itsdesignees , decide where tsp participants can put their funds ? .

however , a growing body of empirical and theoretical research , called "behavioral finance,"throws doubt on the notion that individual investors can be expected to make the decisions that arebest for themselves .

 ( 16 ) behavioral finance identifies mistakes that investors make consistently , such as reliance uponinaccurate rules of thumb and being influenced by the form in which an investment opportunity ispresented , rather than the substance .

these bad habits appear to be deeply rooted and not easilycorrected by education programs .

a recent study of investment returns by defined - contribution plan participants found thatindividuals who chose an asset allocation or balanced fund ( such as the tsp lifestyle options ) achieved better returns than participants who make allocation decisions themselves .

 ( 17 ) results like these suggestthat the neoclassical assumption that individuals can be relied upon to act rationally in their ownself - interest may be overly simplistic .

this line of analysis seems to support the contention of thetsp directors that the current plan design , based on a few broad choices and low costs , "has beenrecognized by many impartial observers as an optimum approach. .

 ( 18 ) .

s. 2490 , a companion bill to h.r .

1578 , was introduced by senatornorm coleman april 3 , 2006 , thus bringing the issue to the senate as well as the house .

the housegovernment reform committee has scheduled new hearings on the subject for april 26 , 2006 .

in march 2006 , the employee thrift advisory council , an advisory panel made up of labor,management , and other federal employees , adopted a resolution opposing the addition of a reitoption to the tsp .

finally , a study has been commissioned by the federal retirement thriftinvestment board to review the existing tsp investment policy and consider the addition of moreoptions ( including a reit option ) , but publication is not expected until later in 2006 .

