chronic political instability in pakistan and islamabad's military efforts against the taliban and al - qaeda have raised concerns about the security of the country's nuclear weapons .

some observers fear that pakistan's strategic nuclear assets could be obtained by terrorists or used by elements in the pakistani government .

however , u.s. officials have generally expressed confidence in the security of pakistan's nuclear weapons .

the collapse or near - collapse of the pakistani government is probably the most likely scenario in which militants or terrorists could acquire pakistani nuclear weapons .

gary samore , then - national security council coordinator for arms control and non - proliferation , stated in an april 2011 interview that the pakistani government takes the nuclear security threat very seriously , and they've put a lot of resources into trying to make sure that their nuclear facilities and materials and weapons are well secured .

there's no lack of recognition that this is a very important issue , and there's no lack of incentive on the part of the pakistani government to maintain control .

what i worry about is that , in the context of broader tensions and problems within pakistani society and polity — and that's obviously taking place as we look at the sectarian violence and tensions between the government and the military and so forth — i worry that , in that broader context , even the best nuclear security measures might break down .

you're dealing with a country that is under tremendous stress internally and externally , and that's what makes me worry .

they have good programs in place ; the question is whether those good programs work in the context where these broader tensions and conflicts are present .

pakistani efforts to improve the security of its nuclear weapons have been ongoing and have included some cooperation with the united states ; former pakistani president pervez musharraf told a journalist in 2009 that islamabad has "given state department nonproliferation experts insight into the command and control of the pakistani arsenal and its on - site safety and security procedures. .

moreover , following the 2004 revelations of an extensive international nuclear proliferation network run by pakistani nuclear official abdul qadeer khan , as well as possible connections between pakistani nuclear scientists and al qaeda , islamabad has made additional efforts to improve export controls and monitor nuclear personnel .

the main security challenges for pakistan's nuclear arsenal are keeping the integrity of the command structure , ensuring physical security , and preventing illicit proliferation from insiders .

some observers are also concerned about the risk of nuclear war between india and pakistan .

the two countries most recently came to the brink of full - scale war in 1999 and 2002 , and , realizing the dangers , have developed some risk reduction measures to prevent accidental nuclear war .

nevertheless , pakistan continues to produce fissile material for weapons and appears to be augmenting its weapons production facilities as well as deploying additional delivery vehicles — steps that will enable both quantitative and qualitative improvements in islamabad's nuclear arsenal .

some observers have also argued that pakistan's expansion of its nuclear arsenal , development of new types of nuclear weapons , and adoption of a doctrine called "full spectrum deterrence" indicate "the growing nuclearization of pakistan's national security policy. .

these developments have "sparked international concerns about the safety and security" of the country's nuclear weapons , as well as raised "concerns that these weapons might be used through intentional , inadvertent , or accidental launch in a crisis or in limited warfare with india. .

a 2013 state department report explains that india and pakistan's governments view nuclear weapons as "vital to their security," adding that these states' respective decisions to pursue nuclear weapons stem largely from their troubled bilateral relationship , assessments of threats posed by each other ( and china in india 's case ) , perceptions of enhanced national power or status derived from possession of such weapons , and domestic politics .

the nuclear programs are popular within each country and are protected by strong institutional and domestic political constituencies .

in view of these factors , international pressure over a period of decades has had little direct impact on the attitudes of india and pakistan concerning nuclear weapons .

islamabad is expanding its nuclear arsenal and developing of new types of nuclear weapons .

special representative for afghanistan and pakistan ambassador richard olson told the house committee on foreign affairs on december 16 , 2015 , that the united states is "concerned" about "the pace and the scope of the pakistan's missile program , including its pursuit of nuclear systems. .

the administration also worries that "a conventional conflict in southwest asia could escalate to include nuclear use as well as the increased security challenges that accompany growing stockpiles," he added .

similarly , defense intelligence agency director vincent stewart expressed concern in february 9 , 2016 , testimony before the senate armed services committee that the growth of pakistan's nuclear arsenal and islamabad's "evolving doctrine associated with tactical nuclear weapons , increases the risk of an incident or accident. .

pakistani officials cite their concern about india's recently - acquired ability to expand its nuclear arsenal as a reason for refusing to support negotiations in the conference on disarmament ( cd ) , which operates by consensus , on a fissile material cutoff treaty ( fmct ) .

such a treaty would ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons .

the cd adopted a program of work in may 2009 that established a working group charged with negotiating an fmct on the basis of the 1995 "shannon mandate. .

although pakistan supported the work plan in 2009 , it did not support the adoption of a draft program of work for 2010 .

ambassador zamir akram , pakistan's permanent representative to the cd , stated on february 18 , 2010 , that islamabad had supported the 2009 program of work because the government had believed that the obama administration might reverse u.s. policy on nuclear cooperation with india .

pakistan , which is widely regarded as the main opponent to the start of negotiations , argues that a treaty on fissile material should not only prohibit the production of new material , but should also require states with such material to reduce their stocks .

a treaty without such a requirement , according to pakistan , will put the country at a disadvantage with respect to india because of what islamabad characterizes as new delhi's larger fissile material stocks and production capability .

although the shannon mandate states that it "does not preclude any delegation" from proposing the inclusion of existing stocks in the negotiations , islamabad has argued that the cd ought to determine the treaty's scope prior to beginning negotiations .

according to a 2001 department of defense report , islamabad's nuclear weapons "are probably stored in component form," which suggests that the nuclear warheads are stored separately from delivery vehicles .

according to some reports , the fissile cores of the weapons are separated from the non - nuclear explosives .

according to dr. mubarakmand , the scientist closely involved with the country's nuclear weapons program , pakistani nuclear weapons are "stored in three to four different parts at three to four different locations," adding that , "[i]f a nuclear weapon doesn't need to be launched , then it is never available in assembled form. .

the 2001 defense department report says that pakistan can probably assemble its weapons fairly quickly .

it warrants mention that , although separate storage may provide a layer of protection against accidental launch or prevent theft of an assembled weapon , it may be easier for unauthorized people to remove a weapon's fissile material core if it is not assembled .

dispersal of the assets may also create more potential access points for acquisition and may increase the risk of diversion .

as the united states prepared to attack the afghan taliban after september 11 , 2001 , then - president musharraf reportedly ordered that pakistan's nuclear arsenal be redeployed to "at least six secret new locations. .

this action came at a time of uncertainly about the future of the region , including the direction of u.s. - pakistan relations .

islamabad's leadership was uncertain whether the united states would decide to conduct military strikes against pakistan's nuclear assets if the government did not assist the united states against the taliban .

indeed , then - president musharraf cited protection of pakistan's nuclear and missile assets as one of the reasons for islamabad's dramatic policy shift .

these events , in combination with the 1999 kargil crisis , the 2002 conflict with india at the line of control , and revelations about the a.q .

khan proliferation network , inspired a variety of reforms to secure the nuclear complex .

risk of nuclear war in south asia ran high during the 1999 kargil crisis , when , according to former william j. clinton administration officials , the pakistani military began preparing missiles to deliver nuclear weapons .

it should be noted that , even at the high alert levels of 2001 and 2002 , there were no reports of pakistan mating the warheads with delivery systems .

in the fall of 2007 and early 2008 , some observers expressed concern about the security of the country's arsenal if political instability were to persist .

former prime minister benazir bhutto said in a november 5 , 2007 , interview that , although then - president musharraf claimed to be in firm control of the nuclear arsenal , she feared this control could weaken due to instability in the country .

similarly , michael krepon of the henry l. stimson center has argued that "a prolonged period of turbulence and infighting among the country's president , prime minister , and army chief" could jeopardize the army's unity of command , which "is essential for nuclear security. .

u.s. military officials also expressed concern about the security of pakistan's nuclear weapons .

experts also worry that while nuclear weapons are currently under firm control , with warheads disassembled , technology could be sold off by insiders during a worsened crisis .

chairman of the joint chiefs of staff admiral michael mullen described u.s. concern about the matter during a september 22 , 2008 , speech: to the best of my ability to understand it — and that is with some ability — the weapons there are secure .

and that even in the change of government , the controls of those weapons haven't changed .

that said , they are their weapons .

they're not my weapons .

and there are limits to what i know .

certainly at a worst - case scenario with respect to pakistan , i worry a great deal about those weapons falling into the hands of terrorists and either being proliferated or potentially used .

and so , control of those , stability , stable control of those weapons is a key concern .

and i think certainly the pakistani leadership that i've spoken with on both the military and civilian side understand that .

u.s. officials have stated that u.s. knowledge of pakistan's arsenal is limited .

for example , then - chairman of the joint chiefs of staff mullen stated during a may 14 , 2009 , hearing before the senate armed services committee that "we're limited in what we actually know" about islamabad's nuclear arsenal .

nevertheless , u.s. officials have expressed confidence regarding the security of islamabad's nuclear weapons .

defense intelligence agency director stewart stated in february 2016 that "islamabad continues to take steps to improve its nuclear security , and is aware of the threat presented by extremists to its program. .

more recently , white house press secretary josh earnest stated on october 15 , 2015 , that we continue to have confidence that the government of pakistan is well aware of the range of potential threats to its nuclear arsenal , and we continue to be confident that pakistan has a professional and dedicated security force that understands the importance and the high priority that the world places on nuclear security .

ambassador olson told the house foreign affairs committee on december 16 , 2015 , that washington has "confidence in the capabilities of ... the pakistani security forces to control and secure their nuclear weapons," adding that islamabad has "specifically taken into account the insider threat" to its nuclear arsenal .

a former administration official wrote in september 2014 that the likelihood [of] terrorists obtaining nuclear weapons or nuclear material from pakistani facilities is currently very low because of the extraordinary measures the pakistan government and military have taken over the last decade... pakistani nuclear materials do not pose the concerns that they once did .

under secretary of state for arms control and international security rose gottemoeller expressed confidence in the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal during a march 17 , 2016 , senate foreign relations committee hearing , but added that pakistan's "battlefield nuclear weapons" are a security concern because such weapons "cannot be made as secure" when deployed .

other governments have also voiced opinions regarding the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal .

for example , indian national security adviser m. k. narayanan said that the arsenal is safe and has adequate checks and balances .

similarly , then - secretary of state for foreign and commonwealth affairs david miliband told the charlie rose show on december 15 , 2008 , that islamabad's nuclear weapons " are under pretty close lock and key. .

furthermore , according to director of the french general directorate of external security erard corbin de mangoux , pakistan's military and civilian leaders have a "sense of responsibility" to maintain control over the country's nuclear weapons ; these leaders "know that the international status to which they aspire depends directly on their ability to exercise complete control over such an instrument of power," he argued in an interview published in spring 2010 .

other non - u.s. officials , however , have sounded somewhat less optimistic .

for example , russian deputy prime minister sergei ivanov said in a march 24 , 2009 , television interview that moscow is "very much concerned" about the security of pakistan's arsenal .

indian officials expressed concerns about the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal following the may 2011 insurgent attack on the karachi military installation .

pakistani officials have consistently expressed confidence in the security of the country's nuclear arsenal .

then - president musharraf stated in november 2007 that pakistan's nuclear weapons are under "total custodial controls. .

according to pakistan's 2014 nuclear security summit statement , the country's "nuclear security regime is anchored in the principle of multi - layered defense for the entire spectrum of any nuclear threat" and includes a "specially trained special response force," an "integrated intelligence system" and "[f]orce validation exercises. .

the spd "has two separate divisions to oversee security and intelligence , with more than 25,000 personnel between them," according to spd official adil sultan .

pakistan has also cited its centre of excellence on nuclear security to bolster its nuclear security credentials .

in its 2016 nuclear security summit statement , islamabad explained that the center , in conjunction with two other pakistani government bodies , provides "exhaustive education and training in areas including physical protection , material control and accounting , transport security , cyber security and personnel reliability. .

in addition , the government points to its status as a party to the convention on physical protection of nuclear material , including the 2005 amendment to the convention .

the may 2011 u.s. strike that killed al qaeda leader osama bin laden generated a public discussion in pakistan as to whether a country such as india or the united states could successfully attack and destroy pakistan's nuclear weapons .

responding to these concerns , then - prime minster gilani stated may 25 , 2011 , that the country's "strategic assets are well protected and our capability to defend our sovereignty , territorial integrity and liberties of our people , is very much in place. .

in addition to the above scenarios , the security of pakistan's nuclear weapons could also be jeopardized by another conflict between india and pakistan , michael krepon argued , explaining that an "escalating war with nuclear forces in the field would increase the probability of accidents , miscalculations , and the use of nuclear weapons" because [w]hen tensions rise precipitously with india , the readiness level of pakistan's nuclear deterrent also rises .

because the geographical coordinates of pakistan's main nuclear weapon storage sites , missile , and air bases can be readily identified from satellites — and therefore targeted by opposing forces — the dictates of deterrence mandate some movement of launchers and weapons from fixed locations during crises .

nuclear weapons on the move are inherently less secure than nuclear weapons at heavily - guarded storage sites .

weapons and launchers in motion are also more susceptible to "insider" threats and accidents .

such a war , krepon added , would also place stress on the army's unity of command .

krepon has also pointed out that islamabad faces a dilemma , because less - dispersed nuclear weapons may be more vulnerable to a disarming military strike from india .

a fundamental aspect of nuclear security is ensuring that personnel with sensitive knowledge do not transfer that expertise .

although pakistan has made significant reforms in this area , many observers continue to be concerned that other states or terrorist organizations could obtain material or expertise related to nuclear weapons from elements in pakistan .

pakistan sees nuclear power as a key component of its economic development and energy security .

the country obtains slightly less than 5% of its power from nuclear energy , or 400 mwe and electricity consumption in pakistan is increasing .

islamabad plans to increase nuclear energy production to 8,800 mwe by 2030 and 40,000 mwe by 2050 .

the pakistan atomic energy commission is in charge of nuclear r&d , and all research and power reactors .

pakistan operates three civilian power reactors under international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards at two sites: a canadian - supplied 100 mwe heavy - water - moderated reactor in karachi ( karachi nuclear power plant 1 ( kanupp ) ) , which began operating in 1971 , and two chinese - built 325 mwe pressurized water reactors ( pwrs ) at the chasma site .

chasma - 1 started operation in 2000 , and chasma - 2 in 2011 .

the china national nuclear corporation ( cnnc ) is building two additional reactors at kanupp .

there are plans for a fourth reactor at kanupp ; the first reactor will be shut down .

at the chasma site , cnnc is constructing two additional reactors .

furthermore , china and pakistan have discussed chinese construction of "three additional nuclear reactors" to be built at muzaffargarh in central pakistan .

u.s. officials and other nsg members have said that the chasma - 3 and - 4 sales by china are inconsistent with current nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) guidelines .

contracts for chasma - 1 and - 2 were concluded before china joined the nsg in 2004 .

at that time , other nsg members agreed "to grandfather construction of plants in pakistan which china had initiated," assistant secretary of state thomas countryman said during a may 12 , 2015 , senate foreign relations committee hearing .

in 2008 , china and pakistan agreed to the chasma - 3 and - 4 construction "in response to the u.s. - india peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement," according to a 2015 nuclear proliferation assessment statement submitted by the obama administration to congress .

china argues that the contracts for chasma - 3 and - 4 are grandfathered , but countryman stated that the nsg did not agree to grandfather any additional reactors .

as noted , the nsg changed its guidelines in 2008 to allow nuclear trade with india , but the group does not allow trade with pakistan .

at present , china is apparently the only country planning to sell nuclear power reactors to pakistan .

pakistan also operates two research reactors — pakistan research reactor 1 , which went critical in 1965 , and pakistan research reactor 2 , which went critical in 1989 .

pakistan research reactor 1 , which was originally supplied by a u.s. firm , was converted from using highly - enriched uranium ( heu ) to low - enriched uranium fuel in 1992 .

a "small amount" of the heu fuel remains in pakistan .

legislation to authorize various forms of u.s. assistance to pakistan contains provisions related to islamabad's nuclear weapons program .

s. 1707 , the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 , which became law ( p.l .

111-73 ) on october 15 , 2009 , authorizes various forms of u.s. assistance to pakistan , including strengthening democratic institutions and law enforcement , as well as supporting economic development , education , human rights , and heath care .

p.l .

111-73 requires the president to certify that pakistan is "continuing to cooperate with the united states in efforts to dismantle supplier networks relating to the acquisition of nuclear weapons - related materials , such as providing relevant information from or direct access to pakistani nationals associated with such networks. .

it also requires a semi - annual monitoring report that is to include a detailed description of pakistan's nuclear non - proliferation efforts and an assessment of whether assistance has directly or indirectly aided the expansion of pakistan's nuclear weapons program , whether by the diversion of united states assistance or the reallocation of pakistan's financial resources that would otherwise be spent for programs and activities unrelated to its nuclear weapons program .

in response to concerns expressed in pakistan over the intent of the bill , a "joint explanatory statement" was submitted for the congressional record by then - senate foreign relations committee chairman john kerry and then - house foreign affairs committee chairman howard berman .

the statement emphasizes that "the legislation does not seek in any way to compromise pakistan's sovereignty , impinge on pakistan's national security interests , or micromanage any aspect of pakistani military or civilian operations. .

regarding reporting requirements on nuclear nonproliferation cooperation , the statement says: the many requirements of this report are intended as a way for congress to assess how effectively u.s. funds are being spent , shortfalls in u.s. resources that hinder the use of such funds , and steps the government of pakistan has taken to advance our mutual interests in countering extremism and nuclear proliferation and strengthening democratic institutions .

there is no intent to , and nothing in this act in any way suggests that there should be , any u.s. role in micromanaging internal pakistani affairs , including the promotion of pakistani military officers or the internal operations of the pakistani military .

sections 9017 ( a ) and 7044 ( d ) ( 1 ) of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) require the secretaries of state and defense to certify that pakistan is "preventing the proliferation of nuclear - related material and expertise" in order for pakistan to receive certain u.s. funds .

these sections contain waiver provisions .

it is worth noting that pakistani officials have expressed interest in concluding a nuclear cooperation agreement with the united states , which would require congressional approval .

then - prime minister gilani told a visiting congressional delegation in june 2011 that such cooperation "would help build a positive image of the u.s. in the country. .

more recently , however , pakistan appears to have emphasized its desire for membership in the nsg and submitted its application for membership on may 19 , 2016 .

islamabad has argued that it is "eminently qualified" for nsg membership , citing the country's potential as an exporter of civil nuclear goods and what islamabad says are effective export controls , a good record regarding nuclear safety and security , and adherence to its iaea safeguards agreements .

pakistan has also asserted that continued exclusion of the country from the nsg "would adversely affect regional peace , security and stability," as well as "undermine the global non - proliferation regime. .

according to u.s. law , the united states could apparently advocate for pakistan's nsg membership without congressional approval .

ambassador olson testified on december 16 , 2015 , that the obama administration is "not negotiating ... a civil nuclear cooperation agreement with ... pakistan," but the united states reportedly considered supporting islamabad's nsg membership in exchange for pakistani actions to reduce perceived dangers associated with the country's nuclear weapons program .

a former pakistani official knowledgeable about the country's nuclear weapons program stated on july 14 , 2016 , that the united states "asked pakistan , in exchange for vague u.s. support of pakistani nsg membership , to freeze its production of fissile material , long - range missiles," and the nasr missile .

on july 26 , a state department official described this account as "incorrect," but acknowledged that the two governments have discussed pakistan's possible nsg membership and concerns regarding islamabad's nuclear arsenal .

in any case , the two governments apparently did not reach an agreement governing these issues .

"pakistan cannot agree to taking any unilateral step not matched by india," the pakistani official stated .

asked during a may 27 , 2016 , press briefing whether the united states supports pakistan's nsg membership , state department spokesperson mark toner stated that "any country can submit its application for membership and we will consider based on a consensus decision. .

