the united states established diplomatic relations with mongolia in 1987 , when it was still a communist state , and since then has sought to expand bilateral cultural and economic ties .

in 1991 , following the signing of a bilateral trade agreement , president bush restored mongolia's most - favored - nation ( mfn ) trading status — now referred to as normal trade relations ( ntr ) — under the conditional annual waiver provisions of title iv of the trade act of 1974 .

that ntr status was made permanent ( pntr ) effective july 1 , 1999 , obviating the annual trade status review process .

in 1990 , the ruling mongolian people's revolutionary party ( mprp ) declared the end of the country's one - party communist state and initiated democratic reforms with u.s. assistance .

since then , the country has been an enthusiastic practitioner of democratic government , although not without some difficulty .

mongolia has seen several reshufflings of government , for instance — the most recent in 2008-2009 , when the mprp won a majority in the state great hural and elected the head of the party as prime minister ( 2008 ) , and the democratic party chairman won popular election as mongolia's president ( 2009 ) .

this report provides background information on mongolia , including political and economic conditions , the status of u.s. - mongolian political and economic relations , and key security and foreign policy issues .

once part of the chinese empire , mongolia achieved independence in 1921 in a revolution backed by the soviet union .

after this , the communist mongolian people's revolutionary party ( mprp ) ruled for almost 70 years , maintaining a tenuous balance between the soviet union and china and receiving substantial financial assistance from each .

public demonstrations for political pluralism in 1990 led to the resignation of the communist mprp government , whose leaders declared the end of a one - party communist state .

since then , mongolia has been undergoing a political and economic transition to a parliamentary democracy under new constitutional rules adopted in 1991 .

after decades of dependency on soviet aid ( at one point worth nearly 40% of the country's gdp ) , mongolia has sought to broaden its foreign contact and trade .

mongolia's legal and financial institutions remain underdeveloped and are a serious impediment to improving the country's economy and business climate .

in part because of these weak institutions , the existence and enforcement of laws protecting private property is extremely limited even though the government passed a land ownership law in 2002 that allows the sale of farmland to individuals .

government corruption also is becoming a more acute problem and was the subject of demonstrations and protests during the 2005 presidential election campaign .

in some respects , and with considerable assistance from western democratic organizations , the fledgling government has made great strides in the 15 years since it adopted multi - party politics .

still , mongolia's legislative processes remain in their infancy .

it was only in 2004 , for instance , that mongolia's parliament , the state great hural ( sgh ) , passed measures giving parliamentary committees separate budgets , staff , and rules of procedure .

the first public hearing by a parliamentary committee was held only in 2002 , although western groups providing assistance are encouraging the sgh to hold public hearings as a routine part of the legislative process .

despite the official demise of communism in mongolia in 1990 , the formerly communist mprp has continued to play a dominant political role .

in the first popular elections ever for mongolia's parliament in 1990 , the formerly communist people's great hural , the mprp won 80% of the seats .

in turn , the same year , this mprp - dominated parliament elected an mprp member , p. ochirbat , as mongolia's first president .

while a new constitution in 1992 created a new parliament ( the state great hural ) to replace the people's great hural , the mprp also won a significant majority in the new body .

its 71 out of a total of 76 seats gave it firm control while mongolia's fledgling opposition parties remained essentially powerless .

but the balance began to tip away from the mprp in 1994 , when the party turned against ochirbat after he vetoed legislation passed by the parliament .

when ochirbat lost the mprp's backing in mongolia's first direct presidential election in 1993 , he ran and won as an opposition candidate .

mongolia's economy is relatively poor and agrarian , with few industries but extensive mineral deposits .

about one - third of mongolia's people live in poverty .

its gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2008 was an estimated $5.3 billion – this figure rises to $9.4 billion when measured on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis , which factors in price differentials between mongolia and the united states .

mongolia's per capita gdp on a ppp basis ( a commonly - used measurement of a country's living standards ) was $3,541 , equivalent to 7.6% of u.s. levels .

industry contributed 35.7% of mongolia's gdp in 2007 ( mining alone contributed 27.4% ) , followed by agriculture at 20.6% , transport and communications at 9.3% , and trade at 7.6% .

mineral production accounts for 77% of industrial output , 67% of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , 40% of the central government's revenues , and 57% of mongolia's export earnings .

the collapse of the soviet union in the early 1990s had a severe impact on mongolia's economy , which had employed soviet - style economic policies and heavily relied on soviet assistance .

after that aid abruptly ended , the economy suffered ; real gdp fell by 9.2% in 1991 and by 9.5% in 1992 , leading to a significant decline in mongolian living standards .

subsequently , the central government moved to privatize its state - owned economy and adopt other free market reforms .

from 1990 to 2006 , the proportion of gdp accounted for by the private sector rose from 4% to 80% .

such reforms enabled mongolia to join the world trade organization ( wto ) in 1997 .

mongolia has struggled to reform the economy while promoting economic growth .

from 1997 to 2002 , real gdp growth averaged only 2.8% .

in 2003 , mongolia agreed to pay russia $250 million , an enormous sum for the government , to resolve most of its debt obligations in an effort to strengthen investor confidence .

from 2003 to 2008 , real annual gdp growth averaged 8.7% ; much of that growth resulted from increases in global metal prices ( such as cooper and gold ) , and relatively mild winters ( which affects livestock ) .

however , inflation has been a problem for the past few years ; in 2008 the consumer price index rose by an estimated 23.2% over the previous year .

mongolia , like most other countries of the world , has been hard hit by the current global economic slowdown ( see table 1 ) .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) projects real gdp growth will slow from 8.9% in 2008 to 2.7% in 2009 .

exports are projected to fall from $2.5 billion to $1.9 billion , due to falling prices for copper and a decline in demand for exports by its major trading partners , especially china .

global insight , an international forecasting firm , projects that mongolia's real gdp could fall by 3.9% in 2009 .

growing trade imbalances and rising government deficits have also put new strains on the central government .

in april 2009 , the imf agreed to extend a $224 million loan to mongolia to help it meet its balance of payments needs .

in addition to the effects of the global economic slowdown , challenges mongolia faces over the long term include a weak banking system , sharp fluxes in global mineral prices , high dependency on imported energy , high unemployment , weak rule of law , government corruption , and inadequate infrastructure .

since the early 1990s , mongolia has pursued an open and non - aligned foreign policy , seeking supportive friendships broadly in asia and around the world and taking a more active role in international organizations , particularly in the united nations .

not surprisingly given its geographical location , the land - locked country maintains good relations with russia and china , its two giant neighbors .

as a new democracy , mongolia also places a high priority on cultivating good relations with the united states , which government officials in ulaan bator have referred to as mongolia's "third neighbor. .

the united states recognized mongolia in 1987 and since then has sought to expand cultural and economic ties .

at mongolia's invitation , the united states began a peace corps program there in 1991 , which by 2007 was maintaining about 100 peace corps volunteers in the country .

also in 1991 , following the signing of a bilateral trade agreement , the president restored mongolia's most - favored - nation ( mfn ) trading status — now referred to as normal trade relations ( ntr ) — under the conditional annual waiver provisions of title iv of the trade act of 1974 .

ntr status was made permanent for mongolia effective july 1 , 1999 , obviating the annual trade status review process , and creating a more stable trade environment .

total usaid assistance to mongolia from 1991 through 2008 was about $174.5 million .

major usaid programs have focused largely on promoting sustainable private sector - led economic growth and more effective and accountable governance .

the administration proposed fy2009 usaid budget would give mongolia $10.4 million .

one primary u.s. interest in mongolia is in supporting the country's ongoing transition from a communist state to a nation with a market - based economy and a democratically elected government .

u.s. support for both mongolia's political and its economic reforms has been tangible .

the united states strongly supported mongolia when it joined the imf , the world bank , and the asian development bank in 1991 .

congress annually has earmarked u.s. assistance amounts for mongolia to signal its support .

in addition , in 2007 , the house democracy assistance commission initiated a program of parliamentary assistance to mongolia's parliament , the state great hural .

mongolia is a relatively minor u.s. trading partner .

in 2008 , mongolia was the 164 th largest u.s. export market ( at $57.2 million ) and its 139 th largest source of imports ( at $52.8 million ) .

from 2000 to 2008 , u.s. exports to mongolia more than tripled , but they remain extremely small .

u.s. imports from mongolia peaked in 2004 at $239.1 million , but have steadily declined each year since , largely due to a sharp fall in u.s. imports of apparel products .

major u.s. exports to mongolia in 2008 included motor vehicles , agriculture and construction machinery , and railroad rolling stock , while the top three imports from mongolia were apparel , basic chemicals , and animal hairs ( see table 3 , table 4 , and table 5 ) .

u.s. data for january - april 2009 show that u.s. exports to mongolia were up 16.4% over the same period in 2008 , while u.s. imports from mongolia were down 87.0% .

on july 15 , 2004 , the united states signed a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) with mongolia to boost bilateral commercial ties and resolve trade disputes .

annual tifa meetings have been held , focusing largely on issues relating to protection for intellectual property , standards development , and transparency .

in addition , the two sides created the u.s. - mongolian business forum to hold annual meetings involving government and private sector officials on how to improve mutual trade and investment opportunities .

the most recent forum was held in washington , dc , in june 2009 and focused on energy development , including coal mining and production , renewable energy , oil and gas , and nuclear energy .

from 1991-2004 , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) provided around $150 million in assistance to mongolia .

usaid programs have focused on two main projects which seek to promote private sector led economic growth and efforts to achieve more effective and accountable governance ; u.s. appropriations for these two projects totaled $7.5 million in fy2007 .

other projects have sought to promote: tax reform , the investment climate , tourism , and business training for rural inhabitants .

mongolia also is eligible for assistance under the u.s. millennium challenge account .

in an address to the american center for mongolian studies in june 2006 , u.s .

ambassador to mongolia pamela slutz called on mongolia to lessen its dependence on foreign assistance by promoting policies that would encourage more trade and foreign investment .

the ambassador stated that ( according to the world bank and imf ) mongolia had received $2 billion in assistance over the last 15 years , and that it annually receives $300 million in aid , making it one of the world's most dependent countries on foreign aid .

mongolia has asked for a free trade agreement ( fta ) with the united states .

however , u.s. officials have indicated that mongolia must make major reforms of many sectors of its trade regime and legal system , and to improve its labor conditions , before it will consider fta negotiations .

in fy2004 , mongolia became an eligible country for u.s. assistance through a millennium challenge account ( mca ) .

after a consultation process , mongolia submitted an official mca proposal to the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) late in 2005 .

the mcc conducted "due diligence" on mongolia's proposal ( assessing it for its suitability , technical viability , and compliance with mcc environmental and other guidelines ) for several years .

during her visit to mongolia in january 2007 , the managing director of the mcc , frances reid , reaffirmed that it was the u.s. intent to conclude an mca agreement with mongolia in 2007 .

on june 14 , 2007 , the mcc issued notification to congress initiating a 15-day consultation period prior to commencing compact negotiations with mongolia .

on september 12 , 2007 , the mcc board of directors awarded mongolia a $285 million aid program , focused mainly on improving rail transportation , property rights , and vocational education and health care .

on october 22 , 2007 , president bush approved the aid package during a visit to washington , dc , by mongolian president nambaryn enkhbayar after the two presidents signed an mcc compact .

mongolia was an early political supporter of the u.s. global anti - terror effort , as well as an early logistics supporter , offering training opportunities and overflight clearances for u.s. forces .

mongolia has contributed troops , engineers , and medical personnel to operation iraqi freedom since april 2003 .

at the request of the united states , mongolian forces also are participating in training artillery units of the afghan national army .

u.s. appreciation for this assistance led in part to last year's visits to mongolia by secretary of defense donald rumsfeld ( in october 2005 ) and president george bush ( in november 2005 ) — the first u.s. defense secretary and u.s. president ever to visit mongolia .

president bush's visit resulted in a joint statement reaffirming the u.s. - mongolian "comprehensive partnership between their two democratic countries based on shared values and common strategic interests ... " in 2006 , mongolia expanded its global peacekeeping activities by sending a contingent of 250 soldiers to protect the u.n. war crimes tribunal in sierra leone , a platoon to participate in the nato mission in kosovo , and by helping to serve as u.n. observers in sudan and ethiopia / eritrea .

on october 23 , 2007 , the u.s. and mongolia signed a memorandum of understanding to increase cooperation in preventing nuclear smuggling by allowing the u.s. to install radiation detection equipment in mongolia and at several of its border crossings .

in addition , the two sides signed the proliferation security initiative shipboarding agreement , which would allow either side to request the other to confirm the nationality of a u.s. or mongolian flagged vessel , and possibly detain the ship or its cargo , in order to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

