this report provides a side - by - side comparison of three bills and two proposals — h.r .

6566 , h.r .

6670 , h.r .

6709 , h.r .

6899 ( the house leadership proposal ) , and the senate draft proposal — which address oil and gas development in the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

none of the bills has passed its respective chamber .

the text below provides background on the issues .

the side - by - side table gives a description of selected sections of the bills .

president bush announced on june 18 , 2008 , that he would like to open areas of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) for oil and gas development currently under presidential and congressional moratoria ( discussed in more detail below ) .

the president stated that he would lift the executive branch moratoria only after congress did so legislatively .

but , on july 14 , 2008 , president bush reversed his position and lifted the executive ban on the ocs imposed in 1990 by president george h.w .

bush .

senator john mccain , among others , has called on congress to lift the offshore drilling moratoria as well .

further , the administration proposes to begin planning its next five - year leasing program that would , if approved , be implemented as early as 2010 — two years ahead of schedule .

the proposed new five - year program would supersede the current five - year leasing program from 2007-2012 .

the administration argues that a new five - year lease program beginning in 2010 would allow any newly opened ocs areas ( if the congressional moratoria is lifted this year ) to be offered in a lease sale sooner than if they remained on their current schedule .

since the president lifted the executive ban , members of congress have introduced legislation that would lift the congressional prohibition ( in part or completely ) against leasing and development of oil and natural gas in the ocs .

the legislation section of this report summarizes several of those bills , including the house leadership proposal ( h.r .

6899 ) .

many in congress , however , oppose lifting the offshore ban .

they argue that there are still several million acres leased onshore and offshore but not yet producing and that production from these lands could increase u.s. oil supply .

on september 16 , 2008 , the house passed h.r .

6899 by a vote of 236-189 and defeated an alternative bill , h.r .

6709 , by a vote of 191-226 .

how much oil could be brought into production in the short - term ( from non - producing leased lands or those under the moratoria ) and its impact on price is uncertain .

an attempt to lift the offshore moratoria with an amendment to the fy2009 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill during the house subcommittee markup was defeated by a vote of 6-9 .

meanwhile , on june 26 , 2008 , under suspension of the rules ( which requires a two - thirds majority for passage ) , the house defeated a measure ( h.r .

6251 ) that would have increased rental fees on non - producing oil and gas leases , and denied new federal leases to those not diligently developing the leases they have .

oil and gas leasing has been prohibited on much of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) since the 1980s .

congress has enacted ocs leasing moratoria for each of fiscal years 1982-2006 in the annual interior and related agencies appropriations bill ( now the interior and environment and related agencies appropriations bill ) , allowing leasing only in the gulf of mexico ( except near florida ) and parts of alaska .

president george h.w .

bush in 1990 issued a presidential directive ordering the department of the interior ( doi ) not to conduct offshore leasing or preleasing activity in areas covered by the annual legislative moratoria until 2000 .

in 1998 , president clinton extended the offshore leasing prohibition until 2012 .

proponents of the moratoria contend that offshore drilling would pose unacceptable environmental risks and threaten coastal tourism industries , whereas supporters of expanded offshore leasing counter that more domestic oil and gas production is vital for the nation's energy security .

the outer continental shelf lands act of 1953 ( ocsla ) , as amended , provides for the leasing of ocs lands in a manner that protects the environment and returns revenues to the federal government in the form of bonus bids , rents , and royalties .

ocsla requires the secretary of the interior to submit five - year leasing programs that specify the time , location , and size of the areas to be offered .

each five - year leasing program entails a lengthy multistep process that includes environmental impact statements .

after a public comment period , a final proposed plan is submitted to the president and congress .

the latest plan went into effect july 1 , 2002 .

public hearings for the 2007-2012 leasing program are underway .

states and interest groups are filing comments on future lease sale areas for the 2007-2012 leasing program .

states with energy development off their shores in federal waters have been seeking a larger portion of the federal revenues generated in those areas .

they particularly want more assistance for coastal areas that may be most affected by onshore and near - shore activities that support offshore energy development .

proponents of these proposals look to the rates at which funds are given to jurisdictions where onshore energy development occurs on federal lands within those jurisdictions .

coastal destruction has received more attention in louisiana — especially hard - hit by hurricanes in 2005 — where many square miles of wetlands have been lost to the ocean each year .

widespread energy - related development is thought to contribute to coastal losses .

currently , the affected states receive some revenue directly from offshore oil and gas leases in federal waters under section 8 ( g ) of ocsla and under the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 .

p.l .

109-432 .

this is in contrast to the 50% share of direct revenues to states that have onshore federal leases within their boundaries .

opponents point out the budget implications that would result from such a loss of federal revenues .

