the types of fraud investigations range in circumstances and scope .

many investigations focus on facilitators ( i.e. , individuals who sell , distribute , or manufacture counterfeit or altered documents ) , and on organized crime syndicates that broker large - scale illegal schemes such as sham marriage rings or bogus job offers .

investigations of immigration benefit applications are another major activity .

complementary to investigating fraud has been the effort to improve the security of immigration documents .

initially , the emphasis was on issuing documents that were tamper - resistant and difficult to counterfeit to impede document fraud and unauthorized employment .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 the policy priorities have centered on document integrity and personal identification with a sharp focus on intercepting terrorist travel and other security risks .

for well over a decade , there has been a consensus that immigration documents also should include biometric identifiers , but determining what type of biometric identifier has posed a variety of technical issues .

congress imposed a statutory requirement for the biometric border crossing card known as laser visas in 1996 and added requirements for biometric visas in 2001 and 2002 .

the report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) made several recommendations that underscore the urgency of implementing provisions pertaining to biometric visas and the entry - exit system .

almost all of the federal agencies that have a role in administering immigration law are also tasked with stymieing immigration fraud .

the department of states' bureau of consular affairs as well as the uscis have a critical responsibility to check the backgrounds and confirm the identities of persons seeking visas , immigration services or adjudication of benefits .

inspectors with dhs' customs and border protection ( cbp ) examine and verify the documents of u.s. citizens and foreign nationals who seek admission to the united states at ports of entry , and border patrol agents play a critical enforcement role along the border and between ports of entry .

the lead agency for investigating immigration fraud is immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

while detecting immigration fraud is an important duty across these federal agencies , the activities described below are expressedly aimed at immigration fraud .

in many ways , immigration fraud is not an isolated issue ; rather , it is inextricably linked to various issues that have led most observers to conclude that the u.s. immigration system is broken .

as noted above , many of the estimated 12 million unauthorized aliens in the united states likely have some form of immigration document that is either expired or counterfeit .

the integrity of the documents issued for immigration purposes and the capacity to curb immigration fraud are among the central themes that underlie the bigger issue of comprehensive immigration reform legislation .

the selected issues discussed below illustrate the complexity of this debate .

there are documented problems between uscis and ice in the area of fraud and national security investigations .

although many presumed that ice would perform the fraud detection and investigation duties formerly handled by the ins , a complete transition did not occur .

in 2004 , gao reported , "the difficulty between uscis and ice investigations regarding benefit fraud is not new.... as a result , some uscis field officials told us that ice would not pursue single cases of benefit fraud .

ice field officials who spoke on this issue cited a lack of investigative resources as to why they could not respond in the manner uscis wanted. .

uscis established the office of fraud detection and national security to address the immigration fraud activities that the ice identity and benefit fraud unit was not performing .

a march 2006 gao report continued to find coordination and communication problems between uscis and ice , but noted that the two agencies in february 2006 signed a memorandum of agreement to establish information sharing mechanisms .

uscis reportedly has problems of its own .

the dhs inspector general found problems in the background checks of applicants for which uscis is now responsible .

among other findings , the ig report concluded that uscis' security checks are overly reliant on the integrity of names and documents that applicants submit and that "uscis has not developed a measurable , risk - based plan to define how uscis will improve the scope of security checks. .

it further stated that "uscis' management controls are not comprehensive enough to provide assurance that background checks are correctly completed. .

most recently , gao expanded on the concerns the dhs inspector general expressed in its report on uscis .

the extent to which uscis should have an enforcement arm to investigate benefit fraud and other adjudications - related violations has become a policy issue .

although title iv of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) tasked ice with immigration enforcement responsibilities , some maintain ice's efforts are not sufficient .

pursuing single cases of benefit fraud is not a priority , yet it is possible that some of these single cases may be linked together in larger fraud schemes that are overlooked without a coordinated "big picture" approach .

this linkage has been characterized as critically important in the context of discerning terrorist travel .

the observable decline in investigator work years allocated to document and benefit fraud has led some to question the federal government's commitment to the enforcement of immigration laws .

among those who would reform immigration law and policy , the question arises as to whether current law is adequate but the dedication of resources is not .

this debate grows in importance when weighing the role bogus documents and benefit fraud play in facilitating other violations of law .

some argue that it is critical to investigate the black market in counterfeit documents and benefit fraud because it is especially important to international terrorists , organized crime syndicates , and alien smuggling rings — all of whom rely on fraudulent documents to minimize detection .

they point out that document and benefit fraud are criminal violations of immigration law and criminal law , and — as a result — merit rigorous enforcement and prosecution .

others argue that limited enforcement resources should not be spent going after unauthorized aliens who present false documents so they can work .

they assert that the preponderance of counterfeit documents is used to obtain employment in the united states .

these critics agree that ice should prioritize the investigation of international terrorists , organized crime syndicates , and alien smuggling rings rather than shifting more resources to investigating what they consider to be the lesser threat of immigration fraud , presumably that is solely to obtain employment .

many observers look to emerging technologies to enhance document integrity and stymie immigration fraud .

the basic concept is that a card with personal identifiers embedded in it would be less vulnerable to counterfeiting , identity theft , and immigration fraud .

a current issue is the integration of the competing biometric — and in some instances radio frequency identification ( rfi ) — technologies and databases .

the difficulties thus far in determining what biometric identifiers are most appropriate are exacerbated by the competing technologies used by the existing databases and systems .

the various key agencies ( eg , cbp , uscis , and dos ) have already heavily invested in technologies that are not necessarily compatible with each other .

this issue most clearly manifests in the scarcity of card readers at ports of entry that are able to read the biometric information in "green cards," laser visas , and biometric visas .

a 2007 report of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) explains that privacy considerations exist when the technology uses , collects , stores , or discloses personal information .

according to nist , for the purposes of current privacy regulation , the most important distinction about the information being addressed is whether personal information is personally identifiable information .

the gao noted several privacy issues in its 2005 report: "notifying individuals of the existence or use of the technology ; tracking an individual's movements ; profiling an individual's habits , tastes or predilections ; and allowing for secondary uses of information .

""without effective security controls , data on the tag can be read by any compliant reader ; " gao further stated , "data transmitted through the air can be intercepted and read by unauthorized devices ; and data stored in the databases can be accessed by unauthorized users. .

approved applicants in the "trusted traveler" program with canada ( known as nexus ) are issued a card , for example , that includes photo - identification and the contactless integrated circuit device commonly known as rfi technology .

although rfi technology has been used for many years in pass card security systems , proposals to incorporate it in immigration documents are quite controversial .

while cards with rfi technology may also include biometric identifiers , they are typically used for cargo or transportation ( eg , e - z pass commuter traffic lanes are one common application of rfi technology. ) .

proponents point out that — unlike magnetic strips or bar codes — not all rfis require manual scanning .

it is reportedly possible to read hundreds of rfis in a few seconds .

proponents further maintain rfis may be read under visually and environmentally challenging conditions in which barcodes or other optical technologies are ineffective .

security and privacy concerns , some proponents assert , are being exaggerated .

in addition to the concerns that nist and gao identified , opponents of rfi technology warn that powerful rfid readers created by criminals or foreign agents who are violating fcc regulations could monitor the movement and activities of people carrying cards with these technologies embedded in them .

other have expressed concerns that police or government agencies may use such technologies to track individuals in violation of their civil liberties and right to privacy .

