budgeting has been defined as the allocation of scarce resources .

it involves choices about how to raise revenues and allocate resources among alternative purposes , locations , and recipients .

these choices frequently are made in an environment of competing views about the public interest , leading one scholar to conclude that "conflict is endemic to budgeting. .

conflict may arise , for example , because federal policy makers often have different priorities about the sources and uses of public funds .

some priorities may be based on policy makers' views on the proper role of government , the offices and positions in government they hold , or the constituencies they represent .

policy makers also may have different views on "who decides. .

in the federal budget process , one such area of budgetary conflict has concerned "earmarking. .

specific definitions for the term earmark ( and related terms , like congressional earmark and presidential earmark ) vary considerably and are controversial .

nevertheless , all of the terms relate to the use of discretion to allocate funding or other benefits to one or more specific purposes , entities , or geographic areas .

during the 110 th congress , the house of representatives , the senate , and the george w. bush administration defined the terms congressional earmark , congressionally directed spending item , and earmark , respectively .

in addition , the house , senate , and president provided directions for how congressionally originated earmarks are to be handled during the budget process .

in january 2008 , for example , the president announced he would veto future appropriations bills that did not cut the number and funding of administration - defined and - identified earmarks by half , relative to fy2008 .

the president also issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

13457 , which directed that agencies "should not" fund non - statutory earmarks , except under some conditions .

omb subsequently directed agencies on how to implement the e.o .

after enactment of fy2009 continuing and regular appropriations .

these are the latest in a series of developments that began in early 2007 , when the president made proposals regarding earmarks originated by congress , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued a series of memoranda and took corresponding actions to implement the president's policy .

this report provides an analysis of bush administration policy regarding congressionally originated earmarks , focusing primarily on the veto threat and e.o. , and related issues for congress .

to provide context and an analytical foundation , the report first discusses conceptual definitions of earmark - related terms .

it then examines potential explanations of why earmarking might occur and several concerns that have been expressed about earmarking .

because the bush administration expressed interest in congressionally originated earmarks before the 110 th congress , the report briefly reviews previous administration policy statements and proposals .

subsequent sections discuss and analyze the administration's veto threat and executive order .

the report culminates with potential issues for congress , including the potential for developments to affect the roles of congress and the president in the budget process .

because the e.o .

formally will remain in effect unless it is revoked , some of these issues may continue to be relevant after the swearing in of the next president .

furthermore , because bush administration policy was articulated in some detail , aspects of the policy may be relevant to future discussion of federal budgeting and earmarking issues .

any discussion of earmarks cannot escape the matter of definitions .

as noted earlier , specific definitions for the term earmark ( and related terms , like congressional earmark , congressional directive , presidential earmark , administration earmark , executive branch earmark , and directed spending ) vary considerably and are controversial .

nevertheless , all of the terms relate to the use of discretion to allocate particularized benefits — subsets of funding or other resources or benefits — through law , non - statutory direction ( eg , report language , which is not legally binding ) , or administrative action ( eg , making a budget proposal or awarding a contract or grant ) to one or more specific purposes , entities , or geographic areas .

practices like earmarking have been used for decades , if not centuries , to make decisions regarding the allocation of public resources , but concerns also have been expressed .

at the same time , congress , its members , and presidents have asserted the prerogatives of their respective constitutional and statutory authorities and pursued their budget policy preferences .

earmarks , or similar practices that result in functionally equivalent outcomes , might be originated by members of congress , the president , or agencies , or possibly jointly .

the articulation and evolution of bush administration policy regarding congressionally originated earmarks may have implications for congressional budgeting and earmarking practices , working relations between congress and the president , and working relations between congress and agencies .

the policy , therefore , may raise several general and specific issues for congress , including the following: what are the appropriate budgetary roles and responsibilities for congress , the president , agencies , and the public in the u.s. political system ? .

how should earmarks be defined , identified , and overseen ? .

what are the implications for congress of the bush administration's executive order 13457 ? .

what are the implications for congress of the omb "earmarks" website and database of congressionally originated earmarks ? .

might administration actions have consequences for congressional representational activities ? .

congress , the president , and individual agencies all have roles in the federal budget process , sometimes working together and sometimes at cross - purposes .

the constitution establishes a basic framework for this interaction .

the framers of the constitution intended for congress , the president , and the courts to work together , but also to jealously guard their own prerogatives , in order to better achieve the varied purposes set forth in the preamble to the constitution .

in the words of james madison , there would be under the constitution a "separation of the departments of power. .

rather than a complete separation of these "departments," however , the principle called for connectedness and a blending: [u]nless these departments be so far connected and blended as to give to each a constitutional control over the others , the degree of separation which the maxim [of separation of the departments of power] requires , as essential to a free government , can never in practice be duly maintained .

under the constitution , for example , congress may use its power of the purse to specify through law , in greater or lesser detail , the process of how resources are to be allocated and distributed .

congress can also communicate to agencies through non - statutory means , such as report language .

for example , congress might communicate its intent concerning how resources are to be allocated in circumstances when legislating in detail might become unwieldy , galvanize opposition , or constrain the ability of agencies to adapt to changing circumstances .

in taking either of these actions — statutory or non - statutory — congress may affect the decisions that the president and individual agencies make by ( 1 ) expanding or diminishing opportunities to use discretion ; ( 2 ) increasing or decreasing transparency of presidential decisions or actions ; and ( 3 ) increasing or decreasing the independence of federal agencies from presidential influence and policy preferences .

the congressional decisions and processes might also leave greater or lesser amounts of discretion to agencies in executing the law and allocating resources .

the president , in turn , could potentially influence congressional decision making through tools such as the veto power , annual spending proposals that are required by law , arguably superior access to and control over information from agencies , and the ability to influence public opinion .

the president may also influence decisions made by agencies through appointments of senior officials ( subject to senate confirmation ) and the use , at times , of other levers to control agency decisions , which at times have been restricted by congress .

in some respects , agencies are sometimes "caught in the middle" between congress and the president in their efforts to control and influence the purpose , design , and implementation of public policy .

from another perspective , agencies also sometimes wield influence or autonomy in constraining and helping to shape the actions of congress and the president , in concert with coalitions of diverse stakeholders in the broader political system .

the administration has stated that "[congressionally originated] [e]armarks are awarded through a congressional political process , favoring those who have direct access to elected officials or indirect access through lobbyists. .

the administration has juxtaposed this perspective with a view of presidential and agency decision making that is "subject to a competitive or merit - based process to ensure higher priorities are funded first. .

this raises other questions .

for example , is budgetary decision making in the white house , among political appointees , or among career civil servants less "political" than in congress ? .

or is it "political" in a different way ? .

what role does access to elected or appointed officials , either directly or through lobbyists , play in budgetary decision making in the executive branch ? .

given the apparent room for the exercise of discretion by congress , the president , and agency officials at various points in the budget process , how should constitutional obligations and powers be reconciled with practical considerations and concerns ? .

how may diverse views about representation , constitutionally prescribed responsibilities , effectiveness , efficiency , equity , transparency , ethics , and accountability be reconciled ? .

in addition , the president proposed that congress stop including earmarks in report language and instead place them in statute .

he expressed his intention to enforce the proposal with his executive order .

congress and agencies have a long history of using report language to guide agency decisions , facilitate communications and accountability , and provide more specificity in expectations about actions or funding .

interaction with agencies through report language at times may provide flexibility to agencies that would not be available if provisions were included in statute .

some observers see report language as allowing insufficient scrutiny in the legislative process , as the administration has argued .

others , however , see report language as facilitating two - way communication between congress and agencies .

one analyst judged that "controls" in report language have "proved to be a helpful device in permitting the delegation of discretionary authority to the agencies while at the same time retaining close legislative review. .

what implications does the president's executive order have for congress , the president , and agencies , in terms of control over the design and implementation of public policies ? .

what are the potential consequences for relations and communications between appropriations committees and agencies ? .

if agencies ignore expressions of congressional intent related to earmarks under orders from the president , will that have implications for how executive agencies respond to other communications contained in report language ? .

debates over earmark definitions and transparency have taken place for some time , but no generally accepted definitions of earmark - related terms appear to have been established .

over time , however , a particular definition of earmark could become so widely used by observers that it becomes regarded as the authoritative definition , notwithstanding other definitions .

if a definition were broadly regarded as authoritative , future developments and debate on earmarks might be influenced accordingly , with resource allocation activities that fall under the definition more likely to be subjected to discussion and public scrutiny than activities that are excluded .

from this perspective , it could be argued that if the administration's definition of earmarking as a solely congressional activity is widely accepted , future discourse and policy proposals may focus more and more on congressionally originated earmarks as opposed to earmarking by the president , political appointees , or career civil servants .

moreover , potential interpretations and connotations of the definitions might also come to be viewed as widely accepted ( eg , relating to concepts of merit and the appropriate processes for allocations of resources ) .

members of congress , several presidents , and interest groups have expressed diverse views regarding ( 1 ) the perceived merit of earmarking activities and ( 2 ) which actors in the u.s. system of government should make decisions on how to allocate specific funds .

the definition of the term earmark has the potential to change the terms of debate and the options considered .

the evolution of the debate over earmark definitions , therefore , may have implications for the institutional capacities of congress and the president to carry out their constitutional responsibilities and advance their policy or procedural preferences .

in that light , congress might consider the implications various definitions of earmark could have , if they were widely accepted , for ( 1 ) affecting the institutional capacities of congress , the president , and agencies to function effectively in the u.s. system of government and ( 2 ) setting the terms of debate .

the president and agency officials can , and often do , make allocation and earmark decisions largely outside public view .

for example , decisions oftentimes are made during budget formulation or during the budget execution process that may or may not be presented in agency budget justifications and reports to congress .

difficult issues — such as whether any presidential or administration decisions to restrict , link , or condition awards of contract or grant funding to nongovernmental entities on the basis of their compliance or cooperation with presidential or administration policy preferences constitutes a form of earmarking — may arise .

with regard to resource allocation , transparency in both decision - making processes and decision outcomes arguably would allow for scrutiny .

scrutiny , in turn , might confer some perception of merit for budget allocations that are able to withstand the scrutiny .

it is not clear if the administration has included in its online database all instances of earmarks that agencies and the white house received through "other communication. .

pursuing that option might provide insight into how the administration and agencies respond to congressionally originated earmarks that are not contained in bill or report language and whether items were included on a selective basis .

on the other hand , it would not necessarily always be in the interest of agencies , the white house , or members of congress to disclose telephone - , letter - , and in - person - directed earmarks in the context of legislative negotiations among congress , the president , and agencies .

currently , there is no publicly available , comprehensive source of information on whether , or the extent to which , congressionally originated earmarks are actually funded by agencies .

some information on this topic might be forthcoming in response to a non - statutory congressional directive to omb that was approved in the explanatory statement associated with the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 , which provided appropriations to omb .

specifically , in its report for the fy2008 financial services and general government appropriations bill , the senate appropriations committee directed omb to report to congress no later than march 1 , 2009 , regarding the extent to which executive departments and agencies that administer directed funding allocate the designated amounts to intended recipients at a level less than the amount specified in any enacted bill or accompanying report describing such directed funding .

the senate report language was subsequently approved in the explanatory statement corresponding to the fy2008 omnibus appropriations measure .

past research suggests that , if omb complies with the committee's directive , the resulting information may cite several kinds of instances in which congressionally directed spending items , or congressional earmarks , are not provided in the full amount to a recipient , including ( 1 ) if the president , omb , or an agency decides not to allocate funds to a recipient ( i.e. , disregards the congressional directive or earmark ) ; ( 2 ) if the president , omb , or an agency decides to reduce a designated amount in light of set - aside requirements or administrative fees ; or ( 3 ) if the president , omb , or an agency is unable to identify or find a recipient or finds the recipient legally ineligible to receive funds .

e.o .

13457 , both alone and in combination with the president's veto threat in the 2008 state of the union message , may have implications for the congressional appropriations process and potentially other legislative activities .

it is not possible to predict how the e.o .

will operate or be used in practice by the president , omb , and heads of agencies , or whether the administration might seek to use the e.o .

's framework as a source of leverage in bargaining in the legislative process .

if the e.o .

were a topic of congressional interest , several general options might be explored .

given the undefined nature of some terms in the administration's overall definition of earmark , as well as uncertainty how some aspects of the e.o .

will operate or be used in practice , congress could consider holding hearings or engaging in other information exchanges to clarify any questions of interest .

in response to the e.o. , congress could include in statutory text what otherwise would have been non - statutory earmarks .

alternatively , congress could incorporate by reference in statutory text any items contained in non - statutory documents .

if congress wished to strengthen , weaken , prevent , repeal , or otherwise alter the directions specified in the e.o .

or the e.o .

itself , or influence the practices called for by the e.o. , congress could consider legislating on the topic , possibly using approaches such as negotiation , appropriations limitations , revocation , or delay of final action on fy2009 appropriations until after a new president takes office .

two factors that may influence whether a given definition of earmark becomes more widely accepted or used include ( 1 ) ease of access to corresponding earmark data and ( 2 ) the extent of data that are made available .

omb's "earmarks" website and database , which contain data on what the administration views to be congressionally originated earmarks , are publicly accessible and are frequently cited in media stories on earmark issues .

the omb website gained further visibility after the administration announced that the website's fy2005 appropriations data would serve as the baseline for measuring progress toward the president's goal of reducing earmarks for fy2008 , and after the administration began to include language about earmarks prominently in its statements of administration policy regarding appropriations legislation .

the fy2008 disclosure lists of earmarks published in house and senate appropriations committee reports also have attracted considerable media attention .

data from the congressional reports , however , have not been aggregated by federal entities in a way similar to the presentation on the omb website .

separately , a searchable website of funding for federal grant , contract , and loan awards that congress required omb to establish under the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ) became operational in december 2007 as usaspending.gov .

in the absence of supplementary information , however , it is not clear that users of the ffata - required website would be able to determine whether an award was earmarked by congress .

the databases that feed into the website do not contain information to separate awards corresponding to congressionally originated earmarks ( according to congressional or administration definitions ) from awards that were originated by the president or agency officials .

if the ffata - required website does not include earmark information , then omb's "earmarks" website would appear to be the only federal government resource providing aggregate information on congressionally originated earmarks that is available to the public online , versus accessing individual committee reports , joint explanatory statements , and managers' statements .

omb may then be in a position to set some parameters for public debate on earmarks .

because the omb website is the most visible federal government resource for tracking aggregated totals of congressionally originated earmarks , many observers may regard it as the authoritative source of information on earmarks generally , reinforcing the perception that the administration's definition is the standard for public debate .

if congress considered these matters to be of interest , it could consider several options along with their advantages and disadvantages .

the omb "earmarks" website and database presumably would continue to provide information to the public that reflects the administration's perspective on what does , and does not , constitute an earmark .

in light of administration statements that the website's purpose is , in part , to "encourage and inform the debate over how taxpayers' money is spent," some would view it as a means for the president to advocate his policy and budget process preferences , and facilitate the actions of nongovernmental actors ( eg , the media and public interest groups ) to exercise scrutiny over congress by performing additional analysis on the earmark data .

congress could consider the advantages and disadvantages of assembling its own centralized , aggregated database .

in effect , pursuing this option would present the public with an alternative source of earmark information , in addition to the omb "earmarks" website , based on congressional definitions of earmark - related terms and congressional disclosure lists .

congress could require omb to adopt a different definition of earmark for use in collecting information from agencies and posting data on the omb "earmarks" website .

this option could allow for establishment of a definition more in concert with the definitions in each chamber's rules , in order to provide greater consistency in terms of data collection , debate , and analysis of earmarks across branches of government .

the option also might constrain the president's ability to use omb and agency budget offices and personnel to advance his proposals regarding congressionally originated earmarks .

critics of earmarking might argue that congressional definitions and practices do not allow for adequate scrutiny of congressional actions .

therefore , critics of earmarking might support the president's use of omb and agency resources to establish the administration's own definition and efforts to decrease the extent of congressionally originated earmarks .

some observers may also raise separation of powers questions if congress required omb to adopt a different definition of earmark .

another option might involve limiting or cutting off funds for the omb website and database .

pursuing this option might be perceived to bring advantages and disadvantages similar to the codification option .

it also might engender a negative reaction from the media and , possibly , the public .

information about congressionally originated earmarks might be made accessible through the ffata - required website .

for example , congress could consider the advantages and disadvantages of amending the ffata to require omb to incorporate its "earmarks" data into usaspending.gov .

integrating the data might address two objectives: to provide the public with as much information as possible about federal awards , and to enable the public to access that information from a single website .

on the other hand , by mandating that usaspending.gov include data from the omb "earmarks" database , congress might be perceived as accepting omb's definition of earmark .

alternatively , congress could consider amending the ffata to require incorporation of data from omb's "earmarks" website , while also requiring that omb adopt congressional definitions of earmark - related terms .

this option , with advantages and disadvantages similar to those discussed above , might provide congress more control over the earmark data provided to the public through usaspending.gov .

finally , congress could pursue an option of requiring the ffata website to include congressionally defined and identified earmarks without addressing the omb website .

this option is explicit in legislation that has been introduced .

pursuit of the option would result in two federal , online sources of earmark information that might differ in part because of different underlying definitions .

in addition , the ffata website would not necessarily capture all congressionally originated earmarks as defined by house and senate rules , if any were not associated with federal awards such as grants , contracts , or loans .

administration efforts to track congressionally originated earmarks and use the machinery of executive agencies to publicize its policy preferences arguably might affect congress's abilities to carry out representational activities that are an implicit component of its constitutional responsibilities .

the framers believed that the federal government needed to provide layers of representation that could incorporate national , state level , and more localized interests , while providing institutional checks and balances between congress and the president .

in the federal government , members of congress represent localized constituencies with interests and policy preferences that might or might not be perceived as aligned with broader , national interests .

members of congress also act ( 1 ) individually , ( 2 ) in their respective chambers , and ( 3 ) between chambers , through deliberation and the legislative process , to come together to make laws for the nation .

a president proposes his or her preferred program of policies and takes care that laws passed by congress are faithfully executed .

in doing so , a president may use discretion sometimes to advance his or her policy preferences .

the presidency has also been seen by many as representing broad national interests .

the combination of layered representation and interbranch checks and balances arguably assures that the preferences of national and local constituencies are addressed in the national policymaking process .

preferences may be addressed sometimes through broad laws , and other times through the use of specific laws , non - statutory earmarks of benefits and resources , and administrative decisions targeted to areas of congressional or presidential policy preference .

the requirements of e.o .

13457 , and the omb "earmarks" website and database , arguably subject the representational focus of congress to greater scrutiny than the president's representational activities .

when viewed in isolation , this might be seen as an attempt to pursue transparency in government funding decisions , a goal that has been advanced by some congressional and executive branch leaders .

depending upon how one perceives the executive order and the omb website fitting into the larger design of checks and balances , however , one might or might not see the long - term representational capacity of congress as being affected or impaired if the executive order were fully implemented , or the omb website were continued in its current format .

