according to the 2011 medicare trustees report , total medicare expenditures were $523 billion in 2010 for 47.5 million beneficiaries .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) office of the actuary projected overall medicare spending will reach $557.4 billion in 2011 .

due to a number of factors such as advances in health care delivery and technology , an aging population , and overall increases in medical costs , medicare spending has been projected to grow more quickly than spending in the overall u.s. economy .

as expenditures continue to rise in the nation's largest health insurance program , efforts to preserve medicare's program integrity have attracted increased attention .

as the agency responsible for administering medicare , cms contracts with a number of private entities to conduct program integrity activities .

program integrity includes the following six main activities: 1 .

conducting provider audits .

2 .

reviewing claims for medical necessity .

3 .

identifying and investigating fraud .

4 .

ensuring that medicare pays only for services for which it has primary responsibility .

5 .

educating providers on medicare billing procedures .

6 .

identifying improper billing practices that affect both medicare and medicaid .

once these contractors identify suspected fraud , they refer the cases to medicare administrative contractors ( macs ) to recover overpayments and , where appropriate , to the department of health and human services office of the inspector general ( hhs / oig ) and the department of justice ( doj ) for further investigation and prosecution .

the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa , p.l .

104-191 ) amended the social security act ( ssa ) section 1817 ( k ) to establish an appropriation from the medicare trust fund to an expenditure account , called the health care fraud and abuse control account ( hcfac account ) .

the amount transferred from the medicare trust funds is jointly certified by the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) and attorney general as necessary to finance anti - fraud activities .

the maximum amounts available for certification are specified in law .

hipaa also established an additional annual medicare integrity program ( mip ) appropriation .

mandatory annual mip appropriations are transferred from the medicare trust funds to the hcfac account , and hipaa specified the maximum amounts available for mip .

the maximum mip appropriations are adjusted for inflation and are available until expended .

hipaa required that the hhs / oig and the attorney general submit an annual report to congress on selected hcfac activities , but not mip activities .

gao submitted four biennial reports on hcfac - funded activities ( not mip activities ) as required by hipaa .

in fy2010 and fy2011 respectively , the hcfac account received mandatory appropriations of approximately $1.17 billion and approximately $1.4 billion .

beginning in fy2009 , congress approved additional discretionary investments of $198 million for fy2009 , $311 million for fy2010 , and $311 million for fy2011 to further enhance medicare's program integrity efforts .

this report presents an overview of medicare program integrity activities including the following major areas: an introduction to medicare health care fraud ; a description of cms's program integrity activities ; a discussion of the roles played by private contractors and federal law enforcement agencies in maintaining medicare program integrity ; details on federal anti - fraud funding ; analysis of cms's medicare program integrity activities ; and a summary of recent program integrity initiatives .

medicare is the nation's health insurance program for most people age 65 and older and certain disabled individuals .

of medicare's 47.5 million enrollees in 2010 , approximately 85% are over 65 and the remaining 15% are disabled .

medicare consists of the following four distinct parts — parts a , b , c , and d: part a ( hospital insurance ) covers inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility , home health , and hospice services .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance ) covers other medical services , such as physician visits , outpatient hospital care , laboratory services , and durable medical equipment ( dme ) .

part c refers to the option beneficiaries have to receive all parts a and b services through a private medicare advantage ( ma ) health plan .

part d covers outpatient prescription drugs , which are provided by private prescription drug plans ( pdps ) .

many medicare beneficiaries who enroll in private , part c , health plans , choose ma - pd ( medicare advantage – prescription drug ) plans for combined parts c and d coverage .

the majority of beneficiaries , nearly 75% , receive benefits through medicare's fee - for - service ( ffs ) program , known as "original" or "traditional" medicare .

the remaining beneficiaries , approximately 25% , chose to enroll in private health care plans under medicare part c , the medicare advantage ( ma ) program .

approximately 73% ( 34.6 million beneficiaries ) of medicare beneficiaries chose to enroll in part d , the outpatient prescription drug program .

increasing health care costs , increases in the number of medicare beneficiaries , and other factors are contributing to push the cost of medicare to unsustainable levels .

these increasing costs as well as concern about proper stewardship of public resources have helped fuel additional interest in finding ways to control rising medicare costs .

program integrity , particularly initiatives to identify and reduce fraud and abuse , have received substantial emphasis as a potential source of restraining the growth in federal medicare expenditures .

several recently enacted new laws have provided additional tools and resources to help federal officials improve upon medicare program integrity activities .

these initiatives are discussed in more detail below .

estimates of fraud and abuse often are made separately from estimates of improper payments .

estimates of the dollar amount lost just to health care fraud vary .

fraud analysts and law enforcement officials estimate between 3% and 10% of health care expenditures ( for all payers , including medicare ) are lost annually to fraud .

cms estimated that medicare's fy2010 ffs improper payment error rate was 10.5% and accounted for $34.3 billion in overpayments .

not only do fraud and abuse contribute to rising health care costs , they also can harm patients , particularly when medically necessary services are withheld , or when medically unnecessary services are provided .

fraud and abuse often are integrated together into the discussion of program integrity or activities to protect the medicare program from these threats .

abuse describes incidents or practices of providers , physicians , or suppliers of services and equipment which , although not usually fraudulent , are inconsistent with accepted sound medical , business , or fiscal practices .

these practices may , directly or indirectly , increase medicare costs , result in improper payment , payment for services below professionally recognized standards , or payment for services that were medically unnecessary .

fraud is intentional deception or misrepresentation that an individual makes , knowing it to be false and that it could result in some unauthorized benefit to them .

typically health care fraud most often is associated with financial misconduct , however , delivering poor or substandard quality care has received increased attention in recent years .

for the purpose of this paper , the discussion of abuse focuses on improper payments and not the improper provision of health care services .

although health care fraud encompasses many different types of erroneous behavior , the types of schemes committed today share certain characteristics .

according to law enforcement officials , fraud perpetrators often target public health insurance programs ( medicare and medicaid ) and private health plans simultaneously .

fraud schemes can span multiple states and involve both providers of services , many with little health care experience , and beneficiaries .

for example , in several recent cases , fraud perpetrators paid both providers and senior citizens kickbacks to obtain their billing numbers in order to submit fraudulent claims to medicare .

other examples of recent fraudulent activity include billing for unnecessary services or tests provided to patients , submitting claims for services provided by unlicensed providers , and illegally marketing drugs or products for higher reimbursements .

further , recent fraud investigations revealed evidence of organized crime activity in health care .

at a recent hearing before the house committee on oversight and government reform , the hhs / oig deputy inspector general testified that health care fraud is attractive to organized crime because penalties are lower than for other organized crime - related offenses , there are low barriers to entry , fraud schemes are easily replicated , and a lack of data hampers detection efforts .

even though there is overlap , the types of fraud committed against medicare's ffs program can differ from the types of fraud committed against medicare's parts c and d plans .

these differences stem largely from differences in medicare's payment structure .

in ffs , medicare pays providers directly for a specified unit of service delivered to a beneficiary ( i.e. , procedure , visit , test , or group of services ) .

this can create provider incentives to overstate the health care services provided to patients or actually to provide more care to beneficiaries than is necessary in order to increase reimbursement .

examples of fraudulent overstatement and over - billing activities in medicare's ffs program include the following: billing for services not furnished and / or supplies not provided ; altering claim forms , electronic claim records , medical documentation , etc. , to obtain a higher payment amount ( i.e. , upcoding ) ; billing for services already provided ( i.e. , duplicate payments ) ; soliciting , offering , or receiving a kickback , bribe , or rebate , for example , paying for a referral of patients in exchange for the ordering of diagnostic tests and other services or medical equipment ; billing for services provided to deceased beneficiaries or provided by deceased providers ; billing non - covered or non - chargeable services as covered items ; and billing separately for services or equipment included in global rates ( i.e. , unbundling ) .

in contrast , under parts c and d , medicare pays private health plans and prescription drug plans ( pdps ) a fixed monthly payment amount per enrollee , otherwise known as a capitated payment .

capitated payments are made in advance for a pre - determined set of benefits either to an ma plan for parts a and b benefits or to a pdp for prescription drug benefits .

under capitation , the monthly payment amount is fixed , regardless of the amount of services provided .

therefore , providers have incentives to limit health services or provide fewer services to beneficiaries to maximize their profit .

in medicare parts c and d , types of fraudulent activities may include engaging in fraudulent marketing practices ( i.e. , offering beneficiaries a cash payment to enroll , enrolling beneficiaries without their consent , conducting unsolicited door - to - door marketing , or using unlicensed agents ) ; selectively enrolling healthy beneficiaries ( "cherry picking" beneficiaries who will need fewer health services ) ; failing to provide medically necessary services ; inappropriately overestimating or underestimating bid amounts for payment ; and collecting excessive beneficiary premiums .

historically , medicare program integrity has focused on combating ffs fraud in medicare parts a and b with less emphasis on part c ( medicare advantage ) and part d. however , as private medicare plan enrollment increased and medicare added an outpatient part d drug benefit , there was a need to expand program integrity activities to address fraud in capitated payment systems as well as ffs .

in medicare , program integrity typically encompasses two types of activities: ( 1 ) processes directed at reducing abuse , such as payment errors or improper payments ; and ( 2 ) activities designed to prevent , detect , investigate , and ultimately prosecute fraud .

since 1990 , the government accountability office ( gao ) has designated medicare as a federal program at high risk for fraud and abuse due to its size , complexity , scope , and decentralized administrative structure .

since 2004 , gao has issued 12 products ( including reports and testimony ) that have identified strategies to reduce medicare fraud and abuse .

to protect the medicare trust funds from improper payments , cms contracts with private companies to review claims to determine whether the services provided are medically reasonable and necessary .

in medicare , improper payments include both provider under - and overpayments .

improper payments largely result from provider billing mistakes or inadvertent claims processing errors .

although medicare's claim review strategies identify some instances of fraud , they are not specifically designed to do so .

the majority of claims are screened and reviewed after payment has been made or post - payment .

cms also contracts with private organizations that are directed to identify fraud .

cms typically classifies these anti - fraud functions as benefit integrity activities .

examples of benefit integrity include performing ongoing claims data analysis to identify aberrant billing patterns , conducting fraud investigations , auditing providers , contacting medicare beneficiaries and providers to verify that medical services were actually provided , and referring suspected cases of fraud to law enforcement personnel for prosecution .

when these activities reveal suspected fraudulent activity , cms's contractors develop and refer cases to the hhs / oig for further investigation and administrative sanctions .

fraud cases may then be referred to the doj for prosecution .

within the four program areas identified under cpi , there are six main types of program integrity activities: provider auditing , medical review , benefit integrity , medicare secondary payer ( msp ) , provider outreach and education , and a medicare - medicaid data match project .

these six functions are stipulated in law and are largely part of cms's medicare integrity program ( mip ) .

however , cms has expanded mip activities to include more focus on preventive methods .

cms strives to use a more flexible approach that combines both traditional mip tools with other approaches , such as the health care fraud prevention & enforcement action team ( heat ) , where a team that includes medical experts , law enforcement , data analysts , and policy staff collaborates to identify suspicious activity and quickly investigate and prosecute criminal behavior .

more information is presented in the remainder of this section on traditional program integrity activities .

to conduct medicare program integrity activities , cms contracts with a number of different contractors .

activities undertaken by these contractors varies depending on their statements of work ( sow ) .

some process and pay medicare claims in addition to performing select program integrity functions ( i.e. , medicare administrative contractors or macs ) .

others specialize solely in program integrity activities such as program safeguard contractors ( pscs ) and zone program integrity contractors ( zpics ) , medicare drug integrity contractors ( medics ) , recovery audit contractors ( racs ) , the comprehensive error rate testing ( cert ) contractor , the national supplier clearinghouse ( nsc ) , and the coordination of benefits ( cob ) contractor .

these contractors and their roles in medicare program integrity are described below .

cms shares responsibility for ensuring medicare program integrity with the hhs / oig , the department of justice ( doj ) , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

the hhs / oig is an independent unit within hhs that has the primary responsibility for detecting health care fraud and abuse in all federal health care programs .

most of its work , however , relates to the medicare and medicaid programs .

cms conducts audits of health care programs , providers , and agencies , and it performs criminal and civil investigations related to specific instances of health care fraud or abuse .

cms contractors , upon detecting potential fraud , will develop and refer cases to the hhs / oig for further investigation and possible administrative sanctions .

the hhs / oig has authority to impose civil monetary penalties and program exclusions on medicare providers that have been convicted of certain fraudulent activities .

the hhs / oig does not have authority to prosecute offenders for violations of federal criminal law .

in these instances , the oig refers the case to the doj for prosecution .

during fy2010 , the oig excluded a total of 3,340 individuals and entities from participating in medicare , medicaid , and other federal and state health care programs .

the fbi is the lead investigative agency in the fight against health care fraud .

unlike the hhs / oig , which has the authority to investigate fraud only in federal programs , the fbi has jurisdiction over both federal and private sector insurance programs .

typically , the fbi investigates complex fraud schemes involving large - scale medical providers , such as hospitals and corporations .

the fbi does not have the authority to impose sanctions .

for the first three quarters of fy2010 , 2,584 fbi - led investigations resulted in 648 criminal health care fraud convictions .

cms contractors , the hhs / oig , and the fbi all refer potential health care fraud cases to the doj for prosecution .

within the doj , the civil and criminal divisions handle health care fraud .

one of the enforcement tools for prosecuting health care fraud is the false claims act ( fca ) , which prohibits knowingly submitting false or fraudulent claims to the u.s. government .

lawsuits may be brought by private plaintiffs , known as relators or whistleblowers , under the fca .

there also are 93 u.s .

attorneys offices nationwide , which prosecute civil and criminal health care fraud .

during fy2010 , prosecutors for the doj and u.s .

attorneys offices opened 1,116 new criminal and 942 new civil health care fraud investigations .

for comparison , doj prosecutors and u.s .

attorneys offices opened 1,014 new criminal and 886 new civil health care fraud investigations in fy2009 .

medicare beneficiaries also are a source for detecting fraud .

beneficiaries who suspect fraud may call the hhs / oig's national fraud hotline at 1-800-hhs - tips .

to educate beneficiaries on how to detect and report fraud and abuse , the administration on aging oversees senior medicare patrol projects , which recruit retired professionals in all states to conduct one - on - one and group training sessions for medicare beneficiaries .

contractors investigating anomalies in billing patterns may also contact beneficiaries to verify that the services claimed actually were received by the beneficiary .

medicare program integrity and anti - fraud activities are funded through the hcfac and mip programs .

hcfac and mip were both established by hipaa , which sought to increase and stabilize federal funding for health care anti - fraud activities .

specifically , hcfac funds are directed to the enforcement and prosecution of health care fraud , whereas mip funding supports the program integrity activities undertaken by cms contractors .

prior to hipaa , funding for medicare's program integrity activities were taken from cms's annual program management budget , which was subject to the appropriations process .

this sometimes led to fluctuations in funding , as monies originally intended to support program integrity functions were redirected to fund ongoing medicare operations , such as day - to - day claims processing functions .

with the passage of hipaa , hhs was assured of stable funding that it could commit to medicare anti - fraud activities .

a limited number of performance statistics and reports are available to help policy makers evaluate medicare's program integrity efforts , and these tend to be broad measures , such as return on investment .

some studies , to date , generally examined the performance of the hcfac and mip programs separately , but these also have been limited .

the hcfac and mip programs authorize appropriations with relatively broad requirements for the program integrity activities to be conducted .

under hipaa , the hhs / oig and the attorney general were required to jointly submit an annual report to congress that identified the hcfac amounts appropriated and recovered , including transfers to the medicare trust funds resulting from criminal fines , civil monetary penalties , property forfeitures , and other penalties and damages .

hipaa also required gao to issue four biennial reports on the appropriateness and adequacy of hcfac appropriations for fraud control efforts as well as other savings to the trust funds and analysis of other aspects of the hcfac account as gao considered appropriate .

however , congress did not require hhs / oig , the attorney general , or gao to evaluate the mip activities and appropriations as part of these assessments .

as a result , there is less empirical data available on mip performance than on the results of the hcfac appropriations for doj , hhs / oig , and law enforcement .

to date , the most comprehensive mip evaluation was from a september 2006 gao study , which identified weaknesses in cms's methods to allocate funds across five mip program integrity activities ( provider audits , medical review , benefit integrity , msp , and provider education ) .

this section summarizes findings from reviews and studies conducted on selected hcfac account and mip activities during the past decade .

both congress and the administration have undertaken initiatives to increase medicare program integrity activity .

congress has held a number of hearings and passed several laws with provisions that have provided new program integrity tools and resources .

the administration has issued several executive orders requiring agencies to address improper payments and has proposed a number of additional program integrity initiatives in its fy2012 budget proposal .

program integrity activities encompass a broad set of strategies and processes intended to meet numerous objectives , including preventing improper payments , identifying and detecting fraud , investigating individuals suspected of committing medicare fraud , recovering overpayments , and prosecuting offenders .

to carry out the six main types of program integrity activities , cms contracts with a number of private organizations .

the effectiveness of these efforts depends on close collaboration and coordination between cms , its contractors , oig , and federal and state law enforcement agencies .

the implementation of hcfac and mip in 1996 provided cms and medicare enforcement agencies with dedicated funding to coordinate health care fraud - fighting activities .

as documented in hcfac reports , from 1999 through 2010 , program integrity and anti - fraud resources increased from an estimated $0.8 billion in fy1999 to approximately $1.9 billion in fy2010 , and the number of new civil and criminal fraud enforcement actions more than quadrupled ( through fy2010 ) .

furthermore , activities of health care fraud enforcement also have steadily increased recoveries transferred to the medicare trust funds .

gao reports have raised questions about how mip funding is used and have recommended cms develop more quantitative measures to assess the impact of mip - funded program integrity activities .

protecting medicare from fraud and abuse is a complex and challenging undertaking for a number of reasons .

reliable estimates of the amount lost to health care fraud are unavailable , making it difficult for policymakers to determine the extent of resources needed to respond to the issue and where best to direct resources .

in addition , fraud perpetrators are quick to adapt to investigative techniques and continually devise new and more sophisticated medicare fraud schemes .

therefore , to reduce medicare's vulnerability , cms and its partners need to utilize a diverse mix of preventive and investigative program integrity methods .

cms has migrated to more preventive program integrity techniques , such as increasing the volume of claims it reviews on a pre - payment basis , applying stricter standards when reviewing provider enrollment applications , and conducting background checks on providers prior to allowing them to bill the medicare program .

