the case management interim final rule elaborates on changes to the tcm definition authorized and initiated in dra by providing specific guidance on how states may claim federal financial participation ( ffp ) for tcm expenditures .

it also directly addresses case management issues that previously might have been considered open to interpretation .

cms stipulated that the case management interim final rule applies to all medicaid authorities , so that all case management , including tcm and services delivered through waivers , would be covered under the rule .

cms estimated that the case management regulation will reduce federal medicaid expenditures by approximately $1.28 billion between fy2008 and fy2012 .

cms also estimated that federal foster care expenditures would increase by $369 million between fy2008-fy2012 .

some of the changes addressed in the proposed rule are outlined below .

estimates of the financial impact of the interim final rule vary .

some argue that cms underestimated the impact of the case management and other regulations , and that cms is attempting to shift medicaid costs to states .

cms estimated that the tcm changes in the interim final rule will reduce federal medicaid outlays by $1.28 billion over five years , whereas cbo estimated that the tcm provision in dra would reduce federal expenditures by $760 million .

cbo's estimate of the impact of dra provisions was for the period fy2006-fy2010 , whereas cms's estimate was for the five year period fy2008-fy2012 .

in a more recent estimate for the period fy2008-fy2012 , cbo forecasted that gross medicaid outlays would decrease by $2.0 billion for the five year period , with a $1.5 billion net reduction ( including effects in foster care administration ) in medicaid outlays for that time period .

a survey of state medicaid directors by the house committee on oversight and government reform estimated the financial impact of the tcm regulation to be approximately $3.1 billion over the five years from fy2009-fy2013 .

there are at least three distinct perspectives on tcm policy issues: ( 1 ) the perspective of advocates representing children and adults who could receive medicaid tcm services , ( 2 ) state governments and medicaid agencies , and ( 3 ) the federal regulatory agency ( cms ) responsible for implementing dra and enforcing states' compliance with federal medicaid statutes .

as cms indicates in the interim final rule , dra required the agency to write regulations .

specific guidance and definitions , cms contends , were needed to avoid further "excessive" federal outlays .

cms points out that the proposed rule clarifies when medicaid will , and will not , pay for case management services .

cms further claims the proposed rule will reduce past confusion about the overlap between medicaid tcm and non - medicaid programs .

moreover , cms cites gao studies , oig audits , and review of spas that document past abuses of medicaid tcm claiming .

advocates for children and adult medicaid beneficiaries who receive tcm services contend that the rule is more restrictive than what congress intended in dra .

advocates also fear that reduced federal medicaid funding for tcm will need to come from other programs or services that do not have funding , resulting in cuts to tcm services .

states cite administrative complexities of the rule that will increase state costs while decreasing provider participation and beneficiaries' quality of care .

further , states and advocates also believe that the complexity of the rule will make it difficult for states to implement within the specified time frame .

child welfare advocates and organizations representing mentally retarded and developmentally disabled individuals , many of whom need medicaid tcm , believe that the interim final rule will cut tcm services for these beneficiaries .

child welfare advocates argue that by requiring medicaid to reimburse providers based on 15-minute billing segments , costs of care would increase and provider participation would decrease .

they also argue that new requirements for record keeping and claims processing will discourage provider participation and reduce actual beneficiary services .

advocates claim that states already cannot afford to fund enough tcm services and that with more restrictions , states will be forced to cut services further .

according to advocates , with less tcm available , children receiving foster care and protective services will get fewer health care services , causing their existing medical and related conditions to deteriorate .

moreover , they argue , without tcm , these beneficiaries will ultimately require more costly health care treatment in the future .

some medicaid and other state officials believe that the cms case management rule will increase costs by creating additional administrative activities .

for example , medicaid agencies have raised objections to the additional reporting requirements and other administrative complexities contained in the interim final rule because they believe these rules will make it harder for them to provide tcm to beneficiaries .

medicaid agencies claim that new delayed billing requirements for providers who assist tcm beneficiaries in transitioning from institutions are burdensome and may reduce patient access to tcm services .

as noted earlier , the interim final rule proposes to permit states up to two years to comply with the one - provider provision for case management .

the additional time for states to comply suggests that cms recognizes the complexity for states to adapt their systems and administratively comply with the proposed rules .

in the same vein , state medicaid agencies believe that the effective date of the interim final rule is inadequate to permit states sufficient time to comply with the regulations , so that states' ffp for case management will be withdrawn suddenly or recovered later under auditors' disallowances .

observers maintain that an extension of time for states to comply might help to moderate stakeholder concerns , while giving states the opportunity to provide an orderly transition and realistically comply with the regulations that have been under development for some time .

in january 2008 , legislation was introduced ( h.r .

5173 and s. 2578 ) that would impose a moratorium on changes to medicaid case management services until april 1 , 2009 .

the indian health care improvement act amendments of 2008 ( s. 1200 ) was to delay implementation of the case management interim final rule until april 1 , 2009 .

a bill , protecting the medicaid safety net act of 2008 ( h.r .

5613 ) , was introduced in march that would impose a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of the tcm and other medicaid regulations .

the house energy and commerce committee voted on april 16 , 2008 , to send h.r .

5613 to the full house .

h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to submit a report by july 1 , 2008 , to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the secretary's report would be required to cover three topics: ( 1 ) an outline of specific problems the tcm and other medicaid regulations were intended to correct , ( 2 ) an explanation of how the regulations would address these problems , and ( 3 ) the legal authority for the regulations .

in addition , h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to retain an independent contractor to prepare a comprehensive report to be completed by march 1 , 2009 , which also would be submitted to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the independent contractor's report would describe the prevalence of the specific problems identified in the secretary's report , identify existing strategies to address these problems , and assess the impact of the medicaid regulations on each state and the district of columbia .

in the senate , a similar measure to h.r .

5613 , the economic recovery in health care act of 2008 ( s. 2819 ) , was introduced in april .

like h.r .

5613 , s. 2819 , would impose a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of the case management , tcm and five other medicaid regulations until april 1 , 2009 .

on may 22 , 2008 , the senate passed the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( h.r .

2642 ) .

h.r .

2642 included a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of the tcm and six other medicaid regulations .

the provision in h.r .

2642 covering medicaid regulations included requirements , similar to h.r .

5613 , for the secretary to submit reports to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

h.r .

2642 was amended by the house and passed on june 19 , 2008 .

the house amendments included moratoria on implementation of six medicaid regulations , including case management and tcm , until april 1 , 2009 .

in addition , h.r .

2642 retained requirements from h.r .

5613 for the secretary to report to the house energy and commerce and senate finance committees , and to hire an independent contractor to report on the specific impact of medicaid regulations .

on june 26 , 2008 , the senate passed h.r .

2642 without changes to the latest house measure , including the moratoria on implementation of six medicaid regulations ( until april 1 , 2009 ) .

h.r .

2642 also retains the requirements for the secretary and an independent contractor to submit reports on the medicaid regulations to the house energy and commerce and senate finance committees .

the president signed p.l .

110-252 into law on june 30 , 2008 .

earlier , on june 4 and 5 , 2008 , the senate and house , respectively , adopted the final version of the budget resolution ( h.rept .

110-659 accompanying s.con.res .

70 ) .

among other provisions , the conference agreement establishes a number of deficit - neutral reserve funds and a sense of the senate provision that would delay medicaid administrative regulations , including medicaid case management and tcm .

in addition to the interim final rule , the bush administration's fy2009 federal budget submission proposed that legislation is needed to restrict medicaid tcm claiming to the lower 50% rate provided for administrative activities , rather than federal medical assistance percentage rates for covered benefits .

the administration has not offered legislation restricting tcm claiming rates yet .

