there is growing momentum among many national security practitioners and scholars , across the political spectrum , broadly in favor of reforming the interagency system to encourage a more effective application of all elements of national power .

one subset of these interagency reform discussions has focused on the cultivation of a community of national security professionals ( nsps ) from all relevant departments and agencies .

according to proponents , nsps , through some combination of shared education and training , and rotational tours of duty in other agencies , would gain a better understanding of the mandates , capabilities , and cultures of other agencies .

such preparation would enable nsps to more effectively craft strategy and plan and execute national security missions together .

these shared practices , proponents add , would eventually lead to broader organizational cultural change across u.s. government agencies , as nsps , for whom interagency collaboration would become second nature , reach senior leadership positions .

such recommendations are not new , but they were given a new sense of urgency by operational experiences at home and abroad over the last 10 years — from the wars in iraq and afghanistan to the responses to hurricane katrina — which suggested insufficiencies in the ability of the u.s. government to integrate and apply the various components of its efforts .

in 2007 , in response to growing concerns , the bush administration launched the national security professional development ( nspd ) program , based on an executive order ( e.o. ) .

and a published national strategy .

the program took shape slowly , and then endured a pause in its development at the change of administration , but in 2011 , the obama administration revised the nspd program and refined its focus .

meanwhile , over the last several years , members of congress have expressed interest in the cultivation of national security professionals by holding hearings , directing the conduct of independent studies , and introducing related legislation .

this report focuses on issues that members of congress may wish to consider in crafting or providing oversight for nsp initiatives .

for context , it also describes key early proposals ; the experiences of the nspd program to date ; current u.s. government strategic guidance ; and significant congressional initiatives .

calls for the cultivation of national security professionals to help improve interagency integration date back at least to the immediate aftermath of world war ii .

they were given fresh impetus by lessons learned from recent operational experiences at home and abroad .

in recent years , the george w. bush and then obama administrations have supported fostering a community of national security professionals , both by establishing and maintaining an nsp program and by issuing strategic guidance .

simultaneously , some members of congress have pursued the cultivation of an nsp community by mandating studies , conducting hearings , and drafting legislation that would establish a permanent nsp requirement .

until recently , these relatively low - key executive and legislative branch efforts took place largely in isolation from one another .

in weighing the merits of draft legislation and outside proposals aimed at fostering an interagency community of national security professionals , members of congress may wish to consider the following issues .

one of the most fundamental questions concerning any existing or proposed nsp initiative is the basic purpose of the effort .

one approach is to focus on changing individual practices , to help ensure that designated professionals are better prepared to participate in specific , near - term interagency national security activities .

an alternative approach is to focus on changing institutional cultures such that , over the long term , interagency collaboration becomes the natural default for all those engaged in national security matters .

the original nspd program took a longer - term view , aiming to foster a cadre of interagency - qualified professionals able to work effectively in interagency contexts and then to bring those interagency perspectives back to their home agencies .

the 2011 revised version of the nspd program aims far more explicitly at meeting current requirements — using educational , training , and rotation opportunities to foster the ability of nsps to more effectively execute missions "now. .

yet most practitioners and observers would agree that there need be no hard and fast choice between fostering individual mission - oriented skills and changing institutional cultures — indeed , changing individual practices , many sociologists would argue , is the most effective way to change shared culture over time .

as an analogy , the military's joint qualification system aims explicitly to achieve both goals .

to meet immediate mission requirements , the goldwater - nichols process designates some joint billets as critical for mission success , and requires that those billets be filled by individuals who already have a specified level of joint qualification .

at the same time , the system fosters joint - qualified senior leaders , who bring joint mindsets and approaches back to their home services , thus augmenting — though not replacing — service cultures with joint culture .

it is common for interagency reform proponents to call for closer integration among departments and agencies , but "integration" can mean a range of different things in practice .

at one end of the spectrum , members of different agencies view may themselves primarily or exclusively as representatives of their home agencies , but they are familiar with the work of other agencies and able to work with counterparts in them — this may facilitate a well - coordinated application of their respective capabilities .

at the other end of the spectrum , members of different agencies may view themselves primarily as part of a common , completely integrated enterprise at the systemic level , though they may still be able to reach back into their home agencies for resources and support .

among commentators , pnsr has made the most comprehensive case to date for fostering a genuinely "interagency cadre. .

some argue that a systemic - level cadre might be best able to articulate and execute national - level priorities and missions .

others suggest that members of such a cadre might lose the ability to understand and represent their agencies of origin , and their exclusive work in interagency circles might leave them little time to help infuse their home agencies with interagency perspective .

as a point of comparison , the u.s. military's emphasis on jointness , based on the 1986 goldwater - nichols act as amended , more nearly mirrors the agency - based concept of integration .

officers at various levels of joint qualification complete joint duty assignments , usually outside their home military service , but they serve most of their careers within their respective services .

an officer's service decides whether he or she is sent to a joint duty assignment , and whether or not he or she is promoted .

the overall intent may best be described less as the creation of a cadre of joint - qualified officers who serve together and work on joint matters , and more as the fostering of an increasingly "joint - minded" total force that benefits from — and relies on — the infusion of joint perspectives using the mechanism of joint duty assignments .

one critical issue , both in practice to date and in the broader policy debates , has been the appropriate scope of inclusion for a national security professional program — which individuals , and which categories of personnel , should be considered nsps or have the opportunity to become nsps ? .

at stake are two very different considerations , which might drive very different solutions .

the substantive consideration is how best to make sure that the program includes all the right categories of personnel , at the right scale , to ensure that the program meets its strategic goals and generates desired effects .

the practical consideration is how best to protect resources at both the systemic and agency levels , by strictly limiting participation to the minimum essential categories of personnel and numbers while still achieving program goals .

one key facet of the "scope" issue is the substantive focus of the program — in particular , the balance between homeland and traditional national security concerns .

there is a broad consensus in the washington policy community that the two categories are related , and this position has been echoed clearly by the obama administration .

as many observers have noted , it is difficult to draw a clear line between them , because providing security for the homeland may require addressing challenges that arise abroad .

but there is also recognition in practitioner communities that not all aspects of "national security" broadly defined are related to all others .

too broad a substantive reach — or too broad a reach with too - uniform policies and procedures — runs the risk of imposing unneeded professional development activities with an attendant waste in time and resources .

in practice — and deriving in part from the desired substantive focus — one key decision for any nsp program concerns which agencies of the federal government should be included .

the initial nspd executive order and the 2011 revised charter for the nspd executive steering committee each cast a wide net in terms of participation , including not only stalwarts such as dod , state , and dhs , but also less traditional national security agencies such as health and human services , and housing and urban development .

on one hand , broadening the scope of participation to include additional , non - traditional national security agencies is appealing because it might offer a relatively low - cost way to incorporate entities with singular expertise , and to catalyze interagency relationships that could improve coordination , and save time and money , in future contingencies .

on the other hand , the inclusion of agencies that would have only a handful of participants might create disproportionate administrative burdens for both the agencies themselves and for those responsible for program oversight .

some of the "undue burden" risk might be ameliorated , in practice , by relying on the major participants such as dod , state , and dhs to host program activities open to all participating agencies .

both practitioners and outside experts have grappled with the question of participation by three major sub - categories of professionals within agencies: the uniformed military , the foreign service , and the intelligence community .

at the outset , all three communities reportedly opposed full , formal inclusion in the nspd program , on the grounds that each community already had a well - established career development program , and that additional requirements would be too burdensome .

the nsdp e.o .

gave the secretary of defense , the secretary of state , and the director of national intelligence the responsibility to issue separate sets of guidance for each of these communities , and then "to coordinate such programs to the maximum extent practicable with the [nspd] steering committee. .

in practice , this language was widely interpreted to mean that the three communities were welcome , but not obliged , to participate in nspd activities .

the argument for avoiding a formal mandate for these three communities to participate is the possible time conflict it might create with their respective , existing career development programs , which already include various forms of training , education , and rotational service .

for the military , for example , the requirements for joint professional military education ( jpme ) are robust , leaving little time in a career for additional education or rotational tours .

moreover , jpme is governed in part by law , so some changes to jpme might require legislative action .

on the other hand , some observers have suggested that , in theory , some of the requirements of jpme and the other communities' career development programs might be fully compatible with those of interagency nsp programs .

for example , one can imagine possible duty assignments for a military officer that might provide both "joint" and "interagency" experience .

the nspd program was designed to include career professionals , not political appointees .

over the course of nspd program implementation to date , some practitioners and outside experts have pointed out that political appointees with similar responsibilities to coordinate national security matters in an interagency environment might also benefit from nspd - program - like training and education , and other forms of relationship - building .

in fact , many have noted , appointees who come from sectors outside government may need familiarization with interagency work much more than government career professionals do .

most observers agree that formal inclusion of political appointees in any nsp program , including making them subject to the same rules that apply to career professionals , would be a bridge too far because it would constrain the president's authority .

moreover , some argue , given the short average tenure of political appointees in government , it might be hard to justify any significant allocation of their limited time for training and education .

as a compromise , some have suggested making nsp program activities available to political appointees at their discretion — a flexible approach that might not , however , encourage appointees to consider those activities a priority .

others have suggested that in the selection of political appointees to fill designated national security positions , criteria similar to those that would be applied to career personnel ought to be considered .

practitioners and outside experts have debated the extent , if any , to which nspd or a possible successor program should include state , local , and tribal officials , as well as federal - level employees .

the initial nspd e.o. , without requiring formal participation from non - federal levels of government in the nspd program , did open the door to their participation in program activities .

section 2 of the e.o .

noted that nspd's "education , training and professional experience opportunities" should be "provided across organizations , levels of government , and incident management disciplines as appropriate. .

section 5 noted that the secretary of homeland security should develop a program to provide to federal , state , local , and tribal government officials education in disaster preparedness , response , and recovery plans and authorities , and training in crisis decision - making skills , consistent with applicable presidential guidance .

the nspd strategy , however , pointedly narrowed the focus of the program to the national level , stating at the outset that the goal was "integrated effort with common purpose across the federal government. .

it underscored the narrower scope by arguing that nsps would "work in coordination with" many others including "state , local , territorial , and tribal governments" as well as the private sector , ngos , and foreign governments — by implication , none of those others would themselves be considered nsps .

the main practical argument for narrowing the scope to the federal level of government is that the inclusion of other levels of government would impose on the program significant resource demands and logistics challenges .

the main substantive argument for exclusion is that the overlap among the portfolios of interest and responsibility of various levels of government is relatively limited — after all , firefighters in des moines , iowa , do not need to know how to foster inclusive community councils in paktika province , afghanistan .

on the other hand , some observers , including pnsr , have argued that the more closely the u.s. government approaches a truly "whole of nation" approach to national security , including all levels of government and all relevant non - governmental actors , the more effective the practice of national security will be .

for those considering the merits of , and possible options for , fostering a community of national security professionals , a key practical issue is how best to structure such an initiative in order to achieve the desired objectives .

different objectives — meeting short - term mission requirements or fostering long - term cultural change , building a cadre of "interagency professionals" at the systemic level or fostering "interagency - savvy" professionals in individual agencies — would likely be best met by different practical mechanisms .

in any case , as the military has discovered in more than 25 years of refining its implementation of the goldwater - nichols act , crafting the detailed mechanics to meet a program's policy goals , once defined , tends to be complicated and to require substantial human resources expertise .

one of the most important practical questions concerns the selection of individuals for participation in any nsp program — a distinct question from the selection of billets .

at stake in the choices at this "micro" level are two key considerations that also apply to the choice of "categories" of personnel for inclusion: ensuring that participation is broad enough to meet substantive national security requirements , while avoiding too - strenuous resource demands .

"individuals" are not static — people enter and exit government employment altogether ; government employees enter and exit national security - focused jobs ; and government employees progress through different career stages .

further , in many proposed formats for fostering national security professionals , participating individuals would be expected to progress from "seeking qualification" to "qualified" — and in some proposals , through multiple stages .

to address this dynamism , some suggest that it might be useful for an nsp program to ( 1 ) identify the broader "pool" of those entitled to seek qualification ; and ( 2 ) specify the rules that govern individual progress over time through the system .

"billets" are a potential source of confusion because they can serve two distinct purposes in a professional development program that also has real - world goals .

one purpose can be to meet real - world requirements — for example , a program might specify that designated national security billets must be filled by persons with some identified interagency capabilities , in order for the u.s. government to best execute national security activities .

another purpose billets can answer is instrumental — serving in them helps an individual gain program qualification .

to address this potential room for confusion , an nsp program might clearly articulate whether the function of billets is to meet real - world needs , help grow qualified nsps , or both .

the military's joint qualification system , while not an exact model , provides a useful point of comparison for any proposed or existing nsp programs .

in the military , the scope for individual participation is broad — all officers , active and reserve , can seek joint qualification .

in practice , achieving various levels of joint qualification depends not only on individual choice , but also on decisions by the appropriate approval authorities who may offer an individual the needed assignments and educational opportunities .

the military's nomenclature has undergone revision several times , and arguably it remains incomplete .

the john warner ndaa for fy 2007 introduced a four - level qualification system , in which approval for each level requires the completion of some combination of education and joint service .

on being approved for level iii , an individual is considered a joint qualified officer ( jqo ) , the only level that has a specific associated term .

there is no separate term for "jqos - in - training," since that category encompasses the entire officer corps .

in the military's system , the designation of joint billets , published in a joint duty assignment list ( jdal ) , serves the dual purpose of meeting real - world goals and helping individuals achieve joint qualification .

so - called critical billets have significant prerequisites: they "require the incumbent to be previously trained , educated and experienced in joint matters," and incumbents must be jqos .

filling these billets with appropriately prepared personnel directly supports the conduct of joint business .

"standard" billets , in turn , are generally used to help the incumbents further improve their ability to work in a joint environment ; these billets may carry some prerequisites below the level of full joint qualification .

since its inception , the nspd program has wrestled with the respective roles of individuals and billets in making the system work .

in its original incarnation , the nspd program used the designation of national security professional billets to define the program's scope — occupying a designated billet made the occupant a program participant .

the nspd e.o .

established the nspd program for "professionals in national security positions. .

in 2010 , during the aborted revision of the nspd strategy and e.o. , program officials signaled their intention to narrow the substantive focus of the program from all national security matters to interagency collaboration on national security matters .

the new rules would require , officials noted , that designated "interagency" nsp positions involve not only a substantive focus on national security - related issues , but also regular , practical collaboration with partners from other agencies .

while that thinking would have changed the program's substantive focus , it would have left intact the premise of using designated billets to define participation in the program .

some stakeholders reportedly found this billet - based approach attractive because , in its apparent simplicity , it might require fewer resources for personnel management , and it might require less of participants , who are "in" by virtue of the seats they occupy .

others argued , however , that the original nspd program's use of billets to identify individual participants made the program extremely static and self - contained: other than occupying a designated billet , the program established no accession mechanism .

it did not make use of any broader "pool" of potential participants .

and it included no mechanism to leverage service in its designated billets to bring greater interagency awareness to broader communities in home agencies .

the early experience of the original nspd program with billet designation illustrates another potential source of confusion — the use of billets for two different purposes , identifying program participants and providing interagency rotational opportunities .

echoing the military's joint system , rotational assignments in the original nspd program were intended to take place outside an individual's home agency , or alternatively , on a dedicated interagency task force .

the nspd strategy called on the program's oversight body , the executive steering committee , "where appropriate," to "develop a formal mechanism ... for national security professionals to participate in rotational or temporary detail assignments. .

in turn , the nspd implementation plan , based on the strategy and approved in september 2008 , tasked each participating agency to identify the rotational opportunities — primarily in other agencies — that would be available to its own personnel .

in theory , it made intuitive sense that the "nsp billets" in agency x might be available as "rotational assignment billets" for personnel from agency y , since by definition those billets should require a national security focus in an interagency working environment .

in practice , one agency's nsp billets , and the rotational billets designated in that agency by other agencies , might conceivably have had little to no overlap , since the two sets of decisions were to be reserved to different agencies , rather than to an oversight body .

the approach of the original nspd program toward the use of billets for rotational assignments was quite different from the military's much more centralized joint system .

in that system , a single , integrated list of billets is recommended by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and approved by the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness .

practitioners with experience in the military's joint system suggest that interagency rotational systems might also require strong centralized oversight to ensure that the equities and requirements of all stake - holding agencies and individuals are met .

the 2011 revision of the nspd program drew a distinction from the outset between individuals and billets , by asking participating agencies to identify both individuals and positions for participation in its emergency management pilot effort .

still to be determined are the modalities for future accession into the revised nspd program , and the ways in which billets will be used to determine participation , help provide qualification , or both .

any interagency national security professional program , whether limited or quite ambitious in scope , includes multiple agencies by definition , and therefore requires some mechanism to coordinate their efforts .

at issue is how centralized — or de - centralized — this integration function ought to be .

the original nspd program was quite de - centralized .

the nspd executive order gave the executive steering committee a weak mandate: "to coordinate , to the maximum extent practicable," the nspd "programs and guidance issued by the heads of agencies , in order to ensure an integrated approach to such programs. .

the original esc and its supporting integration office did not enjoy formal tasking authority , and they did not control any resources .

instead , they served primarily to coordinate agency programs , activities , and promotion policies .

according to some officials , in practice , the original esc rarely enjoyed a veto over agency initiatives that appeared out of synch with nspd intent .

in the absence of dedicated funding for the program's central oversight apparatus , dod established and funded the nspd integration office to coordinate agency efforts to implement esc guidance .

but one challenge was that since dod had no formal "lead agency" role , practitioners in some other agencies interpreted dod's support for the nspd io as a thinly veiled attempt to steer the overall program .

the 2011 revitalized nspd program also appears to be based on a de - centralized premise .

the updated esc charter confirms the esc's weak mandate to "coordinate ... to the maximum extent possible. .

for the sake of comparison , dod's joint officer management program features much stronger oversight from the systemic level .

the secretary of defense , with the advice of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , is tasked to establish different levels of joint qualification , including education and joint experience criteria , to determine the number of officers who are joint qualified , and to establish career guidelines for officers to achieve joint qualification and for officers who have been so designated , including guidelines for selection , education , training , and types of duty assignments .

furthermore , the requirement of joint duty service and joint qualification as prerequisites for promotion to general or flag officer are stipulated by law , not left to the discretion of service rules or regulations .

on one hand , a strongly centralized system might have advantages in terms of forcing the system to work , and ensuring that all relevant policies and resource expenditures support the overall intent of the effort .

on the other hand , a more de - centralized approach might have the advantage of better preserving "wiggle room" for agencies with very different missions , roles in national security , and established career paths .

some observers have pointed out that , in any case , effective integration is typically a product of leadership as well as formal authorities .

creating a program and giving it a name does not necessarily ensure that it will function according to plan , let alone that it will achieve its stated objectives .

many observers suggest that in order for a complex , multi - agency program or system to be effective , it needs an incentive structure — for both agencies and individuals — that makes active participation more advantageous than benign neglect .

agency incentives are likely to be shaped significantly by the resources available to implement the initiative .

in theory , in a program designed to foster interagency communities , resources might be required to support new or expanded education and training programs , including faculty and staff , facilities , curriculum - development , and / or tuition at non - government institutions .

resources might also be required to support a centralized secretariat that coordinates and integrates program efforts .

the single greatest cost might be funding required to create and maintain a personnel "float" in civilian agencies , to backfill positions while personnel participate in education programs , training , or rotational tours in other agencies .

while the military builds sufficient numbers into its personnel systems to provide such backfills , to support the pursuit of joint qualification , most non - dod agencies do not have that luxury , so participation often means a zero - sum contest with "day job" requirements .

in the original nspd program , in the absence of dedicated funding to support agency participation , agencies were asked to take resources "out of hide" — that is , to reallocate resources to nspd from other programs .

many practitioners agreed that this construct created a strong incentive for agencies to limit the extent of their participation , including designating relatively low numbers of national security positions , and creatively reframing existing training , education and exchange opportunities as compliant with nspd intent , rather than crafting new , more optimal programs .

both the reinvigorated nspd 2.0 , and the related bill introduced in the 112 th congress , the interagency personnel rotation act of 2011 , clearly aim to strictly limit program costs .

clear advantages of relatively more robust resourcing might include ensuring the available of personnel "floats" to facilitate participation in program activities , and easing agency concerns about internal zero - sum competitions for resources and staff time .

the clear disadvantage of greater resourcing , in a sharply constrained fiscal environment , is the set of likely opportunity costs in the form of other activities that would go unfunded .

various observers and practitioners have proposed several ways in which the costs of an interagency community - building initiative might be minimized , for example: structuring educational opportunities in limited , recurrent blocks of time that allow participants to continue to do their day jobs — for example , several days per month , on the model of the state department's national security executive leadership seminar — rather than as year - long , full - time residential programs carefully engineering interagency rotational opportunities such that program participants simultaneously complete the program's requirement for rotational service and fully meet the needs of the position they temporarily occupy .

leveraging the many existing training opportunities currently provided by state , dod , and dhs , by making them available to nsp participants from other agencies .

regardless of the resources made available , agencies are likely to assign a higher priority to an initiative if it apparent that the effort enjoys strong support from senior leadership , first of all from the president .

such support might be indicated in publicly delivered remarks , or in the course of private consultations , or in other fora .

some practitioners note that the absence of any such attention , too , is likely to be noted by agencies , and suggest that this was the fate of the original nspd program after the president signed the initial executive order .

individuals might be motivated to participate in an interagency community development program by any number of different incentives , such as: enhanced promotion potential ; improved prospects for choice assignments ; a reasonable degree of confidence that the program rules , on which they may base some career decisions , will not change too dramatically over time ; or direct guidance from leadership to participate , regardless of specific perceived benefits .

based in part on the readily available analogue of the military's joint qualification system , interagency community advocates have focused on the linkage between the completion of program requirements and opportunities for senior - level service .

in the joint system , military services maintain jurisdiction for individual promotion decisions , but legislation ensures that there are jointness prerequisites for individual promotion to flag officer .

in addition , also based on congressional mandate , the secretary of defense , with advice from cjcs , plays an oversight role , helping ensure that overall promotion rates support the goal of jointness .

in a public address in 2004 , then - vice chairman general pace suggested that the officer corps did get the message: "congress said , 'if you want to get promoted , you've got to be joint. .

i was a lieutenant colonel in 1986 .

i said , 'i want to get promoted ! .

what is joint , and how do i get some ? ' .

in contrast , in the original nspd program , departments and agencies retained full jurisdiction over individual promotion decisions , with neither legislation nor a systemic - level mechanism to help ensure that "interagency qualification" would be given due consideration in the agencies' promotion decision - making processes .

at the same time , nspd officials have indicated that individual interest in participation in interagency - related activities — such as longer - term education , short - term training courses , one - day seminars — has remained consistently strong over the past several years , despite fluctuations in the perceived "operational tempo" of the nspd program itself .

some observers suggest that the key empirical events of the last 10 years — hurricane katrina , the wars in iraq and afghanistan — which led to the policy conclusion that more effective interagency integration was be necessary , have also directly spurred many individual practitioners to seek the interagency tools they believe they need in order to perform more effectively .

some observers have argued that a program designed to foster national security professionals might benefit from an array of flexible recruitment tools .

the nspd national strategy tasked departments and agencies to "reform employment practices to encourage the hiring of personnel with a variety of experiences from within and outside the federal government," but the original nspd program apparently took little action on that front .

one proposed approach would be further developing programs at the college - level , including providing support for national security studies programs , and creating opportunities for student internships in national security fields .

other tools might include allowing greater flexibility for mid - career recruitment of specialists from outside the u.s. government , and facilitating transfers in and out of government jobs including providing incentives for valuable experience gained .

the opportunity to bring nsps into government at all career stages , it is argued , might improve effectiveness by introducing needed expertise , and might also improve efficiency by taking advantage of education , training , and experience achieved outside government ( and not at government expense ) .

potential drawbacks of utilizing flexible recruiting tools could include higher costs required to manage a more complex human capital system ; and potential reduced incentives for agencies to make nsp opportunities available to their "permanent" personnel — and to pay for those opportunities — if they can , instead , hire personnel who already have equivalent qualifications .

whether or not legislation is enacted , congress has the option of exercising oversight over both existing and possible future initiatives aimed at fostering a community of interagency national security professionals in the executive branch .

some observers have wondered how congress might best exercise such oversight , given that , by definition , such programs involve multiple agencies with multiple corresponding committees of jurisdiction on the hill .

one option might be oversight of program implementation in individual agencies by their respective committees of jurisdiction .

this approach might help ensure such agencies' individual compliance , but it would not provide an assessment of a program's overall impact or of the consistency of its application .

another option might be oversight by the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , and the house committee on government oversight and reform .

these committees have oversight responsibility for executive branch organization and the federal civil service , although they neither authorize nor appropriate .

in the broader debates concerning national security reform for the interagency , some participants have suggested yet another option — the creation of house and senate select committees on national security , which would have oversight responsibility for holistic issues and initiatives that cross agency boundaries .

one expected challenge might be institutional resistance to any diminution of the prerogatives of existing committees .

in addition , determining the appropriate boundaries for "national security" might prove as challenging on the hill as it has proven to be within the executive branch and in broader policy community debates .

