continuing appropriations acts , commonly known as continuing resolutions ( crs ) , have been an integral component of the annual appropriations process for decades .

when congress and the president do not reach final decisions about one or more regular appropriations acts , they often negotiate and enact a cr .

two general types of crs are used .

an "interim" cr provides agencies with stopgap funding for a period of time until final appropriations decisions are made , or until enactment of another interim cr .

a "full - year" cr , by contrast , provides final funding amounts for the remainder of a fiscal year in lieu of one or more regular appropriations acts .

if interim or full - year appropriations are not enacted , a funding gap and government shutdown occur for affected agencies and programs .

this report analyzes potential impacts that interim crs might have on agency operations .

crs have become commonplace in the federal budget process , with crs occurring in some form in all but four years out of a 61-year period from fy1952 to fy2012 .

however , studies of the impacts of interim crs are quite limited aside from mostly anecdotal accounts .

furthermore , interim crs are formulated differently from time to time , and may affect highly diverse agencies and programs in varying ways .

without in - depth analysis of specific circumstances , therefore , it may be difficult , or in many cases impossible , to make generalizable statements about the impacts of interim crs on particular agencies at particular times .

it is possible , however , to identify some potential impacts of interim crs prospectively , utilizing several approaches .

this report uses three .

first , the report discusses how an interim cr's provisions and requirements may impact directly upon an agency , based on what an interim cr explicitly is formulated to do .

second , the report analyzes office of management and budget ( omb ) and agency documents that have provided guidance or requirements for how an agency should navigate through periods of interim crs .

the existence and emphases of such documents may suggest the occurrence , or at least the risk of occurrence , of interim cr - related impacts on the operations of agencies .

third , the report analyzes brief mentions of claims of impact contained in government accountability office ( gao ) reports from a 20-year span , typically made by agency officials without independent gao validation .

in addition , a gao report from 2009 provided the results of a case study , in which gao evaluated the effects of interim crs on six federal bureau - size agencies .

the possibility that an interim cr might cause impacts may raise corresponding issues for congress .

one issue relates to the fact that the president , omb , and agencies may play roles in the formulation , negotiation , and implementation of interim crs .

an implication of this involvement is that congress typically does not solely determine what the impacts of an interim cr will be , because the president , omb , and agencies may influence the nature and extent of potential impacts .

another issue relates to interim crs as a product of high - stakes negotiation over major issues of fiscal and substantive policy .

claims about positive or negative impacts of crs may be used to argue that changes in cr language , budget priorities , or the budget process are necessary .

the ways in which such claims are framed , however , typically rest on implicit assumptions about what would have happened in the absence of the interim cr ( eg , a government shutdown , on one hand , or agreement on final appropriations , on the other ) .

viewing interim crs as a product of high - stakes negotiation helps explain why differing assumptions sometimes may be plausible .

given the nature of budget deliberations and the potential for changes in the budget process to change power relationships among participants , the ways in which the impact of an interim cr may be framed might be viewed as similarly significant .

the report's final section discusses these and other topics .

full - year crs occur less frequently than interim crs .

historically , the term "cr" has been used in different ways in the context of providing full - year appropriations amounts .

in any case , full - year crs effectively become regular appropriations acts for the fiscal year , complete with the certainty of final funding decisions .

for this reason , full - year crs generally are not discussed in this report .

usage of the term "continuing resolution," like other budget terms , has varied sometimes to reflect evolving budget practices .

this section of the report discusses several aspects of how interim crs typically have been formulated and implemented , in order to identify how interim crs may impact upon the operations of agencies .

some related terms also are highlighted , in order to distinguish between interim cr - related provisions and other provisions that sometimes appear in the context of crs .

as discussed above , provisions and requirements of interim crs may impact upon the operations of agencies in many ways .

if impacts were viewed in more general categories , an interim cr might be characterized as having several types of potential impacts on the operations of agencies .

other sources of information may suggest more specific ways in which an interim cr prospectively might impact , or retrospectively may have impacted , upon an agency's operations .

the possibility of interim cr - related impacts may raise issues for congress .

notably , claims of impacts may generate arguments that changes in crs , budget priorities , or the budget process are necessary to avoid or modify some purported impacts .

given the high - stakes nature of budget deliberations and the potential for changes in the budget process to change power relationships among its participants , claims of impact might be viewed as similarly significant .

if congress considers pursuing an interim cr , the subject of anomalies usually arises .

anomalies may be included among the provisions of an interim cr in order to modify or eliminate potential impacts of an interim cr .

depending upon how an anomaly is structured , an anomaly may cause the funding for an agency to behave exactly like it would under a regular appropriations act , at least for the duration of the cr .

however , anomalies frequently are not included for many programs in interim crs .

a potential explanation for the rarity of anomalies is that the granting of too many anomalies would reduce incentives to negotiate seriously and come to final agreement on full - year appropriations .

another , related explanation is that an anomaly could , in effect , constitute a concession during negotiations and reduce a stakeholder's leverage , unless there were consensus the anomaly was necessary .

in situations when an agency expects a higher level of funding in an upcoming fiscal year , or if an agency needs authority to undertake new projects or activities in order to achieve a task , the agency could request an anomaly .

for executive agencies , such a request can be made through the president and omb , if the white house elected to propose the anomaly to congress .

alternatively , an agency might make such a request directly to congress , either formally or informally .

an agency could make a request to the president or omb but have the request denied .

in such a case , an agency might or might not informally make its views or concerns known directly to congress .

the possibility of direct communications between agencies and congress has sometimes been a contentious issue in congressional - executive relations , both generally and in a budgetary context .

in a budgetary context , most executive agencies have operated under statutory requirements since 1921 that require budget - related requests to be submitted through the president , as noted below .

the president , omb , and agencies often are involved with congress in the process of formulating , negotiating , and implementing interim crs .

therefore , they may influence the potential impacts of interim crs .

some influence may come from the bargaining power of the president .

another source of influence , however , may stem from the issue of access to information from agencies and views of their employees .

because agencies and their employees are "in the trenches" implementing and formulating public policy , they may have considerable access to information about the potential impacts of an interim cr .

congress may not always have ready access to such information .

under the budget and accounting act , 1921 , as amended and recodified , congress has prohibited most executive branch officers and employees from submitting budget requests to congress , except through the president and subject to presidential modification .

however , congress has statutorily exempted some agencies from such restrictions through provisions sometimes referred to as "bypass authority. .

omb regulations governing the budget process also direct agency officers and employees to "avoid volunteering" opinions to members and committees of congress that are inconsistent with administration policies .

therefore , the extent to which information and views flow from agencies and their personnel to congress about the potential impacts of interim crs , both formally and informally , may vary .

a claim about the impact of an interim cr may rest on implicit assumptions .

the term "impact" implies a comparison between the described change that is caused by an interim cr , on one hand , and an assumption about "what otherwise would have happened" without the interim cr , on the other hand .

the assumption or estimation of "what otherwise would have happened" is crucial for any claim about the impact of an interim cr .

for example , suppose an observer characterized an interim cr as having caused a high level of uncertainty for an agency's program planning or execution .

this statement claims that the cr caused the stated impact ( i.e. , high level of uncertainty ) , which otherwise would not have happened , all other things being equal .

in this case , the claim of impact implicitly assumes a scenario under which , in the absence of an interim cr , full - year appropriations would have been passed by october 1 .

passage of full - year appropriations , in turn , would have eliminated uncertainty about funding .

however , it also may be plausible that absence of a cr might instead cause an impasse in negotiations and a government shutdown , rather than enactment of full - year appropriations , rendering the observer's claim contestable .

the reverse argument may also be made .

suppose another observer characterized an interim cr as having prevented a government shutdown .

however , it may be plausible that absence of a cr might cause negotiators to reach agreement on full - year appropriations , thereby avoiding the shutdown without need for a cr .

claims of an impact or lack of impact can be debatable , therefore , and become subjects of scrutiny or even controversy .

some observers , for example , might question the validity of an assumption .

an observer might be partly motivated to raise such objections , because claims of impacts may generate an argument that a change in budget priorities or the budget process is necessary in order to avoid or modify some purported impact .

viewing interim crs as a product of negotiation , in which parties may come to the table with different underlying values and assumptions , helps explain why differing perspectives may be plausible .

it is conceivable , for example , that participants in a negotiation may hold opposite perspectives about the impact of an interim cr in a particular situation .

each participant's views might be based both on his or her aspirations for the outcome of negotiations and the negotiating leverage the participant believes he or she could wield .

in other words , because there typically is some uncertainty about the outcome of any negotiation , contrasting viewpoints may be plausible until decisions are made .

