many u.s. policymakers have viewed the resumption of all u.s. beef exports to south korea — the third - largest u.s. beef export market in 2003 — as essential , but not necessarily all that is required , before the u.s. congress considers legislation to implement the korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus fta ) .

to facilitate this , in april 2008 the u.s. and korean governments agreed on ( but subsequently modified ) the rules that korea will apply to u.s. beef imports to ensure that shipments meet korean human health standards .

south korea's aim was to improve the prospects so that the bush administration would send the korus fta to congress before the end of 2008 .

this did not occur , however , for the reasons explained below .

in late june 2010 , president obama directed u.s. trade officials to work with their south korean counterparts to resolve outstanding matters related to u.s. beef access and the agreement's automobile provisions by the time he met with south korean president lee in seoul in mid - november 2010 .

in the talks that led to the december 2010 supplemental agreement , the issue of full u.s. beef access was not resolved because of its political sensitivity in south korea .

this report describes the beef provisions in the korus fta and the separate bilateral protocols that the united states has negotiated in order to secure the lifting of south korea's ban on u.s. beef imports , imposed after the discovery of mad cow disease in late 2003 .

it also summarizes u.s. beef export developments to this key market before and after the ban and since these protocols took effect and lays out the outstanding issues on u.s. beef access that have been raised in advance of expected congressional consideration of the korus fta this fall .

while the u.s. beef industry and u.s. policymakers welcomed the april deal , korean tv coverage of the issue and internet - spread rumors that questioned the safety of u.s. beef sparked large candlelight vigils in south korea to protest the beef agreement .

opposition political parties soon joined these protests , advocating that the government renegotiate or scrap the agreement .

farmers also called for the national assembly ( korea's parliament ) to reject the korus fta when considered during a special session later in may 2008 .

opponents argued that the korean government moved too quickly to strike a deal , and did not secure enough safeguards against the dangers of mad cow disease .

these developments , in turn , adversely affected the political standing of korea's new president and his government's inability to pursue his ruling political party's policy agenda — one item being the approval by the national assembly of the korus fta .

to respond to mounting public pressure , the korean government twice pursued talks with the united states to find ways to defuse public concerns without "renegotiating" the beef agreement .

a may 19 , 2008 , exchange of letters affirms that south korea has the right under international agreements to take steps to protect its citizens from health and safety risks ( i.e. , suspend u.s. beef imports if a bse - infected cow is discovered in the united states ) .

on june 21 , 2008 , both governments confirmed a "voluntary private sector" arrangement that allows korean firms to import u.s. beef produced only from cattle less than 30 months old , and announced some changes to the april agreement .

although south korea secured the application of the under - 30-months - old criterion with respect to u.s. beef imports , the oie in contrast makes no age distinction in assessing the risk level of cattle slaughtered for beef .

instead , its recommendation is that importing countries , to prevent the introduction of bse , ensure that beef of any age meet certain conditions , such as the removal of those cattle tissues suspected of transmitting bse and the implementation of effective safety controls for cattle feed .

though the united states for some time has argued that it is in full compliance with oie guidelines , u.s. negotiators appear to have had little choice but to compromise in a way that would allow some sales to resume .

publicly , both countries presented this arrangement as a transitional step to improve korean consumer confidence in u.s. beef , and did not commit to any timetable for revisiting this matter .

some members of congress responded cautiously or skeptically to the "voluntary commercial agreement," noting that it changes the april protocol by allowing korea to reject u.s. beef from cattle over 30 months of age , disregards international standards that affirm the safety of all u.s. beef regardless of age , and sets an "unfortunate" or "dangerous" precedent in negotiating the terms of beef access into other countries .

south korean government officials portrayed the june - negotiated arrangement as going far to allay public concerns about the safety of u.s. beef .

however , the political fallout of the controversy continued through the summer of 2008 .

three high - ranking korean officials ( including the agriculture minister and his deputy ) resigned because of their involvement in the agreement's negotiations .

the korean national assembly completed an inconclusive parliamentary inquiry on the strategy and process followed by two successive governments on negotiating this agreement .

it also debated a controversial livestock sector bill that includes a ban on beef imports from any country whenever a new case of a bse - infected cattle is discovered .

as adopted , the measure reportedly exempts the bilateral beef agreement reached with the united states from being subject to its coverage .

although the protests against the beef agreement subsided in the summer of 2008 , they have had lingering effects on u.s. - south korean relations because of their erosion of president lee's standing early in his term and because of their possible effects on the ratification of the korus fta .

the protests damaged the president's political strength and boosted the position of opposition groups that had been demoralized before the candlelight vigils .

in the late summer of 2008 , lee's approval ratings recovered from the trough they entered at the height of the protests , but for months they remained at a low level ( in the mid - 20% to 30% range ) .

thus , the uproar over lee's decisions on beef effectively ruined his "honeymoon" period to push many of his policy goals .

it was not until late 2009 that lee's poll numbers began to exceed 40% fairly consistently .

perhaps most significantly for the united states , the beef protests meant that president lee has lacked the political capital and / or the political will to completely eliminate the beef ban , as the obama administration and various members of congress have asked .

perhaps for this reason , the remnants of korea's beef ban were not linked to the 2010 korus fta negotiations that culminated in the december 3 supplementary agreement .

the domestic uproar in korea following the april 2008 beef deal had increased the perception among many south koreans that lee was overly solicitous toward the united states .

had he compromised again on the beef issue in late 2010 , it is possible that securing passage of the korus fta through korea's national assembly would have become more difficult .

concluding the 2008 bilateral beef agreement was considered a significant step forward in the u.s. government's 4½ - year effort to regain access to south korea's lucrative beef market for the u.s. cattle and beef processing sectors .

it was intended to resolve an issue that some members of congress said stood in the way of congressional consideration of legislation to implement the korus fta .

while korea's lifting of the beef ban was widely regarded as a politically necessary condition for the bush administration to send this trade agreement to congress , it has since become a less sufficient condition , because of other opposition that was expressed against the korus fta , particularly over its auto trade provisions .

following president obama's announcement on june 26 , 2010 , of his intent to present implementing legislation for the korus fta to congress "in the few months" after the november 2010 g - 20 meeting in seoul , the administration consulted with congress and stakeholders on how to resolve outstanding matters related to access for u.s. beef in the south korean market .

discussions focused on what would constitute full access for u.s. beef , as spelled out in the signed april 2008 protocol .

the issue that u.s. negotiators faced was how and at what pace the united states could get south korea to accept all u.s. beef , irrespective of the age of the cattle when slaughtered .

however , the requirement that u.s. exporters remove specified risk materials suspected of causing mad cow disease during processing was not at issue .

at the same time , u.s. negotiators faced pressure to balance this objective with similar negotiating initiatives to expand upon or regain market access for u.s. beef in such important asian markets as japan , taiwan , and china .

administration officials continued to state that their objective is "to eventually secure full market access for u.s. beef " that reflects south korea's recognition that the united states meets oie standards .

however , public statements made by u.s. trade representative ron kirk and then - usda under secretary jim miller raised the possibility that the administration might not require achieving this objective before the korus fta is sent to congress , and instead might seek to secure commitments from south korea to move in steps toward that goal .

senator baucus , chairman of the senate finance committee ( which will consider the administration's bill to approve and implement the korus fta ) stated that he wanted access for all u.s. beef and cuts from cattle of any age as a condition for considering and ratifying the korus fta .

his statements stressed that the oie has determined that u.s. beef from cattle irrespective of age can be safely imported , and that 60 countries now recognize this in accepting u.s. beef .

baucus has continued to reiterate that his objective is to see that u.s. beef access in all markets be based on internationally accepted rules , arguing that allowing an fta partner such as korea not to follow oie guidelines would set a "dangerous precedent. .

another approach laid out by senator grassley , then ranking member of the finance committee , would be to pursue efforts to secure additional beef access "in parallel to the fta approval process. .

much of the u.s. cattle and beef industry wants to see the korus fta take effect soon in order to realize the benefit of the reduction in south korea's 40% tariff on beef muscle cut imports .

the industry points to the fact that u.s. beef exports continue to grow , and that the u.s. market share of korea's beef import market is increasing .

industry spokesmen expressed some apprehension about losing these gains , if u.s. negotiators push south korea too quickly for full beef access .

their stance likely reflected a desire to avoid a repeat of the street protests that occurred in may 2008 , to preclude a public and official perception that the united states is again pressuring south korea for a policy change .

the u.s. beef sector would view such a scenario as undercutting the aggressive market promotion efforts made since late 2008 to assure korean consumers of the safety of u.s. beef , which it views as having contributed to the increase in u.s. beef exports .

others also have mentioned that securing tariff reductions for u.s. beef would provide a price advantage with respect to beef supplied by australia and new zealand , which are seeking similar tariff cuts as both countries negotiate ftas with south korea .

in the negotiations on the supplemental agreement concluded on december 3 , 2010 , the beef issue reportedly received little discussion as both sides focused on revising the auto provisions .

president obama , in discussing this outcome the next day , indicated that the united states will continue to work toward "ensuring full access for u.s. beef to the korean market. .

congressional reaction to this outcome was mixed .

senator baucus expressed "deep disappointment" that the supplemental deal "fails to address korea's significant barriers to american beef exports. .

he stated his commitment to "right this wrong" and to work with the administration to ensure that ranchers "are not left behind. .

two months later , senator baucus said he will not support the korus fta until south korea opens up its beef market .

a few other senators , though concerned with the lack of progress on beef , viewed the deal positively and welcomed the prospect for considering the korus fta in 2011 .

meat industry groups again expressed support for this trade agreement that they expect over time will significantly increase their exports to south korea , and urged congress to move quickly to ratify it .

beef interests , also supportive , called for continued efforts to secure full market access .

memories of the size and intensity of the 2008 anti - beef agreement protests in south korea appear to have directly influenced the position taken on the beef issue by korean negotiators .

reflecting this political sensitivity , they reportedly rejected any discussion on this matter in the negotiations held in early november leading up to the summit between presidents obama and lee and in the final talks leading to the supplemental agreement .

their position was that this issue "did not fall under" the fta concluded in 2007 .

since then , south korea's trade minister has confirmed that there will be no more discussions on ending the age limits of u.s. cattle slaughtered for beef .

this stance was affirmed by south korea's ambassador to washington in late january 2011 .

seeking to move closer toward submitting the korus fta to congress for consideration , the administration on may 4 , 2011 , announced two measures it will take on the u.s. beef access issue .

in a letter to senator baucus , ustr's ron kirk committed to request consultations with south korea on the "full implementation" of the protocol ( eg , opening korea's market "to all ages and all cuts of u.s. beef" ) as soon as this trade agreement takes effect .

the letter referenced one specific provision stipulating that bilateral consultations on the interpretation or application of the protocol's terms "shall be held within seven days" of a request .

usda also announced a $1 million award to the u.s. meat export federation ( usmef ) to be used in 2011 to promote u.s. beef sales in south korea , and its intent to consider future funding requests from the usmef to implement its planned five - year market beef promotion strategy in this key market .

senator baucus welcomed both steps , stating that he will support the korus fta and will work with the administration on a package of trade measures that includes all three ftas and renewing trade adjustment assistance and trade preference programs .

