both the capitol rotunda and the capitol grounds have been used as the setting for a variety of events , ranging from memorial ceremonies and the reception of foreign dignitaries to the presentation of awards and the hosting of public competitions .

this report identifies and categorizes uses of the capitol rotunda and capitol grounds authorized by concurrent resolutions since the 101 st congress .

in most cases , use of the capitol rotunda requires a concurrent resolution agreed to by both the house and senate .

a concurrent resolution for the use of the rotunda typically identifies the event and date for which use is authorized .

often , the resolution also directs physical preparations to be carried out "in accordance with such conditions as the architect of the capitol may provide. .

use of the capitol grounds requires either the passage of a concurrent resolution or permit approval from the capitol police .

events that entail the use of the west front steps of the capitol , electricity on the lower west terrace of the capitol , require more than 24 hours from setup to cleanup , require vehicles on capitol grounds for setup , or will have a large number of members in attendance typically require a concurrent resolution .

all other events can typically be issued permits by the u.s. capitol police .

upon the completion and opening of the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) during the 110 th congress , emancipation hall of the cvc became available for use in the same manner as the rotunda and capitol grounds .

use of emancipation hall requires the passage of a resolution agreed to by both houses of congress authorizing its use .

additionally , congress has provided an ongoing authorization for holiday concerts on capitol grounds .

held on memorial day , the fourth of july , and labor day , these concerts feature the national symphony orchestra and are free and open to the public .

upon the completion and opening of the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) during the 110 th congress , emancipation hall of the cvc became available for use in the same manner as the rotunda and capitol grounds .

use of emancipation hall requires the passage of a resolution agreed to by both houses of congress authorizing its use .

the first concurrent resolution authorizing the use of emancipation hall was agreed to during the 110 th congress .

it provided for the use of the hall in connection with "ceremonies and activities held in connection with the opening of the capitol visitor center to the public. .

consistent with previous resolutions authorizing the use of the rotunda , the concurrent resolution for the use of emancipation hall directed that physical preparations be carried out "in accordance with such conditions as the architect of the capitol may provide. .

a database search was conducted using congress.gov for the 110 th through the 115 th congresses ( 2007-2017 ) .

the search was conducted by running a query using the subject term "emancipation hall. .

the uses of emancipation hall identified here are restricted to those authorized by concurrent resolution of the house and senate .

the search identified a total 43 concurrent resolutions that were agreed to by the house and senate .

between the 110 th congress and the 115 th congress , the house and senate agreed to between 1 and 15 concurrent resolutions per congress that authorized the use of emancipation hall .

table 5 reports the total number of resolutions agreed to in each congress .

appendix c , which lists the results of the database search , provides the following information for each concurrent resolution: the congress in which the resolution was introduced , the resolution number , and the subject of the resolution .

concurrent resolutions authorizing the use of emancipation hall can be divided into one of four categories: ( 1 ) commemoration ceremonies , ( 2 ) congressional gold medal ceremonies , ( 3 ) artwork unveilings , and ( 4 ) presidential inauguration activities .

the following sections provide a brief explanation of each category with examples of the types of activities concurrent resolutions provided for on emancipation hall .

table 6 contains the number of concurrent resolution agreed to by congress since 2007 by category .

the largest percentage of concurrent resolutions agreed to ( 46.5% ) authorized the use of emancipation hall for commemoration ceremonies .

for example , concurrent resolutions authorizing the use of emancipation hall are agreed to annually to celebrate the birthday of king kamehameha .

ceremonies to award congressional gold medals account for 32.6% of the concurrent resolutions for the use of emancipation hall agreed to since the 110 th congress .

these award ceremonies include presentations of congressional gold medals to women air force service pilots , the montford point marines , and native american code talkers .

since the 110 th congress , 11.6% of concurrent resolutions have been agreed to for the use of emancipation hall for ceremonies to unveil artwork .

these have included unveiling ceremonies for a bust of sojourner truth , a marker acknowledging the role of slaves in building the capitol , a statue of frederick douglass , and the american prisoners of war / missing in action ( pow / mia ) chair of honor .

since emancipation hall opened in the middle of the 110 th congress , congress has also utilized the space for inaugural activities .

just like the resolutions authorizing the use of the rotunda for inaugural activities , these resolutions have authorized the joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies to use emancipation hall "in connection with the proceedings and ceremonies conducted for the inauguration of the president - elect and the vice president - elect of the united states. .

since the 110 th congress , 9.3% of concurrent resolutions have authorized the use of the rotunda for inaugural activities .

appendix a. concurrent resolutions for the use of the capitol rotunda appendix b. concurrent resolutions for the use of the capitol grounds appendix c. concurrent resolutions agreed to for the use of emancipation hal .

