in 1997 , in response to increasing claims against european insurance companies operating in the united states , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) formed a working group on holocaust insurance claims to reach out to holocaust victims and their heirs to better determine the scope of the problem , and to initiate a dialogue with european insurers about how to resolve the issue of unpaid claims .

a series of often emotional and contentious meetings between holocaust survivors and their heirs , insurance regulators , and insurance companies over the course of the next year resulted in a joint decision to form an independent international commission to resolve unpaid claims .

in august 1998 , the naic , six european insurers ( allianz , axa , basler , generali , winterhur , and zurich ) , the claims conference , the world jewish restitution organization ( wjro ) , and the state of israel signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) establishing an international commission tasked both with identifying holocaust victims who had purchased insurance policies from 1920-1945 , and administering the repayment of these policies .

members of the international commission on holocaust era insurance claims ( icheic ) — chaired by former u.s. secretary of state lawrence eagleburger — agreed that icheic's claims process would adhere to the following principles: claimants would not be charged to file a claim ; icheic would evaluate claims based on relaxed standards of proof — given that a significant number of potential claimants did not possess policy documentation , claimants would not be required to name a specific insurance company or provide documentation of an insurance policy ; and icheic and participating insurance companies would conduct archival research in order to establish a database of potential policyholders against which to match submitted claims .

although the u.s. government did not have a voting representative on icheic's board , state insurance regulators were officially represented through the naic , and a state department representative was granted observer status .

in all , the board consisted of chairman eagleburger and 12 members: three naic representatives ; two representatives of jewish organizations ( the claims conference and wjro ) ; a representative of the state of israel ; and six representatives of european insurers and insurance regulators .

icheic's claims process opened in 2000 and closed in march 2007 .

in total , it facilitated the payment of just over $300 million to 47,353 of about 90,000 claimants .

of the almost 48,000 recipients of icheic payments , close to 31,300 received one - time "humanitarian" payments of $1,000 ( see table 1 for detailed breakdown ) .

observers and others involved in the process report that rejected claims were often determined to have been honored under previous compensation agreements , or were determined to fall short of the relaxed standards established by the commission .

some critics contend that icheic applied these standards inconsistently , rejecting what were often valid claims .

in addition to the funds paid to individual claimants , icheic allocated $190 million to a "humanitarian fund" overseen by the claims conference .

following claims conference guidelines , 80% of this fund was designated to be spent on assistance to holocaust survivors , and 20% on holocaust education and remembrance .

despite icheic's closure , some european insurers , including members of the german insurance association ( gesamtverband der deutschen versicherungswirtschaft , or gdv ) and the italian company generali , say they are continuing to accept and honor legitimate claims based on icheic's relaxed standards of proof .

according to the gdv , since icheic's closure , the association has received inquiries regarding 49 insurance policies .

of these , 12 were determined to be eligible for compensation , while 37 were determined to have been previously paid or compensated for .

in total , gdv companies say they have paid $119,731 for claims brought since march 20 , 2007 .

ultimately , icheic received a total of about $550 million from participating insurers .

of this , $350 million was secured from german companies through a watershed 2000 executive agreement between the united states and germany , in which german government and industry committed $5 billion to compensate former forced and slave laborers and other victims of nazi crimes .

$100 million came from italian insurer generali , and the remaining $100 million from a u.s. - austrian executive agreement , and bilateral agreements between icheic and swiss insurers , and the dutch , and belgian insurance associations .

in addition to the five insurers on icheic's board , icheic secured the participation of 75 other companies through bilateral agreements with the german , dutch , and belgian insurance associations .

at or about the same time that international efforts to deal with reparations and claims issues — i.e. , beginning in the 1990's — litigation involving holocaust - era - issued insurance began in earnest in the united states .

the claims , brought by either survivors of the holocaust , or the relatives or estates of non - survivors , challenged the nonpayment or alleged erroneous payment of the proceeds of that insurance .

as has been discussed , there was a great deal of dissatisfaction both with the intention to substitute an icheic claims process for the rights of individuals to bring their own actions in court , and with the operation of icheic itself .

initially , the plaintiffs in those cases fared well .

for example , when the defendant insurers sought to have the cases that had been transferred to and consolidated in the united states district court for southern new york dismissed from that forum in favor of adjudication before icheic , the district court refused .

"icheic is not an adequate alternative forum for the litigation of plaintiffs' claims," the court explained , pointing out that despite icheic's inclusion of the state of israel and "certain u.s. state insurance regulators," the commission remained , at bottom , a "privately funded , non - profit entity ... created ... among six european insurance companies ... with certain nongovernmental jewish organizations.... " the court was persuaded neither by the fact that icheic was assumed to be a recognized agent for purposes of carrying out the obligations assumed in the german foundation agreement , nor by the presumption of both the german government and the various german insurance companies against whom there were holocaust - era - related claims pending in u.s. courts that the conclusion of the foundation agreement would bring "legal closure" to those claims .

nor , seemingly , was the court convinced that the arrangement amounted to a valid u.s. foreign policy concern — despite the obligation of the department of justice to: file a "statement of interest" in all cases involving holocaust - era claims against german companies , expressing the view that the german foundation is the exclusive forum for those claims and that dismissal is required in keeping with the foreign policy interests of the united states .

along with the lawsuits filed by holocaust survivors and their heirs , states enacted statutes intended to aid survivors in recovering the proceeds of insurance policies written during the war .

among the statutory provisions most prominently litigated in the lower federal courts were those from florida and california creating disclosure obligations for insurance companies wishing to do business in those states .

the litigation produced diametrically opposite results .

the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit struck down florida's holocaust victims' insurance act on the grounds that it violated the due process rights of insurers because it effectively regulated transactions that had insufficient connection to florida to provide the requisite jurisdictional foundation .

on the other hand , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit upheld california's holocaust victim insurance relief act ( hvira ) , disagreeing with the district court's reasoning that the statute impermissibly interfered with the national conduct of foreign affairs , but initially continuing the trial court's injunction against enforcement of the provision .

the supreme court resolved the conflict between the circuits in american insurance association v. garamendi .

in that case , the court struck down the california statute at issue in the ninth circuit case .

as noted above , hvira was enacted to impose disclosure requirements on insurance companies related to certain policies the companies may have written in europe during wwii .

the court found the statute impermissibly impinged on the president's conduct of foreign affairs .

the issue before the court was "whether hvira interferes with the national government's conduct of foreign relations. .

a five - justice majority concluded that the statute did so interfere , given the "'concern for uniformity in this country's dealings with foreign nations' that animated the constitution's allocation of the foreign relations power to the national government in the first place. .

the california law was , therefore , held to be preempted by the executive's negotiated agreements with foreign governments , and the ruling of the ninth circuit was , accordingly , reversed .

the dissenters would have relied instead on the fact that the german foundation agreement "makes clear ... that 'the united states does not suggest that its policy interests concerning the foundation in themselves provide an independent legal basis for dismissal. .

as a result of garamendi , the same court that refused to dismiss the cases before it in favor of adjudication before icheic , believed it had no choice but to grant the insurers' motion to dismiss all of the claims before it .

a settlement for many of the claims was eventually reached during the appeal of the dismissal .

on january 15 , 2010 , the second circuit upheld the dismissal of the remaining non - class action claims .

the supreme court denied certiorari in the case , effectively ending the litigation .

litigation regarding the settlement of the consolidated class action against generali also appears to have ended .

the second circuit affirmed the dismissal of the remaining complaints against generali in 2010 .

following the second circuit decision , the plaintiffs appealed to the supreme court , but the supreme court declined to hear the case .

the plaintiffs' opportunities to appeal have therefore been exhausted .

since the late 1990s , members of congress have taken a variety of steps seeking to ensure that holocaust survivors and their heirs receive fair compensation for unpaid insurance policies .

a series of hearings before the house committee on government reform between 2001 and 2003 focused specifically on icheic and on proposed legislation intended to create alternative and more effective means for holocaust survivors and their heirs to resolve unpaid insurance claims .

as highlighted above , the house committee's initial exposure of perceived problems with icheic appears to have played a significant role in spurring subsequent reforms to icheic's claims process .

however , the supreme court's 2003 garamendi ruling effectively halted initiatives in several u.s. states that were also supported by some members of congress .

these initiatives would have required european insurers to disclose policyholder records , and provided holocaust survivors and their heirs a cause of action to pursue claims substantiated by these records .

in garamendi , the supreme court cited an absence of congressional action to counter or amend administration support of icheic .

specifically , the failure of numerous legislative proposals aimed at amending administration policy was considered evidence that "congress has done nothing to express disapproval of the president's policy ... " and that furthermore , "given the president's independent authority 'in the areas of foreign policy and national security , ... congressional silence is not to be equated with congressional disapproval.' .

bills introduced in the 108 th – 111 th congresses would have altered u.s. policy by requiring european insurers to disclose policyholder lists from the holocaust era and by strengthening survivors' ability to bring cases against european insurers in u.s. courts .

none of these bills was enacted , and each was opposed by the administration , which continued to consider icheic the exclusive vehicle for resolving holocaust - era insurance claims .

icheic's closure , and growing concern about the well - being of survivors of an average age of over 80 years old , have reignited congressional interest in resolving outstanding holocaust - era insurance claims .

many observers agree , however , that congress may be limited in its ability to ensure increased compensation for outstanding claims .

many of those involved in past efforts to resolve claims — including representatives of the u.s. administration , the naic , european governments , the claims conference , and the state of israel — appear to agree that icheic , in spite of its faults , offered individuals a better vehicle than any previously available mechanisms .

given that european insurers' participation in icheic was based on the condition that icheic would be an exclusive mechanism to resolve claims , many argue that it could be difficult to obtain additional financial commitments from these companies .

furthermore , some argue that significant obstacles could prevent successful litigation against european insurers .

these include difficulties in establishing both the existence and present - day value of policies .

as outlined below , legislation introduced in the 112 th congress by representative ileana ros - lehtinen and senator bill nelson would provide a congressionally sanctioned vehicle for the pursuit of claims by individuals who would otherwise have been prevented from doing so by virtue of the supreme court's 2003 garamendi decision .

on march 2 , 2011 , representative ros - lehtinen introduced h.r .

890 , the holocaust insurance accountability act of 2011 .

the bill would allow persons who are beneficiaries of insurance policies purchased during the time period surrounding world war ii in nazi germany , or areas controlled by that government , as well as their heirs or successors in interest , to bring suit in federal court to "recover proceeds due under the covered policy or otherwise enforce any rights under the covered policy. .

section 3 of the bill would also essentially reverse garamendi .

it states explicitly that the state laws that create a cause of action related to covered policies against insurance companies ( i.e. , the laws at issue in the class action lawsuits , described above ) and the state laws imposing disclosure requirements on insurance companies relating to covered policies ( i.e. , the california statute at issue in garamendi ) shall not be preempted by executive agreements or executive foreign policy .

the bill would apply to all suits brought for recovery related to covered policies , including the lawsuits that have been dismissed as a result of garamendi .

this retroactive application would allow plaintiffs in those lawsuits to sue again .

the bill would further prohibit the use of federal funds to file the statements of interest that the department of justice has filed in the civil suits against insurance companies that have stated that it is the policy of the united states to resolve all claims through icheic .

on march 7 , 2012 , the house committee on foreign affairs ordered h.r .

890 to be reported by unanimous consent .

the bill has also been referred to the house judiciary committee .

companion legislation was introduced in the senate , by senator bill nelson , on the same day as h.r .

890 .

s. 466 , entitled the restorations of legal rights for claimants under holocaust - era insurance policies act of 2011 , would also grant beneficiaries of covered policies , defined similarly as above , the right to sue in a civil action against insurers and their successors in interest to enforce any rights under the policy .

unlike h.r .

890 , s. 466 would provide for treble damages if a court finds that an insurer acted in bad faith .

the bill would apply to all covered policies , including lawsuits that have been dismissed as a result of garamendi .

this retroactive application would allow plaintiffs in those lawsuits to sue again .

similar to h.r .

890 , s. 466 would reverse garamendi by explicitly stating that the state laws that create a cause of action related to covered policies against insurance companies ( i.e. , the laws at issue in the class action lawsuits , described above ) and the state laws imposing disclosure requirements on insurance companies relating to covered policies ( i.e. , the california statute at issue in garamendi ) shall not be preempted by executive agreements or executive foreign policy .

the senate bill , again like the house bill , would further prohibit the use of federal funds to file the statements of interest that the department of justice has filed in the civil suits against insurance companies that have stated that it is the policy of the united states to resolve all claims through icheic .

in general , those supportive of the proposed legislation argue that both the icheic process and previous agreements between the united states and european governments failed to compensate a significant number of holocaust survivors and / or their heirs and beneficiaries .

some of those critical of icheic and supportive of the proposed legislation acknowledge that the standards of proof placed on a claimant in a u.s. court of law would likely be far more stringent than those exercised by icheic .

however , they argue that in light of icheic's closure , the courts represent one of the few , if not the only , remaining avenues by which to pursue claims .

furthermore , a strong sense of distrust regarding icheic's application of its relaxed standards of proof , and of insurers' thoroughness in searching their records , appears to have increased hope that public disclosure of holocaust - era records could lead to substantive claims .

opponents of the proposed legislation often argue that by effectively reversing past commitments made by the u.s. government — specifically , the granting of legal peace to german companies — the bills could damage future cooperation with european governments on other holocaust compensation and restitution issues .

in addition , some u.s. and german government representatives suggest that the credibility of future u.s. and german commitments to european companies in these areas could be called into question .

specifically , german government officials have indicated that new lawsuits against german companies would likely limit their ability to gain future financial commitments from these and other german companies in holocaust compensation and restitution cases .

critics also argue that given the legal and historical complexities of substantiating the existence and value of holocaust - era insurance policies , it is unlikely that claims would be satisfactorily settled in u.s. courts .

they argue that it was precisely this fact that drove u.s. insurance regulators , the claims conference , and others to back icheic .

in addition , given the likelihood of legal challenges from european insurers , some question whether claims could ever be resolved within a reasonable period of time .

