congress and president bush devoted considerable attention to how the nation can best prevent , prepare for , respond to , and recover from natural and human - caused disasters .

events such as the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and hurricane katrina of august 2005 , prompted congress and president bush to require the development of a plan for how government at all levels , and also the nongovernmental sector , should respond to all types of emergencies and disasters .

pursuant to statutory requirements and presidential directives , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , an agency located within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , issued such a plan in march 2008 with publication of the national response framework ( nrf ) .

the nrf is the end product of a long history .

prior to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the structure for responding to emergencies and disasters resided in at least 5 separate plans .

with the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) and sections 15 and 16 of the homeland security presidential directive 5 ( hereafter hspd - 5 ) , congress and president bush directed dhs to consolidate these plans and create a single , overarching , integrated , and coordinated national response plan , and to develop a national incident management system ( nims ) .

these efforts culminated in the initial national response plan ( nrp ) on october 10 , 2003 , followed by the release of nims on march 1 , 2004 .

in august 2005 , hurricane katrina made landfall , followed shortly by hurricanes rita and wilma .

a number of studies on the responses to these hurricanes found shortcomings in the nrp itself and its implementation .

dhs made the decision to revise the nrp partially based on these reports .

the revision of the nrp was also due to mandates in the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-295 , hereafter the post - katrina act ) .

in january 2008 , dhs issued the nrf , which took effect in march 2008 .

since that time , the nrf has been the nation's core response document , providing a structure for the response to such disasters as the 2008 midwest floods and california wildfires , as well as hurricanes gustav and ike .

this report reviews selected statutory provisions related to the nrf and provides an overview of the document .

it discusses some of the reasons the bush administration revised the nrp , as well as some controversial aspects of the review process .

the report also summarizes selected pending legislation concerning national response planning and concludes with a discussion of issues over which congress might consider exercising oversight .

authority for the creation of the nrf emanates from numerous sources .

fema has described the nrf as being guided by 15 "principal emergency authorities," 48 other statutory authorities and regulations , 17 executive orders , and 20 presidential directives .

this report does not offer an exhaustive overview of these authorities .

rather , this section discusses some of the major authorities establishing the nrf , legislation that shaped the development of the nrf , and legislation tied to congressional oversight .

in response to directives from congress and the president , the bush administration issued the nrf to establish a new approach to coordinate federal and nonfederal entities in times of emergencies and major disasters .

the nrf does appear to respond to some of the challenges identified by congress and others .

the document is more concise , has less jargon , and has made an attempt to clarify roles and responsibilities .

additionally , anecdotal reports following gustav and ike indicate the coordination of emergency activities among federal , state , and local governments has improved .

on the other hand , parts of the nrf may have retained some of the problems associated with the nrp .

the nrf still contains the pfo arrangement , terrorism and natural disasters are not given equal treatment , and nonfederal stakeholder input appears to be lacking .

some may contend that insufficient implementation studies have been conducted on the nrf to assess its efficacy .

others might argue the nrf has yet to be tested by a large - scale disaster to form a clear picture of its effectiveness ; the only way to find out whether the nrf is an improvement over the nrp may be to subject it to a major catastrophe comparable to hurricanes andrew or katrina .

