the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) provided $26.89 billion for interior , environment , and related agencies .

another $500.0 million in emergency funds for wildfires was provided in p.l .

110-116 , for an fy2008 total of $27.39 billion .

the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus .

it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs .

the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , national gallery of art , national endowment for the arts , and national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies .

in recent years , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve .

however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe .

at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies .

this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa .

since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles providing funding .

this report is organized along these lines .

accordingly , the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities .

a fourth section of this report discusses cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency .

entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , everglades restoration ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

for each such agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes proposed or enacted for fy2008 that are likely to be of interest to congress .

we also address related policy issues that occurred in the context of considering appropriations legislation .

presenting such information in summary form is a challenge given that budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration .

similarly , funding bills and accompanying reports contain numerous line items and discussions of programs and issues .

this report contains final fy2007 enacted levels for agencies , programs , and activities .

the administration did not use these figures as the basis of comparison in agency budget submissions for fy2008 , because agencies were being funded under a short - term continuing resolution at the time of those submissions .

accordingly , the fy2007 figures used throughout this report will differ in many cases from those contained in the fy2008 agency budget submissions .

a further difference is that fy2007 figures in this report include supplemental funding .

final fy2007 funding levels , as contained in this report , were determined by the agencies under the provisions of p.l .

110-5 , the revised continuing appropriations resolution for fy2007 .

continuing funding was needed to fund agency operations and activities because congress did not enact a regular fy2007 appropriations bill for interior , environment , and related agencies .

p.l .

110-5 provided funds though september 30 , 2007 , which was the rest of the fiscal year .

it continued funds at the fy2006 account level , except where otherwise specified .

the law required that agencies and departments submit an allocation of funds below the account level , for example for programs and activities , to the house and senate appropriations committees .

the submissions were due within 30 days of enactment ( march 17 , 2007 ) .

in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes permanent mandatory budget authorities .

increases and decreases generally are calculated on comparisons between the funding levels enacted for fy2008 and those enacted for fy2007 and requested by the president for fy2008 .

the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report .

other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record .

in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not add to the precise totals provided due to rounding .

epa was established in 1970 to consolidate federal pollution control responsibilities that had been divided among several federal agencies .

epa's responsibilities grew significantly as congress enacted an increasing number of environmental laws as well as major amendments to these statutes .

among the agency's primary responsibilities are the regulation of air quality , water quality , pesticides , and toxic substances ; the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes ; and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

epa also awards grants to assist state and local governments in controlling pollution .

epa's funding over time generally has reflected an increase in overall appropriations to fulfill a rising number of statutory responsibilities .

without adjusting for inflation , the agency's appropriation has risen from about $1.0 billion when the agency was established in fy1970 to a high of $8.4 billion in fy2004 .

title ii of division f of the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act provided a total of $7.46 billion for epa .

although the enacted funding level is an increase above the president's request of $7.20 billion , it is less than the $8.09 billion that the house had proposed , the $7.77 billion that the senate appropriations committee had recommended , and the $7.73 billion that congress had enacted for fy2007 .

congress allocated the fy2008 appropriation of $7.46 billion for epa among eight statutory accounts that fund the agency , and specified statutory funding levels within these accounts for a relatively small number of selected programs and activities .

as in past years , congress specified funding for most of epa's programs and activities within the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2008 law , rather than in the statute itself .

among individual agency programs and activities , there were varying decreases and increases in funding when comparing the fy2008 enacted appropriation to the amounts that the house , senate appropriations committee , and president had supported for fy2008 , and congress had enacted for fy2007 .

for some activities , funding enacted for fy2008 remained relatively flat , compared to the originally proposed amounts and the prior year appropriation .

table 15 lists the eight statutory accounts that currently fund epa .

the table specifies the amounts within each of these accounts that congress enacted for fy2008 , and compares these amounts to the initial recommendations of the house and the senate appropriations committee , the president's request , and the amounts that congress enacted for fy2007 .

the house had proposed to establish a ninth account in fy2008 to fund a new commission on climate change adaptation and mitigation , which is reflected in the following table .

the fy2008 law did not include a new account for the house's proposed commission , nor did the law appear to provide funding in any of the agency's other accounts for this purpose .

however , the law did provide funding for many other activities related to climate change .

the lwcf ( 16 u.s.c .

§§460 l - 4 , et seq. ) .

is authorized at $900 million annually through fy2015 .

however , these funds may not be spent without an appropriation .

the lwcf is used for three purposes .

first , the four principal federal land management agencies — bureau of land management , fish and wildlife service , national park service , and forest service — draw primarily on the lwcf to acquire lands .

the sections on each of those agencies earlier in this report identify funding levels and other details for their land acquisition activities .

second , the lwcf funds acquisition and recreational development by state and local governments through a grant program administered by the nps , sometimes referred to as stateside funding .

third , administrations have requested , and congress has appropriated , money from the lwcf to fund some related activities .

this third use is relatively recent , starting with the fy1998 appropriation .

programs funded have varied from year to year .

most of the appropriations for federal acquisitions generally are specified for management units , such as a specific national wildlife refuge .

the appropriations for the state grant program and other related activities rarely have been specified for individual projects or areas .

from fy1965 through fy2007 , about $30 billion was credited to the lwcf .

about half that amount — $15 billion — has been appropriated .

throughout history , annual appropriations from lwcf have fluctuated considerably .

until fy1998 , lwcf funding did not exceed $400 million , except from fy1977-fy1980 , when funding was between $509 million and $805 million .

in fy1998 , lwcf appropriations exceeded the authorized level for the first time , spiking to $969 million from the fy1997 level of $159 million .

a record level of funding was provided in fy2001 , when appropriations reached $1.0 billion , partly in response to president clinton's lands legacy initiative and some interest in increased and more certain funding for lwcf .

for fy2008 , the total lwcf appropriation was $255.5 million .

this was a $110.4 million ( 30% ) reduction from fy2007 ( $365.9 million ) , as well as a $123.2 million ( 33% ) reduction from the administration's request for fy2008 ( $378.7 million ) .

both the house and the senate appropriations committee had supported decreases from the fy2007 level .

the senate committee had recommended $292.9 million for lwcf , while the house had approved $261.9 million .

the fy2008 law included an additional $7.7 million for land appraisals related to federal land acquisitions , but it did not appear that this amount would be derived from lwcf .

the fy2008 appropriated level included funds for federal land acquisition , the stateside program , and other purposes as described below .

for land acquisition , the fy2008 law contained $129.7 million for land acquisition , a $16.7 million ( 15% ) increase over fy2007 ( $113.0 million ) and more than double the administration's request for fy2008 .

the house and the senate appropriations committee had supported higher funding .

the house had approved $155.6 million , with an additional $7.8 million for land appraisals apparently not derived from lwcf .

the senate appropriations committee had recommended $152.2 million for land acquisition , and $7.8 million for land appraisals with funds derived from lwcf .

for the five fiscal years ending in fy2001 , appropriations for federal land acquisition had more than tripled , rising from $136.6 million in fy1996 to $453.4 million in fy2001 .

the appropriation for land acquisition has subsequently declined to roughly the fy1996 level — to $129.7 million for fy2008 .

the decline may be attributed in part to increased interest in allocating funding to lands already in federal ownership , reducing the federal budget deficit , and funding other national priorities , such as the war on terrorism .

table 21 shows recent funding for lwcf .

for fy2008 , $24.6 million was appropriated for the stateside program , comprised of $23.1 million for new stateside grants and $1.5 million for administrative expenses .

that figure was $5.0 million ( 17% ) less than appropriated for fy2007 ( $29.6 million ) .

the senate appropriations committee had recommended funding at about the fy2007 level ( $30.0 million ) , but the house had approved a substantial increase ( to $50.0 million ) .

the administration did not request funds for new stateside grants in fy2008 , as in fy2006 and fy2007 .

the administration has asserted that state and local governments have alternative sources of funding for parkland acquisition and development , and that the current program could not adequately measure performance or demonstrate results .

as for fy2006 and fy2007 , for fy2008 the administration did request a relatively small amount of funding for administration of the grant program .

specifically , the administration supported $1.4 million for program administration in fy2008 , but in a break from the past , the administration asked that the funds be derived from the national recreation and preservation line item rather than the lwcf .

seeking to eliminate funds for new stateside grants is not a new phenomenon .

for example , for several years the clinton administration proposed eliminating stateside funding , and congress concurred .

in the last seven years , stateside funding has fallen 83% , from $143.9 million in fy2002 to $24.6 million in fy2007 .

through provisions of the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) , a portion of revenues from certain ocs leasing will be provided in future years ( without further appropriation ) to the stateside grant program .

no money is expected to be available under these provisions for fy2008 .

an estimated $6.4 million in revenue from such ocs leasing is projected to be collected in fy2008 and disbursed to the stateside program in fy2009 .

preliminary estimates of disbursements through fy2017 total approximately $21.8 million , according to the doi budget office .

the fy2008 law provided funding from lwcf for two other programs , for a total of $101.1 million .

of the total , $48.9 million was provided for cooperative endangered species grants and $52.2 million was for the forest legacy program .

the senate appropriations committee also had sought funding for these two programs from lwcf , for a total of $102.9 million .

the house had approved funding only for forest legacy — $56.3 million .

by contrast , the president had sought funding for 11 other programs in the department of the interior and the forest service .

the largest portion of the president's fy2008 lwcf request — $313.1 million — was for these other programs .

the fy2008 appropriation for other programs was less than half that provided in fy2007 , when $215.9 million was appropriated for five programs .

table 21 shows that for each year from fy2004 through fy2007 , the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation was for other programs .

this changed in fy2008 , when the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation was for land acquisition .

the administration had requested a much larger amount than was appropriated for each year for other programs , for instance requesting $440.6 million for fy2007 .

table 22 shows the other programs for which congress appropriated funds for fy2006 through fy2008 .

in some cases , congress provided these programs with non - lwcf funding , which is not reflected here .

crs report rl33531 , land and water conservation fund: overview , funding history , and current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

altered natural flows of water by a series of canals , levees , and pumping stations , combined with agricultural and urban development , are thought to be the leading causes of environmental deterioration in south florida .

in 1996 , congress authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to create a comprehensive plan to restore , protect , and preserve the entire south florida ecosystem , which includes the everglades ( p.l .

104-303 ) .

a portion of this plan , the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) , was completed in 1999 , and provides for federal involvement in restoring the ecosystem .

congress authorized the corps to implement cerp in title iv of the water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 , p.l .

106-541 ) .

while restoration activities in the south florida ecosystem are conducted under several federal laws , wrda 2000 is considered the seminal law for everglades restoration .

 ( see crs report rs20702 , south florida ecosystem restoration and the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

appropriations for restoration projects in the south florida ecosystem have been provided to various agencies as part of several annual appropriations bills .

the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws have provided funds to several doi agencies for restoration projects .

specifically , doi conducts cerp and non - cerp activities in southern florida through the national park service , fish and wildlife service , u.s. geological survey , and bureau of indian affairs .

 ( for more on everglades funding , see crs report rs22048 , everglades restoration: the federal role in funding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

from fy1993 to fy2007 , federal appropriations for projects and services related to the restoration of the south florida ecosystem exceeded $2.8 billion , and state funding topped $4.8 billion .

the average annual federal cost for restoration activities in southern florida in the next 10 years is expected to be approximately $286 million per year .

for fy2008 , the administration requested $235.0 million for doi and the corps for restoration efforts in the everglades .

it is generally not possible to identify specific funding amounts for everglades restoration activities from enacted appropriations laws and their explanatory statements .

accordingly , they are not reflected for fy2008 in table 23 .

however , funds for the modified water deliveries project were specified in the fy2008 law , and are discussed below .

other specific funding amounts for everglades restoration under doi will be available in the fy2009 administration's request .

the fy2008 law provided $14.3 million for mod waters under nps construction .

this project is designed to improve water deliveries to everglades national park , and to the extent possible , restore the natural hydrological conditions within the park .

the completion of this project is required prior to the construction of certain projects under cerp .

for fy2007 , $13.3 million in new funds were appropriated for mod waters .

for fy2008 , $14.5 million was requested and provided in the house and the senate committee bills .

the house appropriations committee noted that it intends to monitor the progress of restoring the everglades and requested that the doi submit a progress report on the status of restoration ( h.rept .

110-187 , p. 44 ) .

the fy2008 law provided funds for mod waters under nps construction only if matching amounts are appropriated for similar purposes to the corps .

further , the fy2008 law prohibited funding for mod waters under nps construction if any corps matching funds for mod waters become unavailable , including funds for design analysis of the tamiami trail ( a component of mod waters ) .

funds for evaluating tamiami trail were provided to the corps in the fy2008 law .

also , the law provided $9.8 million to the corps for mod waters .

because this is less than the level appropriated to the nps , it is uncertain if nps funding will be decreased to match corps funding .

a funding issue receiving broad attention is the level of commitment by the federal government to implement restoration activities in the everglades .

some observers measure commitment by the frequency and number of projects authorized under cerp , and the appropriations they receive .

because no restoration projects have been authorized since wrda 2000 , these observers are concerned that federal commitment to cerp implementation is waning .

others assert that the federal commitment will be measurable by the amount of federal funding for construction , expected when the first projects break ground in the next few years .

some state and federal officials contend that federal funding will increase compared to state funding as cerp projects move beyond design into construction .

still others question whether the federal government should maintain the current level of funding , or increase its commitment , because of escalating costs and project delays .

since fy2004 , interior appropriations laws have conditioned funding for the modified water deliveries project based on meeting state water quality standards .

funds appropriated in the laws and any prior laws for mod waters would be provided unless administrators of four federal departments / agencies ( secretary of the interior , secretary of the army , administrator of the epa , and the attorney general ) indicate in their joint report that water entering the a.r.m .

loxahatchee national wildlife refuge and everglades national park do not meet state water quality standards , and the house and senate committees on appropriations respond in writing disapproving the further expenditure of funds .

these provisions were enacted based on concerns regarding a florida state law ( chapter 2003-12 , enacted on may 20 , 2003 ) that amended the everglades forever act of 1994 ( florida statutes §373.4592 ) by authorizing a new plan to mitigate phosphorus pollution in the everglades .

phosphorus is one of the primary water pollutants in the everglades and a primary cause for ecosystem degradation .

provisions conditioning funds on the achievement of water quality standards are included in the fy2008 appropriations law .

for further information on everglades restoration , see the website of the south florida ecosystem restoration program at http: / / www.sfrestore.org and the website of the corps of engineers at http: / / www.evergladesplan.org / .

crs report rs22048 , everglades restoration: the federal role in funding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21331 , everglades restoration: modified water deliveries project , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs20702 , south florida ecosystem restoration and the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

