international food aid is the united states' major response to reducing global hunger .

in 2006 , the united states provided $2.1 billion ( table 1 ) of such assistance which paid for the delivery and distribution of more than 3 million metric tons of u.s. agricultural commodities .

the united states provided food aid to 65 countries in 2006 , more than half of them in sub - saharan africa .

most of the food aid — $1.2 billion or 57% — was provided as emergency food aid .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , which administers the largest u.s. food aid program , estimates that from 50-70 million people benefit from u.s. food aid programs annually .

much of u.s. assistance is provided through the world food program ( wfp ) , the united nations' food aid agency .

the united states is the largest contributor to wfp .

its contribution in 2006 was $1.125 billion or about 40% of total donor contributions to wfp that year .

on average since 1995 , the united states has provided wfp with about 50% of the food aid it distributes .

legislative authority for international food aid programs in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) expires in 2007 .

the 110 th congress has been considering the extension and reauthorization of food aid programs as part of the 2007 farm bill .

the senate passed its version of the 2007 farm bill on december 14 , 2007 .

the house passed its version of the farm bill ( h.r .

2419 ) on july 27 , 2007 .

the united states provides u.s. commodities as international food aid through eight programs .

these are titles i , ii , and iii of the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 ( p.l .

83-48 ) , known collectively as p.l .

480 ; the food for progress program ; the john ogonowski farmer - to - farmer program ; the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program ; section 416 ( b ) of the agricultural act of 1949 ; and the bill emerson humanitarian trust ( beht ) .

in congress , the food aid reauthorization debate has focused on p.l .

480 title ii commodity donations and food aid for school feeding and child nutrition in the mcgovern - dole food aid program .

the administration and two groups of pvos and cooperatives that carry out food aid programs have made recommendations for legislative changes in farm bill authorized food aid programs .

in addition , two identical legislative proposals for increased funding of the mcgovern - dole international school feeding and child nutrition program were introduced in the 110 th congress , h.r .

1616 ( mcgovern ) and s. 946 ( durbin ) .

h.r .

1616 attracted more than 100 co - sponsors .

title iii of the house - and senate - passed versions of the farm bill reauthorizes and amends u.s. international food aid programs .

title iii in both bills extends these programs through 2012 .

the bills selectively incorporate recommendations of the pvos / cooperatives for food aid program changes .

the house bill disregards the one food aid recommendation from the administration to allocate up to a quarter of p.l .

480 title ii funds to local or regional purchase of emergency .

however , the senate bill includes authority to use p.l .

480 title ii funds for a pilot program for local or regional purchase of emergency food aid commodities .

the house bill extends the p.l .

480 food aid programs through 2012 , and authorizes discretionary appropriations for p.l .

480 title ii humanitarian donations of $2.5 billion annually .

if appropriated , that amount would represent a very substantial increase over the $1.2 billion appropriated annually in recent years .

an increase in appropriations for p.l .

480 title ii of this magnitude was initially a provision in h.r .

2488 , the house foreign affairs committee - reported version of the farm bill's trade title .

h.r .

2419 also extends the minimum tonnage requirements of title ii through 2012 .

the house - passed bill also increases the amount of cash that could be allocated to pvos to pay for project - related expenses .

h.r .

2419 increases section 202 ( e ) cash support to not less than 7% nor more than 12% of funds available to title ii .

this amount is more than proposed by the alliance for food aid but considerably less than proposed by the group of four pvos that sought substantially increased cash resources for food aid development projects .

the senate version of title iii also reauthorizes p.l .

480 food aid programs and extends the minimum tonnage requirements for title ii through 2012 .

in contrast to h.r .

2419 , the senate bill does not increase the appropriation for title ii .

the senate bill increases the share of title ii funds that can be used to cover project - related expenses of pvos to not less than 7.5% .

the house - passed bill stipulates that of the funds made available for title ii , not less than $450 million annually be made available for nonemergency ( development ) food aid .

this minimum level of non - emergency assistance could not be waived unless requested by the administrator of usaid , followed by enactment of a law approving the administrator's request .

the senate bill establishes a minimum of $600 million for development food aid that also would not be subject to waivers .

following passage of the house - passed bill , the office of management and budget , in its statement of administrative policy , said that it strongly opposed this provision because it would deprive the administration of the ability to quickly waive it in an emergency .

omb estimated that this house bill provision would result in a $100 million decrease in emergency food aid .

the house - passed farm bill disregarded the administration's sole farm bill food aid proposal for legislative authority to allocate up to 25% of title ii funds to local or regional purchase of commodities for emergency relief .

h.r .

2419 did , however , stipulate that $40 million of the funds appropriated for usaid's international disaster and famine assistance ( idfa ) program be allocated to famine prevention and relief .

idfa funds can be used to purchase commodities locally or regionally .

in contrast , the senate farm bill establishes a pilot program , authorized at $25 million annually , to explore how local or regional procurement of food in emergency situations might be used .

both bills extend provision for the food aid consultative group ( facg ) , which reviews the effectiveness of rules for the title ii program .

the group is composed of representatives of usaid , usda , pvos , recipient countries , and u.s. agricultural producers .

the senate bill adds a representative of the maritime transport sector to the facg .

both bills extend the authorization for usaid grants for stockpiling and distributing shelf - stable foods .

the house bill increases the amount that can be appropriated from $3 million to $7 million ; the senate bill increases the amount to $8 million .

in addition , the bills extend authorization for the use of p.l .

480 funds for prepositioning of agricultural commodities overseas .

the house bill increases from not more than $2 million to not more than $8 million the amount that can be spent to store commodities overseas .

the senate bill increases the amount that can be spent on overseas storage to not more than $4 million .

both bills reauthorize the ogonowski farmer - to - farmer program .

the house bill provides a floor level of annual funding for the farmer - to - farmer program of $10 million or not less than 0.5% , whichever is greater , and authorizes appropriations of $10 million for sub - saharan african and caribbean basin countries and $5 million for all other countries .

the senate bill reauthorizes the program without change .

the house bill reauthorizes , without change , the food for progress program through fy2012 .

the senate bill also reauthorizes food for progress and increases the amount that can be spent on transporting commodities from $40 million annually to $48 million for fy2008-fy2010 .

in reauthorizing the mcgovern - dole program , the house - passed bill changes its funding basis from discretionary to mandatory and increases spending from $140 million in fy2009 to $300 million in fy2012 .

funding for mcgovern - dole under the 2002 farm bill has averaged around $97 million annually .

these provisions for the mcgovern - dole program — substantially increasing funding and making it mandatory — are virtually identical to those included in h.r .

1616 ( mcgovern ) and s. 946 ( durbin ) , introduced earlier in the 110 th congress .

mandatory mcgovern - dole spending would be offset by changes in the federal crop insurance program .

the senate bill reauthorizes the food for education program , but calls for $300 million in discretionary appropriations to fund the program .

the senate bill reauthorizes the trust through 2012 and makes a number of changes in the statute governing the emerson trust .

the bill specifies that the trust can be held as a combination of commodities and cash , not to exceed the equivalent of 4 million tons of commodities .

commodities held in the trust can be exchanged for funds available under p.l .

480 title ii , the mcgovern - dole program , or the market , if the secretary of agriculture determines that such sales will not disrupt the domestic market .

the bill allows the funds held in the trust to be invested in low - risk short - term securities or instruments .

the house - passed farm bill extended authority for the emerson trust through fy2012 without other modifications .

