the useful properties of thousands of chemicals provide a wide range of benefits to american consumers and bolster the u.s. economy .

however , experiences with certain chemicals — for example , ddt , leaded gasoline , and asbestos — have shown that adverse effects sometimes occur when there is insufficient information about potential toxicity and widespread human or wildlife exposure .

various statutes have been enacted to gather information about chemicals produced , sold , and used in the united states and to control associated risks .

this report focuses on the toxic substances control act of 1976 ( tsca ) .

recent legal , scientific , and technological developments are prompting legislators to reexamine tsca ; it has been the subject of a hearing and several legislative proposals in the 111 th congress .

this is a change from the situation that prevailed in most of the previous 30 years since it was enacted ; during that time , most legislators demonstrated little interest in amending the law , despite the long - standing concerns of a few members .

the basic tsca title i provisions concerning chemical regulation have never been amended .

companion bills in the 110 th congress , h.r .

6100 and s. 3040 , would have amended tsca to significantly reshape u.s. chemical assessment and management .

this report provides an overview of basic tsca provisions , briefly examines the history of tsca implementation by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and describes the legal , scientific , and technological developments that are being used to provide support to calls for tsca reform .

federal legislation to regulate u.s. commerce in chemical substances was originally proposed in 1971 by the president's council on environmental quality ( ceq ) .

its report , "toxic substances," defined a need for comprehensive legislation to identify and control chemicals whose manufacture , processing , distribution , use , and / or disposal was potentially dangerous , and not adequately regulated under other environmental statutes .

the house and senate each passed bills in both the 92 nd and 93 rd congresses ( in 1972 and 1973 , respectively ) , but controversies over the scope of chemical screening prior to commercial production and distribution , level of costs , and the relationship to other regulatory laws stalled final action .

episodes of environmental contamination — including contamination of the hudson river and other waterways by polychlorinated biphenyls ( pcbs ) , the threat of stratospheric ozone depletion from chlorofluorocarbon ( cfc ) emissions , and contamination of agricultural produce by polybrominated biphenyls ( pbbs ) in the state of michigan — together with more exact estimates of the costs of imposing toxic substances controls , opened the way for final passage of the legislation .

president ford signed tsca into law on october 11 , 1976 .

title i contains the original , general provisions of tsca , which are the subject of this report .

epa efforts to implement tsca include ( 1 ) developing and collecting data relevant to risk assessment of chemicals under tsca sections 4 and 8 , and ( 2 ) regulating chemicals that pose an unreasonable risk under tsca sections 5 or 6 in a manner that does not unduly oppress innovation and commerce .

this section summarizes available information relevant to epa performance under tsca so that readers might have an objective basis for evaluating statements of opinion regarding its effectiveness .

few legislators have expressed much interest in tsca during its 30-year history: congress has held few oversight hearings on its implementation , and the basic tsca provisions in title i have never been amended .

however , recent legal , scientific , and technological developments appear to have increased legislative interest and are discussed below .

recent congressional and administrative initiatives that address the purported weaknesses of tsca also are summarized .

it is widely agreed that the regulation of chemicals in u.s. commerce should be based on sound science , cost - benefit analysis , and relative risks , that stakeholders should be involved in developing and evaluating risk - reduction measures , and that chemicals posing unreasonable risks to the environment or public health should be adequately controlled .

congress enacted the toxic substances control act in 1976 to generate scientific information needed for chemical risk assessment , and to regulate chemicals in a way that would balance public health and environmental risks with economic costs and benefits .

analysts and policy makers currently are evaluating tsca performance over the past 30 years and considering how the law is likely to perform in the future .

some analysts , and most in the regulated community , believe that generally tsca has performed as intended , and they support tsca in its current form , although most admit it needs minor adjustments .

they praise tsca as a flexible , efficient , and effective limit to over - regulation .

other policy analysts and legal commentators want to amend tsca , because they think that it has not accomplished the tasks laid out for it by congress and is unlikely to do better in the future , especially given recent and emerging changes in science and technology .

some would like tsca amendments that would reduce risk from exposure to existing and emerging chemical hazards through greater restriction of chemical uses .

the available evidence indicates that epa has had limited success using tsca to gather information about new chemicals , but has demonstrated creativity and expertise in making use of available information to categorize such chemicals based on hazard potential , thereby reducing risks potentially associated with exposure to chemicals entering u.s. commerce .

the agency has had some success in gathering information about existing chemicals , but has regulated only a handful .

based on a lack of expressed concern by stakeholders and the competitive strength of the u.s. chemical industry , epa also appears to have avoided imposing a regulatory burden that unduly oppresses innovation and commerce .

whether the amount of chemical regulation in the united states adequately controls unreasonable risks is a key policy question .

however , it is clear that a few chemicals posed risks that congress found unreasonable and tsca ( title i ) failed to control: congress amended tsca on four occasions to control risks associated with asbestos , lead , elemental mercury , and radon .

some remain dissatisfied with tsca .

for example , in the 110 th congress , s. 742 , as reported by the senate committee on environment and public works , and h.r .

6903 would have banned many asbestos - containing materials .

numerous states also have acted to control risks from chemicals that are not regulated under tsca .

in addition , many nations have joined together to regulate persistent , organic , pollutants and persistent , bioaccumulative toxic substances in ways that the united states cannot under the current provisions of tsca .

the european union adopted a new law , reach , that takes a different approach to the regulation of chemicals , eliminating the distinction between new and existing chemicals and requiring manufacturers to identify hazards and manage risks for all uses of their chemicals .

multinational companies , therefore , may have to comply with multiple , possibly redundant or conflicting regulations .

even if one concludes that tsca has performed successfully in the past , it may be reasonable to question the adequacy of a 1976 chemical law in the light of 30 years of scientific and technological advances .

in particular , nanotechnology and gmo advances pose new challenges that many feel require clarified and possibly augmented authority under tsca , to protect human health and the environment .

in 1991 , the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit vacated and remanded an epa rule promulgated under section 6 that prohibited the manufacture , importation , processing , and distribution of asbestos in almost all products .

the substantive heart of the corrosion proof decision was its conclusion that epa had insufficiently justified its ban .

this conclusion was based on two grounds .

first , the court said that epa failed to give adequate weight to section 6 ( a ) insistence that the regulatory approach chosen by epa be the "least burdensome" to achieve the agency - determined acceptable level of ( non - zero ) risk .

epa's burden was especially difficult here , because the court noted that in imposing an asbestos ban , epa chose the most burdensome of the options afforded by section 6 ( a ) .

by analyzing only two scenarios — the ban and no tsca regulation at all — the court held that epa failed to show , as tsca requires , that there was not some intermediate regulation that would achieve the acceptable risk level .

"[t]he proper course for the epa to follow is to consider each regulatory option , beginning with the least burdensome , and the costs and benefits of regulation under each option. .

only such an exercise assures that the agency has not skipped a less - burdensome alternative .

second , the court said epa also must present a stronger case for a ban of products for which substitutes are not now available ( as describes some of the asbestos products covered by the ban here ) , than of products for which substitutes are available .

this it did not do .

as to asbestos products for which substitutes are now available , epa declined to consider the harm from a probable substitute's increased use , even where it is a known carcinogen , the court added .

thus , epa cannot assure that its ban will increase workplace safety , depriving the ban of a reasonable basis .

to be sure , epa need not seek out and test every possible substitute , but where interested parties introduce evidence showing the toxicity or decreased safety of probable substitutes , epa must consider the comparative toxic costs of each — that is , whether its chosen section 6 ( a ) option is increasing workplace safety at all .

as another facet of this insufficient evidence issue , the court determined that epa failed to consider adequately the costs imposed by its ban .

under section 6 ( a ) , epa may regulate only to address "unreasonable risk" — that is , whether "the severity of the injury that may result from the product , factored by the likelihood of the injury , offsets the harm the regulation itself imposes upon manufacturers and consumers. .

the high costs imposed on industry by the asbestos ban , compared to the small number of lives predicted to be saved , suggested to the court that epa could not have given the former serious consideration .

finally , the court examined both the failure to examine intermediate options ( first ground above ) and the insufficiency of evidence ( second ground above ) as these issues affected specific asbestos products covered by the ban , spelling out the deficiencies in greater detail .

for example , in the case of friction products , epa failed to study the effects of non - asbestos brakes on automotive safety , despite evidence that non - asbestos brakes could increase the number of highway fatalities .

