honduras , a central american nation of 9.1 million people , faces significant domestic challenges .

democratic institutions are fragile , current economic growth rates and social policies are insufficient to reduce widespread poverty , and the country continues to experience some of the highest violent crime rates in the world .

these interrelated challenges have produced periodic instability in honduras and have contributed to relatively high levels of displacement and emigration in recent years .

although the honduran government has taken some steps intended to address these deep - seated issues , many analysts maintain that honduras lacks the institutions and resources necessary to do so on its own .

u.s. policymakers have devoted more attention to honduras and its central american neighbors since 2014 , when large flows of migrants and asylum - seekers from the region began arriving at the u.s. border .

in the aftermath of the crisis , the obama administration determined that it was "in the national security interests of the united states" to work with central american governments to improve security , strengthen governance , and promote economic prosperity in the region .

accordingly , the obama administration launched a new , whole - of - government u.s. strategy for engagement in central america and requested significant increases in foreign assistance to support its implementation .

the trump administration initially maintained the central america strategy while seeking to scale back the amount of foreign assistance provided to honduras and its neighbors .

although assistance to the region has declined each year since fy2016 , congress has rejected many of the administration's proposed cuts .

it has appropriated more than $2.6 billion for central america over the past four years , including at least $431 million for honduras ( see table 1 ) .

in march 2019 , however , the trump administration announced its intention to end u.s. foreign assistance to the "northern triangle" nations of honduras , el salvador , and guatemala due to the continued northward flow of migrants and asylum - seekers from the region .

it remains unclear how the administration intends to implement this shift in policy or if it intends to amend its fy2020 budget request , which includes at least $65.8 million for honduras .

some members of congress have objected to the administration's abrupt decision to end foreign aid for honduras and its neighbors .

the 116 th congress could play a crucial role in determining the direction of u.s. policy in the region as it considers fy2020 appropriations , foreign assistance authorizations , and other legislative initiatives .

this report analyzes political , economic , and security conditions in honduras .

it also examines issues in u.s. - honduran relations that have been of particular interest to many in congress , including foreign assistance , migration , security cooperation , human rights , and trade and investment .

honduras has struggled with political instability and authoritarian governance for much of its history .

the military traditionally has played an influential role in politics , most recently governing honduras for most of the period between 1963 and 1982 .

the country's current constitution — its 16 th since declaring independence from spain in 1821 — was adopted as honduras transitioned back to civilian rule .

it establishes a representative democracy with a separation of powers among an executive branch led by the president , a legislative branch consisting of a 128-seat unicameral national congress , and a judicial branch headed by the supreme court .

in practice , however , the legislative process tends to be executive - driven and the judiciary is often subject to intimidation , corruption , and politicization .

honduras's traditional two - party political system , dominated by the liberal ( partido liberal , pl ) and national ( partido nacional , pn ) parties , has fractured over the past decade .

both traditional parties are considered to be ideologically center - right , and political competition between them has generally been focused more on using the public sector for patronage than on implementing programmatic agendas .

the leadership of both parties supported a 2009 coup , in which the military , backed by the supreme court and congress , detained then - president manuel zelaya and flew him into forced exile .

zelaya had been elected as a moderate member of the pl but alienated many within the political and economic elite by governing in a populist manner and calling for a constituent assembly to draft a new constitution .

many rank - and - file members of the pl abandoned the party in the aftermath of the coup and joined zelaya upon his return from exile to launch a new left - of - center liberty and re - foundation ( libertad y refundación , libre ) party .

the post - coup split among traditional supporters of the pl has benefitted the pn , which now has the largest political base in honduras and has controlled the presidency and congress since 2010 .

many analysts maintain that the pn has gradually eroded checks and balances to consolidate its influence over other government institutions and entrench itself in power .

for example , in 2012 , the pn - controlled congress , led by juan orlando hernández , replaced four supreme court justices who had struck down a pair of high - profile government initiatives .

although the honduran minister of justice and human rights asserted that the move was illegal and violated the independence of the judiciary , it was never overturned .

the justices who were installed in 2012 issued a ruling in 2015 that struck down the constitution's explicit ban on presidential reelection , allowing hernández , who had been elected president in 2013 , to seek a second term .

the pn has also manipulated appointments to other nominally independent institutions , such as the country's electoral oversight body .

given that honduras continues to hold multiparty elections but falls short of democratic standards in several areas , freedom house classifies the country as "partly free," and the varieties of democracy project classifies the country as an "electoral autocracy. .

the honduran economy is one of the least developed in latin america .

historically , the country's economic performance closely tracked the prices of agricultural commodities , such as bananas and coffee .

while agriculture remains important , accounting for 14% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and nearly a third of total employment , the honduran economy has diversified since the late 1980s .

successive honduran administrations privatized state - owned enterprises , lowered taxes and tariffs , and offered incentives to attract foreign investment , spurring growth in the maquila ( offshore assembly for reexport ) sector — particularly in the apparel , garment , and textile industries .

those policy changes also fostered the development of nontraditional agricultural exports , such as seafood and palm oil .

president hernández's top economic policy priority upon taking office in 2014 was to put the government's finances on a more sustainable path .

the nonfinancial public sector deficit had grown to 7.5% of gdp in 2013 as a result of weak tax collection , increased expenditures , and losses at state - owned enterprises .

as the honduran government struggled to obtain financing for its obligations , public employees and contractors occasionally went unpaid and basic government services were interrupted .

in 2014 , hernández negotiated a three - year agreement with the international monetary fund ( imf ) , under which the honduran government agreed to reduce the deficit to 2% of gdp by 2017 and carry out structural reforms related to the electricity and telecommunications sectors , pension funds , public - private partnerships , and tax administration in exchange for access to $189 million in financing .

the hernández administration ultimately reduced the deficit to less than 1% of gdp in 2017 and adhered to most of its other commitments .

in may 2019 , the imf and the honduran government reached a staff - level agreement on a new two - year economic program that will give honduras access to $311 million of financing .

hernández has also sought to make honduras more attractive to foreign investment .

he contracted a global consulting firm to develop the five - year "honduras 20 / 20" plan , which seeks to attract $13 billion of investment and generate 600,000 jobs in four priority sectors: tourism , textiles , intermediate manufacturing , and business services .

to achieve the plan's objectives , the honduran government has adopted a new business - friendly tax code , increased investments in infrastructure , and entered into a customs union with guatemala and el salvador .

the hernández administration is also moving forward with a controversial plan to establish "employment and economic development zones" — specially designated areas where foreign investors are granted administrative autonomy to enact their own laws , set up their own judicial systems , and carry out other duties usually reserved for governments .

nevertheless , annual foreign direct investment inflows to honduras fell from $1.4 billion in 2014 to $1.2 billion in 2018 .

the honduran economy has expanded by an average of 3.9% annually over the past five years , but it is not generating sufficient employment to absorb the country's growing labor supply .

in 2017 , for example , the honduran labor force increased by nearly 110,000 people , but only 8,500 jobs were created in the formal sector .

the vast majority of new workers were left to work in the unregulated informal sector , without job protections or benefits , or seek opportunity elsewhere .

since nearly 40% of hondurans are under the age of 19 , the country's prime age working population is projected to continue growing for the next two decades .

without stronger job creation , honduras may miss a key window of opportunity to boost economic growth .

in 2018 , nearly 20% of hondurans were unemployed or underemployed , and another 49% of hondurans worked full time for less than the minimum wage .

honduras's recent economic growth has also proven insufficient to reduce the country's high poverty rate .

some economic analysts argue that the hernández administration's fiscal austerity policies have exacerbated the situation by increasing the government's dependence on regressive , indirect taxes while limiting public investment and social welfare expenditures .

more than 67% of hondurans live below the national poverty line .

conditions are particularly difficult in rural honduras , where nearly 63% of the population lives in extreme poverty — unable to satisfy their basic nutritional needs .

in recent years , many rural communities have struggled to contend with a coffee fungus outbreak and a series of droughts that have destroyed crops and reduced agricultural production and employment .

households have reportedly been forced to engage in extreme coping strategies , such as taking on debt , selling off land , and migrating .

honduras's medium - term economic performance is expected to mirror the u.s. business cycle , as the united states remains honduras's top export market and primary source of investment , tourism , and remittances .

to boost the country's long - term growth potential , analysts maintain that honduras will have to improve education and infrastructure and address entrenched social ills , such as widespread crime and corruption and high levels of poverty .

honduras struggles with high levels of crime and violence .

a number of interrelated factors appear to contribute to the poor security situation .

widespread poverty , fragmented families , and a lack of education and employment opportunities leave many honduran youth susceptible to recruitment by gangs such as the mara salvatrucha ( ms - 13 ) and barrio 18 .

these organizations engage in drug dealing and extortion , among other criminal activities , and appear to be responsible for a substantial portion of homicides and much of the crime that affects citizens on a day - to - day basis .

honduras also serves as a significant drug - trafficking corridor as a result of its location between cocaine - producing countries in south america and the major consumer market in the united states .

heavily armed and well - financed transnational criminal organizations have sought to secure control of honduran territory by battling one another and local affiliates and seeking to intimidate and infiltrate honduran institutions .

many of these groups have close ties to political and economic elites who rely upon illicit finances to fund their election campaigns and maintain or increase the market share of their businesses .

in november 2018 , for example , the u.s. department of justice charged antonio "tony" hernández — a former member of congress and president hernández's brother , for allegedly engaging in large - scale drug trafficking ( see " counternarcotics " below ) .

honduran security forces and justice - sector institutions have historically lacked the personnel , equipment , and training necessary to respond to criminal threats .

they have also struggled with systemic corruption , with some sectors working on behalf of criminal organizations or private interests .

president hernández campaigned on a hard - line security platform , repeatedly pledging to do whatever it takes to reduce crime and violence in honduras .

upon taking office in 2014 , he immediately ordered the security forces into the streets to conduct intensive patrols of high - crime neighborhoods .

among the units involved in the ongoing operation are two hybrid forces that hernández helped to establish while he was serving as the president of the honduran congress: the military police force ( policía militar de orden público , pmop ) , which is under the control of the ministry of defense , and a military - trained police unit known as the "tigers" ( tropa de inteligencia y grupos de respuesta especial de seguri dad , tigres ) .

the pmop has been implicated in numerous human rights abuses , including 13 of the 16 killings documented by the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights in the aftermath of the 2017 election .

human rights advocates have repeatedly called on the hernández administration to withdraw the military from domestic law enforcement activities .

hernández has also taken some steps to strengthen security and justice - sector institutions .

he created a special police reform commission in april 2016 after press reports indicated that high - ranking police commanders had conspired with drug traffickers to assassinate two top honduran antidrug officials in 2009 and 2011 and the head of the anti - money - laundering unit of the public prosecutor's office in 2013 ; other officials in the honduran national police and security ministry reportedly covered up internal investigations of the crimes .

although previous attempts to reform the police force produced few results , the special commission dismissed more than 5,600 personnel , including half of the highest - ranked officers .

it also proposed and won congressional approval for measures to restructure the national police force , increase police salaries , and implement new training and evaluation protocols .

public perceptions of the national police have yet to improve substantially , however , as fewer than 34% of hondurans expressed confidence in the force in 2018 .

honduras's investigative and prosecutorial capacity has improved in recent years , although impunity remains widespread .

in 2015 , the honduran national police launched a new investigative division and the public prosecutor's office established a new criminal investigative agency .

both institutions have set up forensic laboratories and have begun to conduct more scientific investigations .

the budget of the public prosecutor's office grew by more than 94% in nominal terms from 2014 to 2018 , allowing attorney general óscar chinchilla to hire additional detectives , prosecutors , and other specialized personnel .

nevertheless , the public prosecutor's office accounted for less than 1.5% of the honduran central government's expenditures in 2018 and remains overburdened .

these policies appear to have contributed to considerable improvements in security conditions over the past five years .

although the homicide rate remains high by global standards , it peaked at 86.5 murders per 100,000 residents in 2011 and fell to 41.3 murders per 100,000 residents in 2018 ( see figure 2 , below ) .

common crime also appears to have declined , with the percentage of hondurans reporting they had been the victim of a crime in the past year falling from 20.5% in 2014 to 12.8% in 2018 .

nevertheless , there continues to be a pervasive sense of insecurity in the country: 52% of hondurans consider their cities unsafe , and nearly 88% consider the country unsafe .

the united states has had close relations with honduras over many years .

the bilateral relationship was especially close in the 1980s , when honduras returned to civilian rule and became the lynchpin for u.s. policy in central america .

the country served as a staging area for u.s. - supported raids into nicaragua by the contra forces attempting to overthrow the leftist sandinista government and an outpost for u.s. military forces supporting the salvadoran government's efforts to combat the farabundo martí national liberation front insurgency .

a u.s. military presence known as joint task force bravo has been stationed in honduras since 1983 .

economic linkages also intensified in the 1980s after honduras became a beneficiary of the caribbean basin initiative , which allowed for duty - free importation of honduran goods into the united states .

economic ties have deepened since the entrance into force of the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) in 2006 .

relations between the united states and honduras were strained during the country's 2009 political crisis .

the obama administration condemned the coup and , over the course of the following months , leveled a series of diplomatic and economic sanctions designed to pressure honduran officials to restore zelaya to power .

the administration limited contact with the honduran government , suspended some foreign assistance , minimized cooperation with the honduran military , and revoked the visas of members and supporters of the interim government headed by roberto micheletti .

in november 2009 , the administration shifted the emphasis of u.s. policy from reversing zelaya's removal to ensuring the legitimacy of previously scheduled elections .

although some analysts argued that the policy shift allowed those behind the coup to consolidate their hold on power , administration officials maintained that elections had become the only realistic way to bring an end to the political crisis .

current u.s. policy in honduras is focused on strengthening democratic governance , including the promotion of human rights and the rule of law , enhancing economic prosperity , and improving the long - term security situation in the country , thereby mitigating potential challenges for the united states such as irregular migration and organized crime .

to advance these objectives , the united states provides honduras with substantial foreign assistance , maintains significant security and commercial ties , and engages on issues such as migration and human rights .

bilateral cooperation could be constrained , however , if the united states ends foreign assistance programs in the region , as announced by the trump administration ( see " potential termination of assistance " below ) .

honduras has made uneven progress in addressing the country's considerable domestic challenges over the past five years .

public prosecutors have begun to combat high - level corruption with the support of the maccih , but their efforts have generated fierce backlash from political leaders and other sectors of the honduran elite .

the country's finances have improved , but living standards for most hondurans remain poor .

the homicide rate has been nearly cut in half , but human rights abuses persist and impunity remains widespread .

since launching the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , the united states has significantly increased foreign assistance to honduras to strengthen government institutions , foster economic prosperity , and improve security in the country .

it is too early to assess the impact of those efforts since much of the assistance only began to be delivered in 2017 .

moreover , these are difficult and long - term endeavors , and significant improvements in living conditions in honduras will likely require concerted efforts by the honduran government and the international community over many years .

u.s. policy is now uncertain as congress has continued to appropriate funding to implement the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , but the trump administration has announced its intention to end some foreign assistance programs .

in the absence of sustained support and engagement from the united states and other international partners , honduras is likely to continue struggling with political and social instability , which , given the country's geographic proximity , is likely to affect the united states .

