the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates more than $1 trillion worth of products annually .

it regulates the safety of foods ( including animal feeds ) and cosmetics , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices .

fda's annual funding is provided in the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations bill , and is handled by the corresponding appropriations subcommittees in the house and senate .

fda's program level , the total amount that fda can spend , is composed of direct appropriations ( which fda calls budget authority ) and other funds , which are mostly user fees .

the standard appropriations procedure involves congressional passage of 12 annual regular appropriations acts , of which agriculture ( including fda ) is one .

not having completed the normal appropriations process , congress acted in the final days of fy2008 to provide appropriations for the start of fy2009 as part of the larger consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 , signed on september 30 , 2008 ) .

many refer to the act's division a , the continuing appropriations resolution , 2009 , as the continuing resolution or the cr .

it provided agencies with continuing appropriations to allow spending , until march 6 , 2009 , at the rate of their fy2008 appropriations .

the annualized amount at this rate would provide fda with $2.42 billion in total program level for all of fy2009 .

congress could , however , alter its appropriations decisions later in the year .

table 1 provides a timeline of the various administration requests , congressional actions , and enacted laws relating to fda appropriations for fy2009 .

the administration's fy2009 budget request for fda ( fy2009 request ) was $2.676 billion , an increase of $256 million ( 10.6% ) over fy2008 .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the fy2009 request is composed of budget authority of $2.046 billion and user fees of $630 million .

the budget authority amount is a $176 million ( 9.4% ) increase over fy2008 .

of this requested amount , $25 million was for cost - of - living pay increases .

the requested user fee amounts included $609 million in currently authorized fees .

this included $14 million in new fees for the advisory review of direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) television advertisements , a program authorized in the fda amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) .

the amount for currently authorized fees represented a $59 million ( 10.8% ) increase over fy2008 .

fda indicated that the additional fy2009 funding would support , among other things , activities included in fdaaa , the agency's food protection plan , and the government - wide action plan for import safety .

in addition to the authorized fees , the fy2009 request included $21 million in proposed new user fees for generic human and animal drugs , pending authorizing legislation .

it described another $27 million in proposed fees for reinspections and food and animal feed certification , but did not include them in the budget request totals .

while the administration and congress were looking to fy2009 funding , more immediate questions continued about fda's fy2008 budget .

the requests and actions regarding the two fiscal years overlapped in time .

following submission of the administration's initial fy2009 request in february 2008 , some expressed concern that the fda budget was inadequate to meet continuing and upcoming challenges .

the fda science board , in response to congressional questions regarding its report , fda science and mission at risk , recommended a $375 million increase in the "appropriated ( non - user fee ) budget" in fy2009 .

in may 2008 , fda commissioner andrew von eschenbach released a professional judgment budget that noted additional resource needs of $275 million to supplement the fy2008 budget .

the president submitted an amended fy2009 request in june 2008 , which included an additional $275 million for fda activities involving food protection , enhanced inspection of imported products , and monitoring the safety of drugs , devices , and biologics after they are approved .

 ( note: subsequent mentions in this report to the administration's fy2009 request refer to the amended request. ) .

congress passed an fy2008 supplemental appropriations bill at the end of june 2008 that provided an additional $150 million in budget authority for fda ; it made this funding available through the end of fy2009 .

in july , the senate committee on appropriations reported , in s. 3289 and s.rept .

110-426 , its recommended fy2009 direct appropriations for fda that essentially matched the administration's amended request ( fy2009 request ) .

the committee did not follow the agency's request for user fees: the senate committee recommendations did not include the proposed human or animal generic drug user fee programs , or the fdaaa - authorized program to collect user fees for the advisory review of dtc television advertisements of prescription drugs .

furthermore , its report did not include those fees in its representation of the fy2009 request .

as the end of fy2008 approached , the full senate had not considered the bill and the house had not introduced a comparable bill .

the continuing appropriations resolution allowed agencies to spend , until march 6 , 2009 , at the rate of their fy2008 appropriations .

it specified that , for fda , this base would include the $150 million from the fy2008 supplemental .

fda's budget funds both agency - wide activities and specific program areas .

agency - wide activities include headquarters and the office of the commissioner ( which provides program direction and administrative services ) , rents , and buildings and facilities .

the agency supports six program areas .

five of these administer fda's regulatory responsibilities for products and are discussed later in this report .

the sixth , toxicological research , is non - regulatory and involves activities ( including scientific research , technical advice , and training ) to inform fda's regulatory decisions .

for each of the five regulatory programs , fda's congressional budget justification provides funding information divided into center activities and field activities .

field activities — which include inspection and laboratory testing for regulatory purposes , and enforcement activities — are administered by fda's office of regulatory affairs ( ora ) .

the fda's congressional budget justification describes the field activities / ora .

it then arrays those resources within each fda regulatory program budget , showing considerable variation across program .

for fy2009 , summing across the program areas , fda requested $716 million for field activities / ora , representing 26.8% of the agency's total request ( 35% of the requested budget authority ) .

the 110 th congress addressed the product inspection and standards enforcement functions of fda in hearings and proposed legislation .

various committee members have requested information on inspection staffing by program area .

however , agency statements suggest that field inspectors may be redeployed to meet critical needs , such as foodborne outbreaks , rather than being permanently assigned to one program area .

some studies suggest that budget constraints have prevented fda from making all of its required inspections .

for example , a 2007 gao report found that fda had not inspected certain domestic medical device manufacturing establishments once every two years as required by law .

in addition , deaths associated with contaminated heparin ( a blood - thinning drug ) have added to concern about whether the fda's field activities are adequate .

thus , field activity funding and management are among the key challenges fda faces .

the remainder of this report provides brief program descriptions and synopses of the fy2009 request for each of fda's regulatory program areas .

table 2 displays fda's budget items by budget authority , user fees , and total program levels , for fy2008 and fy2009 requests and congressional action .

the foods program is responsible for ensuring that most foods for humans are safe , sanitary , wholesome , and accurately labeled , and for ensuring that cosmetic products are safe and properly labeled .

the foods program addresses its regulatory responsibilities in four areas: food protection , improved nutrition , dietary supplement safety , and cosmetic safety .

it is administered by fda's center for food safety and applied nutrition ( cfsan ) .

the program is funded through budget authority and has no authorized user fees .

the fy2009 request for the foods program was an $84 million ( 14.5% ) increase over fy2008 .

the senate committee recommended the same amount .

more than two - thirds of the foods program budget is devoted to field activities .

the primary focus of the request was the protecting america's food supply initiative , including implementing the goals of fda's food protection plan , released in november 2007 .

key challenges for the program include whether the agency's resources are adequate to oversee the number and diversity of facilities in the food system , and whether the agency's approach to inspection is properly aligned toward food safety risks , especially for imports of produce and seafood .

the human drugs program is responsible for ensuring that prescription and nonprescription ( over - the - counter ) drugs , both branded and generic , are safe and effective .

its regulatory responsibilities include the review of marketing applications for new drugs for safety and effectiveness , similar reviews of generic drug applications , and postmarket safety and surveillance .

the program is administered by fda's center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) .

it is funded through both budget authority and user fees authorized by the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ) .

the fy2009 request for the human drugs program was $789 million ( $407 million in budget authority and $381 million in user fees ) , a $80 million ( 11.3% ) increase over fy2008 .

the requested amount for user fees included increased revenues from pdufa ( up $26.5 million to $354 million ) , a new user fee for the advisory review of dtc television advertisements ( $12 million ) , and a proposed new user fee program to support the review of generic drug applications ( generic drug user fee act , gdufa , $15 million ) .

the senate committee recommendation ( $763 million total ) matched the budget authority request , but did not include the requested fees for dtc advertisement review or the proposed gdufa .

key challenges for the program include ensuring the safety of imported drugs and ingredients , and identifying and acting on emerging safety and effectiveness information about drugs once they are on the market .

the biologics program is responsible for ensuring the safety , purity , potency , and effectiveness of biological products .

the program carries out its regulatory responsibilities in three areas: blood and blood products ; vaccines and allergenics ; and cells , tissues , and gene therapies .

it is administered by fda's center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) and operates with both budget authority and user fees authorized by pdufa and the medical device user fee act ( mdufa ) .

the fy2009 request for the biologics program was $268 million ( $181 million in budget authority and $87 million in user fees ) , a $19 million ( 7.8% ) increase over fy2008 .

the increase would provide additional budget authority to cover blood and tissue safety , and to help cover a cost - of - living pay increase for the entire program .

the requested amount for user fees includes increased revenue from pdufa ( up $4.3 million to $74.4 million ) , mdufa ( up almost $1 million to $11.5 million ) , and the new fee for review of dtc advertisements ( $1.4 million ) .

the senate committee recommendation ( $268 million total ) matched the budget authority request but did not include the requested fees for dtc advertisement review .

for fy2009 , congress has been considering legislation that would allow fda to approve abbreviated applications for follow - on biologics .

the bush administration requested that the legislation include , among other things , a public guidance process , prescribed data requirements , safety labeling related to interchangeability , intellectual property protections , and the implementation of new user fees to cover the associated costs .

a key challenge will be negotiating a compromise among several existing legislative proposals and the position of the new obama administration .

the animal drugs and feeds program regulates animal drugs and devices to ensure their safety and effectiveness , and regulates the safety of animal feeds , including pet food .

the program is administered by fda's center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) .

fda claims that 70% of cvm's work is devoted to the safety of the food supply , largely through its activities to ensure the safety of drugs and feeds used for food - producing animals .

in fy2008 , the program was funded through both budget authority , and user fees for brand - name animal drugs authorized by the animal drug user fee act ( adufa ) .

the fy2009 request for the animal drugs and feeds program was $132 million , a $17 million ( 15.3% ) increase over fy2008 .

the total requested amount consisted of $114 million in budget authority , $14 million in authority for adufa , and $4 million for a proposed animal generic drug user fee act ( agdufa ) .

more than $7 million of the requested increase would be used to support the protecting america's food supply initiative , including the development of processing and ingredient standards for animal foods as required by fdaaa .

the increase would also allow workforce development and the expansion of existing product safety and activities .

in july 2008 , the senate committee recommended $128 million total .

this matched the budget authority request and included the requested fees for adufa , contingent upon its reauthorization , but did not include the requested fees for agdufa , which had not yet been authorized .

the animal drugs and feeds program faces challenges similar to those for comparable activities in the other programs .

these challenges include evaluating drug approvals efficiently without compromising safety , monitoring drug safety after approval , and developing effective strategies to ensure the safety of imports .

the devices and radiological health program is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of medical devices , and eliminating unnecessary exposure to radiation from medical and consumer products .

the program divides its regulatory responsibilities into three areas: premarket device safety and effectiveness , postmarket safety and surveillance , and the mammography quality standards act ( mqsa ) .

the program is administered primarily by fda's center for devices and radiological health ( cdrh ) , and in part by cber .

it operates with both budget authority and user fees authorized by mdufa and mqsa .

the fy2009 request for the devices and radiological health program was $326 million ( $277 million in budget authority and $49 million in user fees ) , a $23 million ( 7.4% ) increase over fy2008 .

most of the increase was for a cost - of - living pay increase .

a smaller portion was for the modernizing medical product safety and development initiative ( mmpsdi ) of the administration's import safety action plan .

the senate committee recommendation ( $327 million total ) closely matched the fy2009 request .

ensuring the safety of imported devices is a key challenge for the program , as suggested by the request related to mmpsdi .

a second challenge is ensuring the safety of medical devices already on the market .

this may be complicated by the requirement that device user fees , which constitute an increasing proportion of the device budget , be spent only on activities related to the approval or clearance of new devices .

