on march 11 , 2009 , president obama signed the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , which provides $44.6 billion for fsgg programs and agencies , an increase of $385 million above the fy2009 requested amount and $58 million less than fy2008 enacted appropriations .

the house appropriations committee had recommended $44.27 billion for fsgg agencies and programs for fy2009 , while the senate appropriations committee had recommended fy2009 appropriations of $44.75 billion .

table 1 , below , reflects the status of the fy2009 fsgg appropriations bill .

the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 .

each chamber created a new subcommittee on financial services and general government ( fsgg ) .

in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee was formed primarily of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee .

in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee .

additionally , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , the judiciary , housing and urban development , and related agencies were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions .

on september 30 , 2008 , president george w. bush signed the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) .

division a of p.l .

110-329 provided continuing appropriations for most accounts in the financial services and general government accounts through march 9 , 2009 .

funding was generally at the same rate appropriated in p.l .

110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 .

division b of p.l .

110-329 provided gsa with an additional $182 million for courthouse construction , and provided sba with an additional $799 million , most of which was for the disaster loan program account .

the administration's fy2009 budget request included $44.20 billion for fsgg agencies and programs .

the house appropriations committee recommended $44.27 billion for fsgg agencies , and the senate appropriations committee recommended $44.75 billion .

table 2 lists the enacted amounts for fy2008 , the president's request , house and senate appropriations committees' recommendations , and the enacted amounts for fy2009 .

this section examines fy2009 appropriations for the treasury department and its operating bureaus , including the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

table 3 shows the enacted amounts for fy2008 , as well as the bush administration's budget request for fy2009 , house and senate appropriations committee recommendations for fy2009 , and enacted amounts for fy2009 .

all but three offices in the executive office of the president ( eop ) are funded in the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill .

table 4 shows appropriations enacted for fy2008 , amounts requested by the president for fy2009 , amounts recommended by the house and senate committees on appropriations for fy2009 , and appropriations enacted for fy2009 .

as a co - equal branch of government , the judiciary presents its budget to the president , who transmits it to congress unaltered .

table 5 shows appropriations for the judiciary as enacted for fy2008 , as requested for fy2009 , as recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees , and as enacted .

the authority for congressional review and approval of the district's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( home rule act ) .

the constitution gives congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 50 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor .

the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , modification , and approval .

both the president and congress may propose and approve of financial assistance to the district in the form of special federal payments in support of specific activities or priorities .

table 6 shows details of the district's federal payments — the fy2008 enacted amounts , the amounts included in the president's fy2009 budget request , and the amounts recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees , and the amount enacted for fy2009 with the passage of p.l .

111-8 .

the financial services and general government appropriations language includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs .

there also may be general provisions at the end of an individual title within the appropriations act which relate only to agencies and accounts within that specific title .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions was included in the fy2009 budget , appendix .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years .

for various reasons , congress has opted to reiterate the language rather than making the provisions permanent .

presented below are some of the government - wide general provisions that were included in p.l .

110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 , but that were not included in the fy2009 budget proposal .

 ( the section numbers refer to the provisions as they appeared in p.l .

110-161 .

section 709 , which prohibited payment to political appointees who are filling positions for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed .

section 749 of p.l .

111-8 prohibits appropriation of funds for the payment of services to any individual carrying out the responsibilities of any position requiring senate advice and consent in an acting or temporary capacity after the second submission of a nomination for that individual to that position has been withdrawn or returned to the president .

the provision became effective on january 20 , 2009 , and applies for each fiscal year thereafter .

section 717 , which prohibited the payment of any employee who prohibits , threatens , prevents , or otherwise penalizes another employee from communicating with congress .

section 714 of the house bill and the senate bill as reported and section 714 of p.l .

111-8 .

section 718 , which prohibited the obligation or expenditure of appropriated funds for employee training that ( 1 ) does not meet identified needs for knowledge , skills , and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties ; ( 2 ) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants ; ( 3 ) does not require prior employee notification of the contents and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation ; ( 4 ) contains any methods or contents associated with religious or quasi - religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems ; or ( 5 ) is offensive to , or designed to change , participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace .

section 715 of the house and senate bills as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 719 , which prohibited the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce employee non - disclosure agreements if they do not contain whistleblower protection clauses .

section 716 of the house and senate bills as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 722 , which required the approval of the committees on appropriations for the release of any "non - public" information , such as mailing or telephone lists , to any person or any organization outside the federal government .

section 719 of the house and senate bills as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 733 , which stated that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states .

section 729 of the house and senate bills as reported and section 729 of p.l .

111-8 .

section 735 , which prohibited the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowship program or to implement opm's proposed regulations limiting the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch .

section 731 of the house and the senate bills as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 737 , which required agencies to provide information on e - government initiatives , including lines of business , in their fy2009 budget justifications .

section 733 of the house and senate bills as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 738 , which required appropriate executive department and agency heads either to transfer funds to , or reimburse , the federal aviation administration to ensure the uninterrupted , continuous operation of the midway atoll airfield .

section 734 of the senate bill as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 742 , which precluded contravention of the privacy act .

section 739 of the house bill and section 740 of the senate bill as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 744 , which required omb to submit a crosscut budget report on restoration activities for the great lakes .

section 741 of the house bill and section 742 of the senate bill as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 745 , which prohibited funds to be used for federal contracts with expatriated entities .

section 742 of the house bill and section 743 of the senate bill as reported and p.l .

111-8 .

section 748 , which required omb to establish a pilot program to develop and implement an inventory to track the cost and size of service contracts , particularly those that have been performed poorly , in at least three cabinet - level departments .

section 746 of the senate bill as reported and section 747 of p.l .

111-8 .

the fy2009 budget proposed a new section 734 to provide a 2.9% pay ( annual and locality pay combined ) adjustment for federal civilian employees .

the house bill , as reported , included the provision at section 737 ( a ) , and the senate bill , as reported , included the provision at section 738 ( a ) and would have provided a 3.9% pay adjustment .

division a , section 142 ( a ) of p.l .

110-329 provides a 3.9% pay adjustment for federal civilian employees , including employees in the department of homeland security .

the pay increase became effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning after january 1 , 2009 .

the pay adjustment for blue - collar workers in most locations is no less than the increase received by white - collar general schedule ( gs ) employees in that location .

blue - collar workers in alaska , hawaii , and certain other non - foreign areas receive a pay adjustment that is no less than the increase received by gs employees in the rest of the united states ( rus ) pay area ( section 142 ( b ) ) .

the law provides that the pay raise will be paid from the appropriations for salaries and expenses made to each department and agency for fy2009 ( section 142 ( c ) ) .

these provisions apply notwithstanding any other provision of the joint resolution ( section 142 ( d ) ) .

the president allocated the pay raise between a 2.9% annual ( basic ) adjustment and a 1.0% locality pay adjustment in executive order 13483 , issued on december 18 , 2008 .

 ( individuals who are paid under the schedule for the senior executive service ( ses ) do not receive locality pay and those who are paid under the schedule for senior - level ( sl ) and scientific or professional ( st ) positions will not receive locality pay after april 12 , 2009 , when a new sl and st pay schedule authorized by p.l .

110-372 becomes effective. ) .

among new general provisions that were recommended by the house or senate committees on appropriations and are included in p.l .

111-8 are these: opm , or any other agency , is prohibited from using funds to implement regulations that would change competitive areas under reductions - in - force affecting federal employees .

section 745 of the house bill , section 749 of the senate bill as reported and section 745 of p.l .

111-8 .

funds are prohibited from being used to implement the provisions on regulatory policy officers in executive order 13422 .

section 746 of the house bill and p.l .

111-8 .

the federal government is expected to conduct its business "in an environmentally , economically , fiscally sound and scientifically defensible manner" in carrying out executive order 13423 related to management of the environment , energy , and transportation .

section 747 of the house bill and section 748 of p.l .

111-8 .

federal employees will maintain their federal salary when called up to active duty in the national guard and reserve , with their agencies making up the difference between their military pay and their federal salary .

section 750 of the senate bill as reported and section 751 of p.l .

111-8 .

each executive branch department and agency is required to submit a report to the omb director that would state the total size of its workforce , including the number of civilian , military , and contract workers as of december 31 , 2008 .

the report must be submitted within 120 days after the act's enactment .

the omb director is required to submit a "comprehensive statement" to the house and senate committee on appropriations on the workforce data of the departments and agencies and aggregate totals of civilian , military , and contract workers , within 180 days after the act's enactment .

section 753 of the senate bill as reported and section 752 of p.l .

111-8 .

section 735 of p.l .

111-8 expands the applicability of section 739 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( division d ) of p.l .

110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 , to all public - private competitions .

section 739 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the act , which established certain requirements for public - private competitions , applied only to competitions that involve more than 10 federal government employees .

section 736 of p.l .

111-8 replaces the language found in section 739 ( b ) ( division d ) of p.l .

110-161 and elaborates on the guidelines for insourcing new functions and agency functions performed by the private sector sources .

this provision directs agency heads to implement required guidelines and procedures no later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this subsection ( that is , section 736 ( b ) ) .

gao's deadline for submitting a report to certain congressional committees regarding the implementation of insourcing guidelines is 210 days after the date of enactment of this subsection .

in this context , the term "insourcing" refers to considering using federal employees "to perform new functions and functions that are performed by contractors and could be performed by federal employees. .

public - private competitions that involve work performed by contractors are rare .

most public - private competitions involve work performed by agency employees .

opponents of the proposed revision may maintain that the feasibility , and hence the implications , of section 735 are unclear .

the requirement to consider using federal employees for new functions and for functions currently being performed by contractors might be affected by , for example , the availability of resources .

that is , an agency might not have sufficient personnel to staff the new function , and it might not be able to obtain additional personnel .

potential critics may argue that if a function under consideration for insourcing is currently being performed by contractor personnel and an a - 76 competition is required , an agency might not have sufficient resources to perform the tasks associated with a public - private competition .

section 737 of p.l .

111-8 prohibits using funds appropriated by this act or any other act for the announcement or commencement of a public - private competition or study that involves activities currently being performed by federal employees .

this provision does not apply to public - private competitions in progress .

in its report on h.r .

7323 , the house committee on appropriations explained that the "one - year moratorium on new a - 76 studies" would provide "the new [presidential] administration ... an opportunity to review and develop federal workforce policies. .

in the absence of additional information , the meaning of "federal workforce policies" is unclear in this context .

nevertheless , the moratorium could provide an opportunity for gathering data on the disposition of federal employees whose work was outsourced as a result of public - private competitions , or conducting an independent study of the savings and costs associated with public - private competitions .

opponents of this provision might assert that the moratorium will adversely affect the amount of savings that results from completed competitions .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward communist cuba has consisted largely of efforts to isolate the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including prohibitions on u.s. financial transactions — the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) — that are administered by the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

restrictions on travel have been a key and often contentious component of u.s. efforts to isolate the cuban government by denying it access to u.s. currency .

the regulations do not ban travel itself , but place restrictions on any financial transactions related to travel to cuba .

over the years , there have been numerous changes to the cacr regarding family travel .

in march 2003 , the regulations were eased to allow such travel to visit relatives within three degrees of relationship to the traveler ( eg , great - grandparents and second cousins ) .

in june 2004 , however , the restrictions were tightened to allow family travel only to visit immediate family once every three years for a period not to exceed 14 days .

permission from ofac was required through a specific license .

previously , ofac allowed family travel under a general license , which meant that there was no need to obtain special permission from ofac .

under u.s. sanctions , some u.s. commercial agricultural exports to cuba have been allowed since 2001 pursuant to the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 , or tsra ( title ix of p.l .

106-387 ) .

however , there are numerous restrictions and licensing requirements for these exports .

for instance , exporters are denied access to u.s. private commercial financing or credit , and all transactions must be paid for in cash in advance or with financing from third countries .

the administration tightened sanctions on cuba in february 2005 by further restricting how u.s. agricultural exporters may be paid for their product .

ofac amended the cacr to clarify that the term "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural sales to cuba means that the payment is to be received prior to the shipment of the goods .

this differs from the practice of being paid before the actual delivery of the goods , a practice that had been utilized by many u.s. agricultural exporters to cuba since such sales were legalized in late 2001 .

u.s. agricultural exporters and some members of congress strongly objected to this "clarification" on the grounds that the action constituted a new sanction that violated the intent of tsra , and could jeopardize millions of dollars in u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

then ofac director robert werner maintained that the clarification "conforms to the common understanding of the term in international trade. .

since 2001 cuba has purchased almost $2.7 billion in agricultural products from the united states .

overall u.s. exports to cuba rose from about $7 million in 2001 to $404 million in 2004 .

u.s. exports to cuba declined in 2005 and 2006 to $369 million and $340 million , respectively , but increased to $447 million in 2007 .

in 2008 , u.s. agricultural exports to cuba rose to $718 million , far higher than in previous years , in part because of the rise in food prices , but also because of increased cuban needs in the aftermath of several hurricanes and tropical storms that severely damaged cuba's agricultural sector .

from 2000-2007 , either one or both houses of congress included provisions in the annual treasury department appropriations bill that would have eased u.s. economic sanctions on cuba ( especially on travel and on u.s. agricultural exports ) , but none of these provisions were enacted .

the bush administration regularly threatened to veto legislation if it included any provision weakening sanctions on cuba .

in 2007 , both the house - passed and senate appropriations committee - reported versions of the fy2008 financial services and general government appropriations bill , h.r .

2829 , contained language that would have eased cuba sanctions , but ultimately congress dropped these provisions in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

in 2008 , the house appropriations committee version of the financial services and general government appropriations bill for fy2009 , h.r .

7323 , contained three provisions in title vi that would have eased restrictions on the sale of u.s. agricultural exports and on family travel .

section 621 would have prohibited funds in the act from being used to administer , implement , or enforce new language in the cuban embargo regulations added on february 25 , 2005 ( 31 cfr part 515.533 ) that requires that u.s. agricultural exports must be paid for before they leave u.s. ports .

with regard to family travel , section 622 would have allowed for such travel once a year , while section 623 would have expanded such travel by a person to visit an aunt , uncle , niece , nephew , or first cousin .

the committee's report to the bill , h.rept .

110-920 , would have required the ofac to provide detailed information on ofac's cuba - related licensing and enforcement actions .

the senate version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill , s. 3260 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee on july 14 , 2008 ( s.rept .

110-417 ) , included three provisions easing cuba sanctions .

section 618 ( identical to section 621 in the house version of the bill ) would have prohibited funds in the act from being used to restrict payment terms for the sale of agricultural goods to cuba .

section 619 would have eased restrictions on travel relating to the commercial sale of agricultural and medical goods to cuba by allowing for such travel under a general license .

section 620 would have prohibited funds from being used to administer , implement , or enforce family travel restrictions that were imposed by the bush administration in june 2004 .

none of the cuba provisions in s. 3260 or h.r .

7323 were included in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) , which continued fy2009 appropriations for the treasury department through march 6 , 2009 ( at fy2008 levels ) .

in 2009 , however , the 111 th congress included three provisions easing cuba sanctions in sections 620-622 of division d of the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( h.r .

1105 / p.l .

111-8 ) that was signed into law on march 11 , 2009 .

 ( the provisions were identical to the cuba provisions in the senate version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill , s. 3260 . ) .

the provisions ease restrictions on family travel and travel for the marketing and sale of u.s. agricultural and medical exports to cuba , and also were intended to ease payment provisions for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba , although as discussed below , the treasury department's interpretation of this provision mitigated its practical effect .

the joint explanatory statement to p.l .

111-8 also requires the department of the treasury to prepare a report within 90 days on the steps that it is taking to assess ofac's allocation of resources for investigating and penalizing violations of the cuba embargo with respect to the numerous other sanctions programs it administers .

as part of the report , the treasury department is directed to provide detailed information on ofac's cuba - related licensing on its enforcement of the cuba embargo .

travel for the marketing and sale of agricultural and medical goods .

section 620 amends the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 to require the secretary of the treasury to issue regulations for travel to , from , or within cuba under a general license for the marketing and sale of agricultural and medical goods .

such travel had required a specific license from ofac , issued on a case by case basis .

on march 9 , 2009 , secretary of the treasury timothy geithner stated in a letter published in the congressional record that the regulations issued pursuant to this provision "would provide that the representatives of only a narrow class of businesses would be eligible , under a new general license , to travel to market and sell agricultural and medical goods. .

the secretary also maintained that "any business using the general license would be required to provide both advance written notice outlining the purpose and scope of the planned travel and , upon return , a report outlining the activities conducted , including the persons with whom they met , the expenses incurred , and business conducted in cuba. .

on march 11 , 2009 , ofac maintained that it would implement this provision in the coming weeks and promulgate regulations authorizing travel under the general license for the marketing and sale of agricultural and medical goods .

family travel .

section 621 prohibits funds from being used to administer , implement , or enforce family travel restrictions that were imposed by the bush administration in june 2004 .

as noted above , those 2004 restrictions allowed family travel only to visit immediate family ( grandparents , grandchildren , parents , siblings , spouses , and children ) once every three years for a period not to exceed 14 days .

under the 2004 restrictions , a specific license was required from ofac for such travel , and the authorized amount that family travelers could spend while in cuba was limited to $50 a day .

on march 11 , 2009 , ofac provided guidance on its implementation of this omnibus provision that reinstated the authorization for family travel to cuba that existed prior to the june 2004 restrictions .

ofac issued a general license authorizing family travel once every 12 months for an unlimited length of stay , and increased daily expenditure limits for family travelers to the same as all other authorized travelers to cuba ( state department maximum per diem rate for havana , currently $179 a day ) .

the new general license also provides for an expanded definition of "close relatives" to mean any individual related to the traveler by blood , marriage , or adoption , who is no more than three generations removed from that person ( eg , great - grandparents and second cousins ) .

specific licenses may be issued on a case - by - case basis for additional visits during the 12-month period or for travel to visit a close relative who is not a national of cuba .

payment of cash in advance .

section 622 prohibits funds in the act from being used to administer , implement , or enforce an amendment to the cuban embargo regulations issued on february 25 , 2005 , requiring that u.s. agricultural exporters using the "cash in advance" payment mechanism for selling their goods to cuba must be paid in cash for their goods before the goods leave u.s. ports .

as noted above , tsra requires either the "payment of cash in advance" for such exports ( or financing by third country financial institutions ) , but does not provide a definition of cash in advance .

prior to the february 2005 amendment to the cuban embargo regulations , u.s. exporters could be paid for the goods before they were unloaded in cuba .

ofac guidance on the implementation of this provision states that tsra's statutory provisions remain in place that agricultural exports to cuba be either paid for by "cash in advance" or financed using a third - country bank .

secretary of the treasury geithner provided additional guidance on the implementation of this provision in a letter published in the congressional record that states that , "exporters will still be required to receive payment in advance of shipment. .

this appears to continue the bush administration policy imposed in february 2005 .

given the secretary's interpretation , it appears the omnibus provision will have little , if any , practical effect .

while the secretary's response ameliorated the concerns that several senators had regarding the provision , it also triggered concerns by other senators who maintained that the secretary's action ignores the legislative intent of the cuba provisions to ease restrictions on agricultural sales to cuba .

