recent drought in the southeast has intensified a tri - state water conflict involving alabama , florida , and georgia over water allocation and management in the apalachicola - chattahoochee - flint ( acf ) river basin ( see figure 1 ) .

the water at stake is vital for the basin's municipalities and industries .

these include the atlanta metropolitan area's populace , industry , and recreational economy ; hydropower dams and cooling of thermoelectric power plants throughout the basin ; lower basin navigation interests ; agriculture , including irrigators ; and the regionally significant apalachicola bay oyster industry .

the water also is vital to threatened and endangered species and basin ecosystems .

management of the current drought may shape long - term acf management , set precedents for future federal drought responses , and affect the role of the endangered species act ( esa ) in water resources management .

for more information on acf species issues , see crs report rl34440 , apalachicola - chattahoochee - flint drought: species and ecosystem management , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

drought has escalated competition for the water in federal acf reservoirs .

a central issue for the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) is how to manage its reservoirs to meet municipal and industrial ( m&i ) water needs equitably in the upper and lower basin , while complying with federal law ( eg , esa ) and minimizing harm to river and bay ecosystems .

the operation of federal reservoirs shapes both the quantity of stored water and the river flows .

predictions for a continued drought have georgia's upper basin municipal and industrial users concerned about depletion of their principal ( and , in some cases , their only ) water supply — lake lanier — which is slow to refill because of the limited drainage area feeding into it .

lower basin interests ( including those in southwest georgia ) are concerned about current and future river flows to meet their municipal , electricity , and ecosystem needs .

this report provides an introductory analysis of federal water management issues in the acf , particularly during drought .

the report underscores that decision - makers are faced with the tradeoff of the current harm that reduced flows may cause aquatic species against the benefits of maintaining water in storage for future multi - purpose use later .

the first section briefly introduces the basin's water resources and related federal issues .

the second section summarizes current federal reservoir operations .

the third section discusses how the municipal , industrial , and agricultural uses of acf waters affect federal reservoir management .

the fourth section covers how species protections affect corps operations and how corps operations may affect protected species .

the fifth section briefly discusses legislation in the 110 th congress related to the acf and water supply and management issues in the southeast .

the report concludes with comments about the acf in the broader context of federal water policies and projects .

many aspects of the complex acf management issues are not discussed in detail ( eg , acf navigation and recreation issues , the influence of the alabama - coosa - tallapoosa ( act ) basin ) .

consumptive use of water reduces the amount of water available in the basin for other uses , including in - stream flows .

efforts to reduce water consumption through conservation and efficiency programs often fall into two categories: programs to reduce water use without reducing services by improving efficiency and reducing waste ; and short - term emergency measures that cut services .

municipal , industrial , and agricultural water use are the primary consumptive uses in the acf basin .

this section provides a brief discussion of these consumptive uses and their management during the current drought , including short - term emergency conservation measures .

depletion or inability to access municipal drinking water sources can represent a significant public health threat , and reductions in m&i and agricultural water supply can have significant economic impacts .

although the drought has made reservoir management and endangered species protections the acf basin's most active federal issues , the tri - state disagreement over water allocation and managing municipal , industrial , and agricultural demand will persist even when the drought subsides .

the drought is drawing attention to how the corps operates its acf reservoirs under a draft water supply plan from 1989 that is being modified through interim plans for individual dams and exceptional drought waivers .

this situation and the related lawsuits are increasing interest in having the three states devise a comprehensive long - term solution in order to avoid congressional or judicial resolutions on a piecemeal basis ; however , the administration's attempt to garner such a tri - state agreement failed in early 2008 .

how the federal government responds to the current acf drought may set precedents for the long - term management of the acf basin and other basins whose stakeholders compete for water resources , as well as other basins where the demands on federal infrastructure have changed significantly since their original authorizations .

increasing pressures on the quality and quantity of available water supplies — due to growing population , environmental regulation , in - stream species and ecosystem needs , water source contamination , agricultural water demand , climate variability , and changing public interests — have resulted in heightened water use conflicts throughout the country .

the federal government has a long history of involvement in water resource development and management to facilitate water - borne transportation , expand irrigated agriculture , reduce flood losses , and more recently restore aquatic ecosystems .

congress makes decisions that define the federal role in planning , constructing , maintaining , inspecting , and financing water resource projects .

these decisions occur within the context of multiple and often conflicting objectives , competing legal decisions , and long - established institutional mechanisms ( eg , century - old water rights , contractual obligations , etc. ) .

the acf is a prime example of the complexity of the river management issues in which the corps and other federal water management and resource agencies are embroiled along with state and local governments and the general public .

how the nation uses and values its rivers has changed over time .

rivers are now seen as not only providing economic benefits but also recreational opportunities and ecosystem services , such as species habitat , which also have economic dimensions .

these changes have manifested themselves in law ( eg , esa ) and implementation of water resources statutes .

this shift has caused a reexamination by the courts , agencies , and stakeholders of the distribution of economic and other benefits of river management alternatives .

the debate over acf management raises some fundamental questions about water resources management in the nation , such as whether some river uses should take priority over others ( eg , threatened and endangered species protection over inland waterway transportation ) , how to evaluate alternatives ( eg , balancing multiple uses , maximizing economic benefits , reducing short - term or long - term risk ) , and how to manage extreme conditions and changing water availability and use .

actions by federal agencies remain controversial on the middle rio grande , san joaquin , colorado , klamath , columbia , snake , mississippi , and missouri rivers .

like the acf , federal actions and facility operations on these rivers frequently are challenged in the courts and by state and local interests .

appendix a. acf compact and lawsuits after almost 20 years of lawsuits about and attempts at allocating water among the basin states , the three basin states have been unsuccessful at resolving how to allocate water through a compact .

there are several pending cases related to acf waters , filed in various federal district courts .

the first , alabama v. u.s .

corps of engineers ( the alabama case ) , was the original case that led to a 1997 acf compact ; it was revived after the acf compact expired in 2003 .

the second , southeastern federal power customers , inc. v. u.s. army corps of engineers ( the d.c. case ) , was filed in the district court for the district of columbia in december 2000 .

the third case , georgia v. u.s. army corps of engineers ( the georgia i case ) , was filed in the federal district court for the northern district of georgia in february 2001 .

the fourth case , georgia v. u.s. army corps of engineers ( the georgia ii case ) , was filed in the federal district court for the northern district of georgia in june 2006 .

the fifth case , florida v. u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( the florida case ) , was filed in the federal district court for the northern district of florida in september 2006 .

the sixth case , city of columbus v. u.s. army corps of engineers ( the city of columbus case ) , was filed in the federal district court for the middle district of georgia in august 2007 .

the seventh case , city of apalachicola v. u.s. army corps of engineers ( the city of apalachicola case ) , was filed in the federal district court for the northern district of florida in january 2008 .

many of these cases raise the same legal issues in differing contexts .

in order to avoid repetitive litigation over very similar issues , many of the cases were consolidated in march 2007 .

one of the recurring issues in the litigation is determination of the authorized purposes of lake lanier .

this issue was addressed in the most recent decision relating to the acf ( see discussion of the d.c. case below ) .

in february 2008 , the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit held that congressional authorization would be necessary in order to provide local water supply for municipalities near the reservoir .

that opinion directly affected only the d.c. case , the sole case omitted from the consolidation .

this appendix includes a discussion of each of the cases and the consolidation .

it also discusses considerations for the future of the litigation , including supreme court jurisdiction and possible effects of the d.c. case on the remainder of the litigation .

acf cases the alabama case and the acf compact .

in 1990 , alabama and florida filed suit ( the alabama case ) against the corps to stop the larger withdrawals it had approved for georgia , based in part on the impact they would have on downstream users and a failure to comply with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321-4347 ) .

the suit alleged that the corps exceeded its authority under the water supply act of 1958 by reallocating storage in the acf reservoirs .

under the water supply act , a modification to reservoir projects "which would seriously affect the purposes for which the project was authorized ... or which would involve major structural or operational changes shall be made only upon the approval of congress. .

the authorized purposes of lake lanier are disputed among the parties and have become a recurring issue in each of the lawsuits filed .

generally , each of the parties except georgia recognizes three authorized uses: flood control , hydropower , and navigation .

georgia has maintained that municipal and industrial use was also authorized .

the parties suspended the proceeding in 1992 to negotiate a settlement .

settlement negotiations ultimately resulted in an interstate compact ( the acf compact ) which was approved by congress in 1997 ( p.l .

105-104 ) .

through the acf compact , the parties intended "to develop an allocation formula for equitably apportioning the surface waters of the acf basin among the states while protecting the water quality , ecology and biodiversity of the acf. .

in other words , the compact provided an agreement to agree on allocations at some future date .

although the states negotiated for years , they never reached an agreement and , after many extensions of the 1998 date on which the acf compact was to terminate , the compact expired on august 31 , 2003 .

since then , the litigation has resurfaced as the states attempt to secure their water rights ( see discussion below and discussion on " consolidation of cases ." ) .

the d.c. case .

the d.c. case involved a dispute brought by southeastern federal power customers ( sefpc ) , a non - profit corporate consortium of rural electric cooperatives and municipal electric systems .

sefpc alleged that the corps contracts that provided for increased withdrawals from lake lanier exceeded the corps' authority under the water supply act of 1958 .

the increased withdrawals , they argued , consequently diminished the flow - through by which hydropower is generated .

sefpc claimed that its members were paying for buford dam hydropower at prices disproportionate to their residual share of water stored in lake lanier devoted to power generation .

the proceedings of the alabama and d.c. cases are interrelated .

in the alabama case , alabama and florida sued to prevent withdrawals of water from lake lanier made to the detriment of downstream users .

while the action was suspended pending negotiations , the d.c. case was filed .

in january 2003 , the parties in the d.c. case , including georgia and the corps , reached a settlement agreement and requested the court's approval .

because the parties to the d.c. case attempted to implement a settlement agreement that would affect the use of the water at issue in the alabama case , alabama and florida revived the alabama case to challenge the settlement agreement .

alabama and florida also intervened in the d.c. case to oppose the approval of the agreement as a violation of the suspension of proceedings in the alabama case .

in october 2003 , the federal district court in the alabama case granted alabama and florida's motion for a preliminary injunction , enjoining the corps and georgia from implementing the agreement in the d.c. case .

in 2004 , the district court in the d.c. case approved the settlement agreement , but required that the injunction entered in the alabama case be dissolved before the agreement could be implemented .

in 2005 , the 11 th circuit court of appeals vacated the alabama district court's injunction order , finding that alabama and florida did not establish an imminent threat of irreparable harm or a substantial likelihood of prevailing on the merits of the case .

in february 2008 , the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit reversed the district court's approval of the settlement agreement reached by the parties in the d.c. case .

the settlement agreement , entered by georgia and the corps , provided for two 10-year contracts that allocated water to georgia for municipal use .

the court's opinion addressed only one of the statutory issues raised by the appeal — the water supply act .

the court held that "the agreement's reallocation of lake lanier's storage space constitutes a major operational change on its face" and therefore , under the water supply act , required prior congressional approval .

because congress did not authorize the change , the court ruled that the agreement could not be enforced .

florida and alabama also claimed that the agreement violated the flood control act and nepa , but the court did not reach those issues .

the georgia i case .

in 2000 , the governor of georgia made a written water supply request asking the corps to commit to making increased releases of water from the buford dam until the year 2030 in order to assure a reliable municipal and industrial water supply to the atlanta region .

in 2001 , after nine months without a reply to the request , georgia sued the corps to increase its water supply .

while the alabama and dc cases were being litigated , florida and sefpc filed motions to intervene in the georgia i case , but the motions were denied by the district court .

after this denial , the corps denied georgia's request , claiming that it lacked the "legal authority to grant georgia's request without additional legislative authority , because the request would involve substantial effects on project purposes and major operational changes. .

on appeal , the court of appeals for the 11 th circuit overturned the district court's decision .

the court permitted florida and sefpc to intervene and returned the case to the district court for further adjudication .

the district court , noting the similarity of the parties and the subject matter , found the case to be parallel to the alabama case .

the court suspended the proceedings in the georgia i case pending resolution of the alabama case .

 ( see discussion below on " consolidation of cases ." ) .

the georgia ii case .

in 2006 , the corps issued an interim operations plan ( iop ) for woodruff dam for the purpose of protecting federally protected species in the apalachicola river .

 ( see discussion on p .

6. ) .

georgia sued the corps to challenge the iop , claiming that it constituted a change from the only approved water control plan ( which was adopted in the late 1950s ) .

georgia argued that , by releasing more water from reservoir storage to meet the in - stream requirements for the apalachicola river in the iop , the corps was jeopardizing the state's future water supply .

the releases allegedly did not account for dry weather conditions and did not reserve enough water to supplement the dry summer conditions in northern georgia .

the suit also alleged that water supply was a contemplated purpose of the corps' water project .

 ( see discussion below on " consolidation of cases ." ) .

the florida case .

in 2006 , fws issued a biological opinion ( biop ) regarding the impact of the iop for woodruff dam on protected species downstream ( see discussion on p. 6 ) .

florida filed a lawsuit to review the biop , which was issued pursuant to the esa .

the biop concluded that the corps' operations under the iop were not likely to jeopardize the species or their habitat .

florida sought review , claiming that operations had already caused significant damage .

the biop , according to florida , violated rational decision - making standards .

florida also alleged that the municipal and industrial uses for which georgia sought water were not authorized purposes .

 ( see discussion below on " consolidation of cases " ) the city of columbus case .

in 2007 , the city of columbus , georgia , sued the corps , challenging the validity of the iop .

columbus asserted that the corps failed to adopt a formally finalized water control plan for the acf basin and that the corps' current operation under the iop violated its legal authority .

the corps was operating under a third revision of the iop , each changing the flow levels in the rivers , at the time columbus filed the lawsuit .

columbus claimed that the lack of reliable flow from the chattahoochee river impaired its ability to discharge water that it used to provide services to the city in compliance with regulatory requirements .

the city alleged that the iop improperly revised the water control plan because it was published in final form without public comment and was put into effect for an indefinite period of time .

according to columbus , the iop resulted in over - releases of water from the acf reservoirs to the city's detriment .

the city of apalachicola case .

in 2008 , the city of apalachicola , florida , sued the corps , challenging its management and operation of the acf facilities .

the lawsuit arose from the city's interest in maintaining the apalachicola bay ecosystem , which the city claims as a basis for its economy and livelihood .

apalachicola alleged that the corps did not complete an adequate nepa review when it issued the original iop , the modified iop , or the exceptional drought operations modification ( edo ) to the modified iop .

the city also claimed that the corps did not comply with environmental assessments required under the coastal zone management act ( czma ) .

apalachicola also alleged that various contracts entered by the corps , which provide for withdrawals for purposes other than those authorized by law , and the corps' application of the draft water control plan violate the water supply act , flood control act , and nepa .

consolidation of cases .

in march 2007 , the alabama , georgia i , georgia ii , and florida cases were consolidated and transferred to the federal district court for the middle district of florida "to serve the convenience of the parties and witnesses and promote the just and efficient conduct of the litigation. .

the city of columbus case was also included in this litigation after it was filed .

other cases filed since the consolidation that relate to the acf dispute , including the city of apalachicola case , are likely to be included in the consolidated proceedings .

the d.c. case was excluded from this consolidation of proceedings because it had already reached the appellate court , whereas the cases that were consolidated remained in various federal district courts .

considerations for future litigation efforts u.s. supreme court review .

the u.s. supreme court has not addressed the issues raised by the acf litigation at this time .

in june 2006 , the court declined to review an 11 th circuit decision in the alabama case .

the underlying 11 th circuit opinion held that the action did not involve a controversy between states , which would have to be heard by the u.s. supreme court , but did involve a dispute between states and a federal agency , which was properly heard by the lower federal courts .

therefore , the court would only hear arguments regarding the acf dispute if a new lawsuit is filed by one state against another state or if a party to one of the lawsuits appeals a circuit court's decision .

anticipated effects of the d.c. case decision .

as discussed above , the various lawsuits involve many recurring issues , including authorized purposes of lake lanier , the effect of the water supply act of 1958 on authorized purposes , and whether the environmental reviews that have been conducted satisfy the requirements of nepa .

the d.c .

circuit's decision holding that reallocation of water supply storage for municipal use would require congressional authorization addresses one of these issues .

that decision may affect the future path of litigation in the other cases .

although the court determined that the settlement agreement was unenforceable , the litigation of the d.c. case may continue at different levels .

one or more of the parties may try to appeal the circuit court's decision to the u.s. supreme court .

if the supreme court accepts the case for review , it may or may not uphold the d.c .

circuit's interpretation of the issue .

the d.c .

circuit's decision addressed only one of the statutory challenges raised before the court .

as a result , the case may also be remanded to the original court ( the d.c. district court ) for further review of other issues raised but not resolved in the higher courts .

if the case is remanded to the district court , it may be consolidated with the other cases .

the d.c. case was omitted from the original consolidation because it was the only case not on the trial level .

if it is remanded to the district court for further consideration , it would again be on the same level of review as the other cases and potentially be appropriate for consolidation .

generally , the consolidated cases , being litigated in a different jurisdiction ( a district court within the 11 th circuit ) , are not controlled by decisions in the d.c .

circuit .

that is , the 11 th circuit , or district courts within its jurisdiction ( including alabama , florida and georgia ) , may choose to interpret the issue of required congressional authorization differently than the d.c .

circuit did .

however , other courts may be bound by the d.c .

circuit's decision under a legal principle known as collateral estoppel .

the principle of collateral estoppel , also known as issue preclusion , prevents parties from raising issues that have already been resolved in previous legal proceedings in later cases under certain circumstances .

in order to raise the issue of collateral estoppel and prevent the consolidated cases from further litigating the issue decided by the d.c .

circuit , a party must show that: ( 1 ) the issue at stake is identical to the one involved in the prior proceeding ; ( 2 ) the issue was actually litigated in the prior proceeding ; ( 3 ) the determination of the issue in the prior litigation must have been "a critical and necessary part" of the judgment in the first action ; and ( 4 ) the party against whom collateral estoppel is asserted must have had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the issue in the prior proceeding .

if a court determines that these four elements have been met , the ruling from the prior proceeding stands , meaning that the party raising the issue of collateral estoppel wins on that claim .

if at least one element is not met , the court hearing the consolidated cases would be free to interpret the issue independent of the d.c .

circuit's decision .

appendix b. nepa and current acf operations nepa and the exceptional drought operations when a federal agency takes an action that could significantly affect the environment , it is required to conduct a review under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) ( 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321 et seq. ) .

the corps submitted an environmental assessment ( ea ) of the exceptional drought operations ( edo ) modification to its operations of woodruff dam with a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) .

this ea - fonsi means the corps determined that any adverse environmental effects were not so significant that an environmental impact statement ( eis ) was required .

under nepa , an agency is required to take a hard look at the environmental consequences of its action .

the u.s. supreme court has said nepa "merely prohibits uninformed — rather than unwise — agency action. .

the original case ( see alabama case in appendix a ) raises a nepa complaint .

legal challenges to eas are based on the following: timing , contents , and conclusions .

the timing factor is whether the document informed the agency decision , rather than providing an after - the - fact rationalization of the agency action .

challenges based on the contents of a document argue that the document does not show the agency took a hard look at the relevant environmental effects .

the conclusion that no eis was required can also be a basis for a legal challenge .

timing and content nepa requires federal agencies to comply "to the fullest extent possible. .

however , nepa does not require any particular results , such as choosing the least harmful project .

the u.s. supreme court has said nepa "merely prohibits uninformed — rather than unwise — agency action. .

accordingly , where courts have found that agencies took a hard look at the relevant areas of environmental impact and satisfied the other demands of section 4332 ( 2 ) ( c ) , the courts have upheld the nepa process .

to comply with nepa the agency must show that the environmental review informed the decision - making process .

nepa regulations promulgated by the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) address the timing of an environmental review .

the regulations all require the environmental review before the agency decision , indeed , as early as practical .

a section discussing timing of environmental reviews says: an agency shall commence preparation of an environmental impact statement as close as possible to the time the agency is developing or is presented with a proposal ( sec .

1508.23 ) so that preparation can be completed in time for the final statement to be included in any recommendation or report on the proposal .

the statement shall be prepared early enough so that it can serve practically as an important contribution to the decisionmaking process and will not be used to rationalize or justify decisions already made .

although this section refers specifically to an environmental impact statement ( eis ) , the rationale of not using an environmental document to justify decisions already made applies to environmental assessments as well .

after all , eas are intended to be performed to see whether an eis must be prepared .

therefore , since they precede an eis ( if an eis is deemed necessary ) , they must also precede the agency decision on a course of action .

a specific regulatory reference to eas further supports that the document is intended to contribute to the discussion of choosing an action: "agencies may prepare an environmental assessment on any action at any time in order to assist agency planning and decisionmaking. .

another section discusses the benefits of starting the environmental review at the earliest possible time: "agencies shall integrate the nepa process with other planning at the earliest possible time to insure that planning and decisions reflect environmental values , and to avoid delays later in the process , and to head off potential conflicts. .

early in nepa practice , the courts established that a nepa review should occur before an agency action was decided upon: "that the filing of an eis should precede rather than follow federal agency action has been consistently recognized by the courts. .

the fifth circuit described the harm in reversing the order: whenever an agency decision to act precedes issuance of its impact statement , the danger arises that consideration of environmental factors will be pro forma and that the statement will represent a post hoc rationalization of that decision .

nepa was intended to incorporate environmental factors and variables into the decisional calculus at each stage of the process .

the courts agree that a nepa review is intended to inform the decision - making process .

the ninth circuit addressed the timing of the environmental review in relationship to the agency decision .

it said the purpose of the review is to provide "decisionmakers with an environmental disclosure sufficiently detailed to aid in the substantive decision whether to proceed with the project in light of the environmental consequences. .

a reviewing court is likely to find that an agency failed to take a hard look at the environmental consequences of its action when the decision on what action to take predates the consideration of the environmental effects .

the contents of a nepa document may also influence a court as to whether an agency took a hard look at the environmental effects of the proposed action .

the regulations provide a general description of the contents .

eas are intended to be concise , but are also required to consider the need for the project , the environmental impacts of the project and its alternatives , alternatives required by section 102 ( 2 ) ( e ) , and a list of the agencies and persons consulted .

in the context of an action that could affect species listed under the esa , the nepa review and the biological assessment ( ba ) under the esa can be synchronized .

the statutory provision for a ba contemplates that it will be used in conjunction with the nepa process , and in fact can be considered part of a nepa review , although it does not mandate that the two go together .

another issue related to the contents of an ea is whether the document indicates that an eis is needed or that there is no significant impact .

reasonable people can disagree as to what conclusion the data in an ea justify .

deference is given to the agency's determination by courts , however .

that judicial deference can be reduced under certain circumstances , including when a court finds the agency has pre - judged the environmental impacts .

the environmental document must adequately support the conclusions within it in order for a court to uphold it .

also , the record must show how the agency reached its determination: "mere perfunctory or conclusory language will not be deemed to constitute an adequate record and cannot serve to support the agency's decision not to prepare an eis. .

if an ea with a finding of no significant impact is found to be inadequate , most courts will remand the action to the agency , where another ea could be prepared by the agency .

in certain rare cases , courts have directed agencies to prepare an eis , without leaving the matter to the agency's discretion .

the right to sue under nepa nepa suits are brought under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

therefore , courts review whether an agency's action was arbitrary or capricious or otherwise not in accordance with law .

parties have to show standing .

that limits plaintiffs to those who could show they were adversely affected or aggrieved by the agency action and that nepa intended to protect against that actual or threatened injury .

for example , an economic injury by itself is not the type of harm nepa protects against and could not be the basis for a lawsuit .

however , the reduced use of the river by a recreational kayaker could be the basis for standing .

plaintiffs could include individuals and groups , provided they were able to show they suffered an injury in fact that was different from the injury suffered by the community at large .

appendix c. acf electric power generation issues acf power generation includes hydroelectric facilities operated by the corps , georgia power , and private entities as well as coal - fired , gas - fired , and nuclear plants operated by southern company and its subsidiaries , southern nuclear and gulf power .

hydroelectric generation historically , hydropower at dams on the acf provides power primarily during peak demand .

an issue is the effect of decreased river flows on turbine operations , specifically whether lower reservoir levels would drop below the turbine's water intake .

currently , water levels are sufficient to generate peaking power for the region .

according to the corps , the two main units at buford dam can generate as long as water levels do not fall below 1035 feet .

even before the reduced flows under the edo , the two main units at buford were projected to be operational at least until summer 2008 .

the southeastern power administration ( sepa ) markets the power generated at corps - operated dams to its customers in the southeast .

sepa enters into five - year contracts with its preference customers ( cooperatives and municipal power systems ) with power delivery obligations based on 1981 drought levels .

sepa is obligated to meet its contract requirements whether or not sufficient hydroelectric power is available to meet its obligations .

in the event of a hydropower shortfall , sepa purchases power on the open market , generally at a cost greater than hydroelectric generation .

the additional cost is passed on to sepa's customers .

sepa does not own transmission lines and must contract with other utilities for use of the transmission system .

nuclear generation plant farley , located in southeastern alabama near the town of dothan , is a 1,711 megawatt ( mw ) nuclear plant ; water is used in the cooling system .

 ( see figure 1 ) according to the serc reliability corporation , in addition to being a large source of electricity , generation from farley is also important for maintaining the stability of the local power system .

plant farley requires a minimum water flow of 2,000 cfs to operate at full load under its current water permit .

at lower flow , water discharges from the plant may have thermal or other impacts on the chattahoochee river that could trigger regulatory action .

under the lowest flows in the edo , the flow at farley may drop to roughly 2,300 cfs , still above the plant's full load requirement .

because of the plant's design , it appears unlikely that all of the generation from farley could be lost due to low water conditions , at least in the foreseeable future .

farley is a two - unit plant .

on september 28 , 2007 , unit 1 went off - line for refueling , and through october and early november , water flows often dipped far below 2,000 cfs ( eg , to a flow of 1,048 cfs on november 3 , 2007 ) .

this indicates that the plant can operate with one unit at full load with much less water than required for two unit operation .

however , according to southern company , during the period october to may , when other generation and transmission assets are taken off - line for maintenance , both farley units are necessary for reliable operation of the local power system .

according to the serc reliability corp. , alternative , albeit more expensive , natural gas - fired generation could be used to compensate for reduced generation from farley during off - peak seasons .

however , these alternatives may be otherwise committed during summer peaks and very cold winter periods , in which case reliability risks would be greater if farley generation is unavailable or reduced .

coal - fired and natural gas - fired generation coal - fired power plants , older ( steam electric ) gas - fired plants , and modern combined cycle gas plants are dependent on water for steam processing , and primarily cooling .

older power plants , those whose construction began prior to 1972 , use a once - through system where the water is discharged back into the water source .

newer power plants do not discharge water , but use cooling towers to evaporate the water .

in low water years , once - through plants may encounter issues with thermal discharge .

the discharge from the power plant is typically warmer than the water source , and increases in the surrounding water temperature could affect the ability of fish and other aquatic species to survive .

this effect is more pronounced with low stream flows .

for both older and newer plants , water intakes for the plant must be below water level .

although several large coal and gas - fired plants are located along the acf rivers , only the coal - fired plant scholz in the florida panhandle has been mentioned as potentially being affected by low flow in the apalachicola river .

 ( see figure 1 ) this plant is considered a base load plant which generates power throughout the day .

although scholz is small ( capacity of 92 mw ) , the plant is a low - cost source of generation and is used in some situations to maintain the reliability of the local power system .

specifically , scholz is needed during high - demand periods to help prevent overloading power lines under some circumstances , and during low demand periods to maintain voltage levels .

according to southern company affiliate gulf power , the plant's owner , the plant can operate with flows at 5,000 cfs .

with the edo flows , the plant should be able to continue operating without modifications for three months .

the plant does not expect any issues with thermal discharge with the lower flows .

plant operators plan to make some modifications in its intake system to be able to continue operating into the summer of 2008 .

if scholz needs to shut down , there do not appear to be any transmission constraints in the area that would prevent power from being delivered from other generating plants .

however , the cost of purchased power or generation from other southern company assets may be more expensive than generation from scholz and farley .

also , the reduction in reserve margins from taking plant scholz and other generating plants off line could create reliability concerns , especially during the peak summer season .

