the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa , division a of h.r .

1424 , which was enacted on october 3 , 2008 , as p.l .

110-343 ) established numerous reporting requirements regarding a variety of issues .

some of the reporting requirements are assigned to newly established entities in the act , including the financial stability oversight board , the congressional oversight panel ( cop ) , and the special inspector general for the troubled asset relief program ( sig tarp ) .

other reporting requirements are given to agencies and officials who existed before the enactment of eesa ( eg , the secretary of the treasury and the comptroller general of the united states ) .

the recipients of these reports also vary , as well as their timing , frequency , and factors that trigger their development .

these differences notwithstanding , all of the eesa reports appear to share a common purpose—to provide information to congress and other entities on the implementation of the act's provisions .

this report describes the various reporting requirements in eesa and is organized according to the entities required to prepare and submit the reports .

the report also provides some concluding observations regarding those requirements .

the appendix of the report summarizes the act's reporting requirements in terms of those responsible for producing and receiving the reports , the timing of the reports , and when the reports are scheduled to end .

the preceding review of eesa's reporting requirements indicates that those requirements are both numerous and varied .

the individuals and organizations tasked with submitting eesa reports include ( 1 ) the secretary of the treasury , ( 2 ) the financial stability oversight board , ( 3 ) the cop , ( 4 ) the special inspector general for the tarp , ( 5 ) the comptroller general , ( 6 ) the director of omb ( and omb itself ) , ( 7 ) the congressional budget office , ( 8 ) federal property managers , ( 9 ) the board of governors of the federal reserve system , and ( 10 ) the securities and exchange commission .

in one case ( section 116 ( b ) ) , the reporting requirement is placed on a program ( the troubled asset relief program ) rather than an individual or an organization .

the designated recipients of the reports are equally varied , including the "appropriate" congressional committees ( defined as the senate committees on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; finance ; budget ; and appropriations ; and the house committees on financial services , ways and means , budget , and appropriations ; a subset of those "appropriate committees" ( eg , in section 116 ( b ) and section 117 , only the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; and the house committee on financial services ) ; congress as a whole ; the cop ; the special inspector general for the tarp ; the president ; and the public .

no single entity receives all of the eesa - required reports .

also , it is not readily apparent why some of the reports are filed with the set of "appropriate committees," some to a subset of those committees , and some to congress as a whole .

when reports are required to be submitted to "the congress," the parliamentarian in each house of congress ( on behalf of the speaker of the house and the presiding officer of the senate ) decides which officers and committees ultimately receive the reports .

many of the act's reporting requirements seem to address the same or similar issues .

for example , section 105 ( a ) requires the secretary of the treasury to report to the "appropriate committees" within 60 days and every 30 days afterward on all "actions taken by the secretary," including all agreements , transactions , and insurance contracts .

section 105 ( b ) requires the secretary to report to the same committees on the same transactions within seven days of each $50 billion in commitments to purchase troubled assets .

section 116 requires the comptroller general to oversee the activities of the tarp and report on his findings at least every 60 days , which would presumably include tarp - related agreements , transactions , and insurance contracts .

section 121 requires the special inspector general to report every quarter on its audits of ( among other things ) all "troubled assets" purchased or sold under section 101 , and the management of any insurance program under section 102 .

also , section 105 ( c ) of the act requires the secretary of the treasury to review the current state of the financial markets and the regulatory system and submit a written report to the appropriate committees of congress not later than april 30 , 2009 .

that report is also required to provide recommendations regarding whether any participants in the financial markets that are currently outside the regulatory system should become subject to the regulatory system .

similarly , section 125 ( b ) ( 2 ) requires the cop to submit a "special report on regulatory reform" by january 20 , 2009 , "analyzing the current state of the regulatory system and its effectiveness at overseeing the participants in the financial system and protecting consumers. .

the report is also required to provide "recommendations for improvement , including recommendations regarding whether any participants in the financial markets that are currently outside the regulatory system should become subject to the regulatory system. .

the number and variety of the required reports may have been intended to provide a variety of perspectives on the implementation of eesa , but the lack of integration of those requirements may make understanding the implementation of the act difficult .

also , given the nature of the "troubled assets" being purchased under the tarp ( i.e. , bank stock instead of mortgages or other instruments related to mortgages ) , it is unclear whether some of the reporting requirements are still relevant to the activities being carried out .

for example , section 105 ( a ) ( 3 ) requires the secretary of the treasury to provide a detailed financial statement with respect to the exercise of authority under this act , including ( a ) all agreements made or renewed ; ( b ) all insurance contracts entered into pursuant to section 102 ; ( c ) all transactions occurring during such period , including the types of parties involved ; ( d ) the nature of the assets purchased ; ( e ) all projected costs and liabilities ; ( f ) operating expenses , including compensation for financial agents ; ( g ) the valuation or pricing method used for each transaction ; and ( h ) a description of the vehicles established to exercise such authority .

the secretary of the treasury announced on november 12 that the department of the treasury no longer plans to buy mortgage - based "troubled assets," and will instead "aid banks and other firms that issue student , auto , and credit card loans in part by jump - starting the market that provides financing for these companies. .

therefore , some of these particular reporting requirements may no longer be relevant or helpful .

as a result , some have called for congress to revisit eesa's reporting requirements .

other information that is not specifically required by the act may be more useful to congress and others as they oversee the implementation of the program .

for example , several members of congress have expressed concerns that the funds being invested in banks are being used to pay dividends to stockholders , purchase smaller banks , or finance bonuses and other types of compensation for bank executives—not to increase lending .

although some of the reporting requirements appear to be general enough to allow the reporting entities to include how the funds were used , no individual or organization is currently required to do so .

as the cop's january 9 , 2009 , report stated: eesa does not require recipients of tarp funds to make reports on the use of funds .

however , it is within treasury's authority to make such reports a condition of receiving funding , to establish benchmarks for tarp recipient conduct , or to have formal procedures for voluntary reporting by tarp recipient institutions or formal guidelines on the use of funds .

the adoption of any one of these options would further the purposes of helping build and restore the confidence of taxpayers , investors , and policy makers .

also , although section 2 ( 2 ) ( d ) of eesa says one of the purposes of the legislation is to provide "public accountability" for the use of the act's authorities , only one of the reports is required by eesa to be made to the public .

most , if not all , of the required reports have been made public so far , but it is currently unclear whether , and if so , how , the practice will continue .

one of the recommendations from a conference on public accountability under eesa is that "congress should make clear that any reports required to be made to congress under the eesa should also be made public , unless specifically made confidential in the act or some portion is specifically designated by the reporting entity as being exempt from disclosure under foia. .

some of the reports are required to be submitted to the recipients relatively quickly , and some of the reporting deadlines have already occurred .

on the other hand , some of the reports are not required for years .

for example , section 134 of the act requires omb to "submit a report to the congress on the net amount within the troubled asset relief program under this act" five years after the date that eesa was enacted ( i.e. , on october 3 , 2013 ) .

some of the reporting requirements are recurring ( eg , in section 125 ( b ) ( 1 ) , which requires the cop to submit its regular reports every 30 days ) .

other reports , however , are only required to be submitted one time ( eg , in section 125 ( b ) ( 2 ) , which requires the cop to submit a special report to congress by january 20 , 2009 ) .

most of the reporting requirements include clear starting or ending points for the submission of the reports ( eg , those that are required within 30 days after the date that eesa was enacted , or those that require a report by a certain date ) .

in some cases , however , the starting points for the reporting deadlines are unclear .

for example , section 104 ( g ) requires the financial stability oversight board to submit reports "not less frequently than quarterly," but the act does not indicate when these reports are to begin .

similarly , section 116 ( a ) ( 3 ) requires the comptroller general to report "no less frequently than once every 60 days," but does not indicate when those reports are to begin .

finally , some of the reporting requirements ( eg , those placed on the secretary by section 105 ) expire on the date that the last troubled asset is sold or transferred , or the date that the last insurance contract expires .

without some kind of a lag period for the expiration of these reporting requirements ( eg , 30 or 60 days after the last sale or transfer of troubled assets ) , a complete history of these transactions may not be provided to congress or the public .

