parliamentary elections were held on july 22 instead of november 4 , as otherwise scheduled .

on august 14 , abdullah gul announced his revived candidacy for president , emphasizing that protecting secularism is one of his main principles and that he knows "the sensitivities of all our institutions. .

mhp and dsp fielded their own candidate for the post .

chp again boycotted the election .

yet , mhp , dsp , dtp , and independent attendees enabled parliament to achieve the required 367 member quorum .

gul failed to win 367 votes in the first and second rounds , but won the presidency in the third round with 330 votes on august 28 .

the referendum on constitutional amendments , including one providing for the direct election of the president by the people , still is scheduled for october 21 and approval is predicted .

however , direct election of a president may not occur until another president is elected seven years from now unless gul resigns before his seven - year term expires to allow a direct election .

on august 29 , prime minister erdogan presented his 24-member cabinet to president gul , who approved it .

only eight members had not been in the prior government , several were formerly in other parties .

erdogan chose 40-year - old ali babacan , who had previously been in charge of the economy and negotiations with the european union to replace gul at the foreign ministry , and elevated three close associates to deputy prime minister posts with responsibility for coordinating various functions and agencies .

the only one woman in the cabinet remains state minister nimet cubukcu , who is responsible for women , children , family , and elderly issues .

domestically , the new government's agenda includes promulgating a new constitution to replace the current one drafted in 1982 under military guidance .

the akp's stated aim is to promulgate a document that conforms to european standards .

to reassure secularist adversaries , prime minister erdogan has promised that the first four articles would be unchanged , meaning that they would include article 2 which declares that the "republic is a democratic , secular , and social state ... loyal to the nationalism of ataturk. .

erdogan aims for turks to have a $10,000 per capita income by 2013 and his programs include structural economic reforms to develop employment opportunities .

he also hopes to pass long postponed social security reforms and new privatization initiatives to alleviate the current account deficit .

in addition , a decision on future relations with the international monetary fund ( imf ) has to be made by the expiration of the current standby agreement in may 2008 .

as part of its anti - terrorism policy , the government will initiate educational , health , and transportation projects in the pre - dominantly kurdish southeast .

in foreign policy , the government needs to find ways to relate better to developments in iraq , including fostering ties with the baghdad government , dealing with the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) in northern iraq , and countering pkk terrorism .

erdogan has initially chosen a cautious diplomatic approach .

at his invitation , iraqi prime minister nuri al maliki , a shiite , visited ankara on august 7 , while then foreign minister ( now president ) abdullah invited vice president tariq al hashimi , a sunni , for consultations on august 23 .

maliki and erdogan signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) on "cooperative efforts against the pkk terror organization...." the iraqi parliament has to approve any agreement and action , which requires the cooperation of the leaders of the krg .

iraqi foreign minister hoshyar zebari claims that the iraqi kurds' leaders , iraqi president jalal talabani and krg president massoud barzani , support the mou .

however , these gentlemen have been conspicuously absent from ankara's diplomatic offensive so far .

should political approaches fail , turkey may consider military options at a later time .

barzani has declared that he will combat any turkish incursion , and the qandil mountains , where the pkk has its safe havens , is harsh , uninviting terrain for military operations .

nonetheless , public distress eventually may leave the government and military no other recourse .

erdogan also intends to continue turkey's course toward european union membership despite difficulties .

in the short term , this entails a revival of a domestic reform agenda .

in the longer term , the prime minister must convince european opponents of turkey's accession that the eu would benefit from turkey's inclusion .

finally , due to the severe polarization of society evident during the presidential election crisis and the parliamentary election campaign , erdogan will be called upon to appear magnanimous in order to heal his country .

his greatest challenge may be pursuing a "policy of unity. .

the prospect of eu membership had limited influence during the electoral crisis .

over the past several years , the akp has led turkey's march toward eu membership , overseeing passage of laws and constitutional amendments to conform to eu political and economic standards .

the akp views the path to eu membership as a way to advance turkey's democracy and claims that it would proceed with the reforms required for membership for the good of the country even if membership were not achieved .

more cynical commentators suggest that the akp , as the current incarnation of islamist parties closed as a result of military interference in the political process , is pursuing eu membership mainly in order to restrict the role of armed forces .

in december 2004 , the eu agreed to begin accession talks with turkey , with conditions that had not been applied to other candidate countries .

despite turkey's failure to meet a commitment to open its ports to the internationally recognized greek cypriot government of the republic of cyprus , the talks have proceeded with only the relatively mild eu rebuke of suspending negotiations on eight chapters of the acquis ( eu rules and regulations ) because of the cyprus issue , but permitting other negotiations to proceed .

there are 34 chapters in all .

neither the eu nor turkey apparently or officially wants to derail the process .

turkey is not expected to be eligible for membership before 2014 , at the earliest .

turks are far less enthusiastic about the eu than they were several years ago , with support falling drastically .

they are scornful of eu and european officials' repeated threats that the path to accession could be blocked if turkey does not recognize an armenian genocide that occurred in the early 20 th century , make concessions to the ( greek ) cypriots , or act on a variety of other matters .

turkish military commanders are particularly dismissive of the eu .

they charge that europeans aid the pkk even though the pkk is on the eu's list of terrorist groups , and that eu demands to improve the rights of kurds and religious minorities are a conspiracy to divide turkey .

moreover , the eu insistence that turkey improve civilian control over the military threatens the military's prerogatives .

turks know that their chances of obtaining eu membership have diminished markedly .

a unanimous vote of eu member states is required for admittance to the union .

europeans are increasingly opposed to turkey's accession .

some eu leaders firmly oppose turkey's membership for cultural ( religious ) reasons .

german chancellor angela merkel prefers granting turkey a "privileged partnership," but has not pushed the issue out of deference to her domestic coalition partner which supports turkey's membership .

she also has not defined privileged partnership so as to distinguish it from turkey's existing customs union with the eu and to make it an attractive option .

new french president nicholas sarkozy made his opposition to turkey's membership a campaign issue and is bound by a french parliament decision to allow a national referendum to decide the membership question .

most observers expect the french people to vote against turkey's accession .

sarkozy has proposed a mediterranean union of states of the mediterranean littoral , including turkey , but turkish officials reject the idea if it is a substitute for eu membership .

sarkozy has agreed to allow the eu's negotiations with turkey to proceed if the union appoints a committee to define its future borders by the end of the year , but asserted that he has not changed his mind about turkey's eventual membership .

germany and france are arguably the most powerful and influential members of the eu , but austria , denmark , and the netherlands also oppose turkey's membership .

european opposition has fed reciprocal feelings in turkey .

many in turkey ignored eu criticism even as eu officials commented repeatedly on the evolving election crisis .

after the turkish military's april 27 statement , eu enlargement commissioner olli rehn said , "the military should be aware that it should not interfere in the democratic process in a country which desires to become an eu member. .

on april 30 , the european commission urged the turkish military to allow the constitutional court to act "in full independence from any undue influence. .

then , on may 2 , the commission elaborated , "the european union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law as well as the supremacy of democratic civilian power over the military .

if a country wants to become a member of the union it needs to respect these principles. .

the commission welcomed the early election as a way to ensure turkey's political stability and democratic development .

on june 4 , in meetings with foreign minister gul and state minister ali babayan , turkey's eu negotiator , german foreign minister frank - walter steinmeier , representing the eu presidency , voiced concern about the military's april 27 message , while emphasizing the need to maintain "democratic secularism" in turkey .

he thereby sent a message that balanced impressions that earlier eu statements may have been perceived as too supportive of akp .

in his first speech after the akp election victory , prime minister erdogan vowed to relaunch eu reforms that have slowed since 2005 .

the membership process , if not membership , remains on the agenda .

during the akp era , the bush administration has continued to consider turkey to be an important ally .

this is despite the failure of the akp - led parliament to authorize the deployment of u.s. forces on turkish territory to open a northern front against saddam hussein in march 2003 .

the administration values relations with turkey because it is a critical transit hub for the resupply of forces in iraq and afghanistan , and participates in ( and twice led ) the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan , in the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) , and in the u.n. peacekeeping force in lebanon ( unifil ) .

turkey also is seen as a critical transportation and energy corridor linking the caucasus and central asia to europe by routes independent of russia at a time of increasingly concern about russia's energy dominance over europe .

akp's criticism of u.s. policies in iraq , its warm relations with syria and iran , and its outreach to the palestinian hamas group have not noticeably altered the official u.s. assessment of turkey's significance .

although some akp policies have been at odds with those of the bush administration , chp and mhp have been seen as fueling the anti - americanism that has already increased due to the war in iraq and u.s. inaction against the pkk .

thus , u.s. policymakers may have reached a conclusion that they had no side to back in the turkish election contest except the cause of stability .

as the presidential election crisis unfolded , u.s. government officials made increasingly critical statements .

early statements were limited to platitudes that redundantly emphasized the need for turkey to follow its constitution , while later ones contained warnings to the military to stay out of the political process .

after the turkish military intervention via the internet , u.s. state department spokesman sean mccormick said on april 30 , "we have real confidence in turkey's democracy and we have confidence in their constitutional processes and that all the parties involved in the election of the new president will abide by those constitutional processes. .

u.s. assistant secretary of state for european and eurasian affairs daniel fried averred , "we hope and expect that the turks will work out these political issues in their own way , in a way that's consistent with their secular democracy and constitutional provisions. .

secretary of state condoleezza rice declared , "the united states fully supports turkish democracy and its constitutional processes , and that means that the election , electoral system , and the results of the electoral system , and the results of the constitutional process have to be upheld. .

only in response to a question , however , did she agree with the eu forthright call for the military to stay out .

later , state department spokesman tom casey directly warned the turkish armed forces , "we don't want the military or anyone else interfering in the constitutional process or doing anything in an extra - constitutional way. .

given the low standing of the united states in turkish public opinion , u.s. support for any side may be viewed as counterproductive and none of the contending parties sought it .

the state department congratulated prime minister erdogan and the akp on their victory in the elections , which it said demonstrated the heath of turkish democracy , and president bush promptly called president gul to congratulate him on his victory and to affirm the u.s. commitment to a strong relationship .

aside from the domestic political crisis in turkey , u.s. policy makers were concerned about possible spillover of the campaign into turkey's policy toward iraq .

turkish civilian and military officials have repeatedly expressed disappointment in the failure of u.s. and iraqi forces to act against the pkk .

in the absence of action , the turks claim a right to act with or without u.s. approval .

some parties ratcheted up their rhetoric partly for political gain , but also because the pkk continued to attack and to inflict casualties almost daily .

in response , the turkish military has launched short - lived , "hot pursuit" incursions and artillery shells into northern iraq and larger scale operations in the largely kurdish southeast turkey .

during the election period , there were ( unverified ) reports that turkish troops were massed along the border .

u.s. officials responded to turkish saber - rattling with calls for restraint and voiced concern about the destabilizing effects of turkish military action on the situation in iraq .

on june 3 , secretary of defense robert gates issued a stern warning against such action .

the turkish parliament must approve a major military offensive against a foreign country , and on july 9 , prime minister erdogan admitted , "the possibility of getting parliamentary approval for an operation is not on our agenda right now. .

an incursion is not his preferred course of action .

however , if yet another major terrorist attack occurs , like the bombing at a crowded ankara shopping center on may 22 which killed 7 and injured about 100 , turkish authorities may not continue to be restrained even if action has unpleasant consequences for bilateral relations with the united states .

during the presidential election process , u.s. state department spokesman sean mccormack asserted , "we have full confidence that the turkish system will come to terms with whatever differences are within that system to produce a result that is democratic , that is consistent with turkey's history , and consistent with turkey's laws and constitution. .

he added , "what you are seeing is a debate ... about turkey's future course.... that is the functioning of a democracy.... .

president bush congratulated prime minister erdogan on his victory and invited him to the white house .

the meeting has not yet been scheduled .

u.s. officials probably view favorably erdogan's preference for diplomacy over military options .

the bush administration is likely to remain concerned about turkish - iranian relations .

the two neighbors concluded a counterterrorism accord in 2004 and have been cooperating in targeting their probably related opponents , the pkk and pjak ( party for a free life in iranian kurdistan ) .

trade between turkey and iran is burgeoning , totaling $6 billion in 2006 and expected to reach $10 billion in 2007 .

u.s. policymakers may be concerned about a july 2007 iran - turkish memorandum of understanding on natural gas , which is the prelude to a deal that would allow turkey to transport natural gas from iran and turkmenistan via a planned , but as yet unfunded , pipeline from turkey to austria called the nabucco project .

the europeans have been interested in nabucco in order to lessen their energy dependence on russia .

for the bush administration , the main problem with the new turkish - iranian accord is possible turkish petroleum corporation development of three gas fields in iran because the administration seeks to curtail international investment in iran's oil sector in order to pressure iran to resolve the issue of its nuclear program .

if turkey's investment in the project exceeds $20 million , then it would violate the u.s. iran sanctions act ( p.l .

104-172 ) .

no companies have yet been sanctioned under the provisions of the act for their investments in iran .

these include turkish companies involved in constructing the turkey - iran gas pipeline that will link to the one from turkey to austria .

this prior experience may have led the turks to assume that the new project would not be sanctioned either .

at the same time , turkey is concerned about the effect of a possibly nuclear - armed iran on the regional balance of power .

it supports only iran's right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful uses and has urged its neighbor to reach an accommodation with the international community .

finally , possible house passage of h.res .

106 , related to the armenian genocide issue , hangs like a sword of damocles over bilateral relations .

akp's reaction may depend on public opinion and on whether it believes it needs to prevent ties with washington from becoming even more frayed .

