child welfare services are intended to prevent the abuse or neglect of children ; to ensure that children have safe , permanent homes ; and to promote the well - being of children and their families .

most federal child welfare programs are administered by the children's bureau , at the administration on children , youth and families ( acyf ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

funding for acf programs is primarily provided in the annual appropriations bill for the departments of labor , hhs , and education .

several child welfare programs authorized by the victims of child abuse act are administered by the office of justice programs ( ojp ) within the department of justice ( doj ) .

their funding is provided in the annual appropriations bill for the departments of commerce and justice .

this report begins with an overview of the purposes for which federal child welfare funds are appropriated .

it discusses fy2013 appropriations for those programs , including the effect of the automatic spending cuts , known as sequestration .

additionally , it reviews the president's fy2013 budget request for child welfare programs ( first presented in february 2012 ) .

this report does not discuss the president's fy2014 budget request for child welfare .

by far , the largest share of dedicated federal child welfare funding ( roughly 88% in recent years ) is provided to states to assist them in supporting , or otherwise administering aid to , children who have been removed from their birth families primarily due to abuse or neglect .

this includes funding to support children in foster care , to assist children who leave foster care permanently to live with adoptive families or with a legal guardian , and for services to youth who have aged out of foster care or are expected to age out of foster care .

remaining funds ( roughly 12% ) support child welfare - related services to children and their families , including children living in their own homes and those in foster care , or are provided to support child welfare - related research and demonstration projects .

the fy2013 budget request submitted by the obama administration on february 13 , 2012 , anticipated $8.175 billion in federal support for the child welfare programs and initiatives discussed in this report .

this included about $7.571 billion in mandatory child welfare funding and $604 million in discretionary funding .

final fy2013 funding provided via p.l .

113-6 — and after application of the march 1 sequestration order and the 0.2% reduction in non - security discretionary spending — was $7.868 billion , including $7.282 billion in mandatory funding and $586 million in discretionary funds .

by comparison , for fy2012 congress provided $8.009 billion in funding for the child welfare programs discussed in this report , including $7.386 billion in mandatory funds and $623 million in discretionary program dollars .

for most programs , the president's fy2013 budget request closely tracked child welfare funding provided by congress for fy2012 ( as part of p.l .

112-55 and p.l .

112-74 ) .

the largest difference in funding authorized for fy2012 versus the funding requested in fy2013 reflected changes in the administration's estimate of funds needed to reimburse eligible state claims ( as authorized under current law ) related to provision of foster care , adoption assistance , and guardianship assistance .

support for these purposes is authorized under title iv - e of the social security act on a mandatory and open - ended basis ( meaning the federal government is committed to paying a part of the cost of providing this aid to every eligible child ) .

as noted above , p.l .

113-6 provides whatever level of funding necessary to meet the federal share of costs under the title iv - e program .

the president's fy2013 budget included $250 million to provide financial incentives to states to improve the child welfare system and $2 million as part of early implementation of a policy to ensure that child support payments collected on behalf of children in foster care are used in the child's best interest .

as discussed below , implementation of these proposals would require legislative authorization ( separate from appropriations ) , and specific legislation to authorize those proposals has not been introduced .

the fy2013 budget also proposed to reinstate funding ( $6 million ) to continue a nationally representative and longitudinal survey of children who come into contact with the child welfare system .

the study , which was authorized under section 429 of the social security act and was last funded in fy2011 , is known as the national survey of child and adolescent well - being ( nscaw ) .

additionally , the administration proposed to fund competitive grants to reduce pregnancy among foster youth by "repurposing" mandatory funds previously appropriated for abstinence education ( under section 510 of the social security act ) .

hhs estimated funding of between $12 million and $15 million for the grants based on the amount of this pre - appropriated money that has not been claimed by states in past years .

neither of these proposals was included in the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l .

113-6 ) .

on the discretionary side of the budget , the administration sought an increase of funds for research to support new competitive grants related to preventing and addressing commercial sexual exploitation of children ( $5 million ) .

this funding was not provided in the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l .

113-6 ) .

finally , the president's fy2013 budget sought to eliminate funding for three child welfare programs administered by the department of justice and included in the victims of child abuse act ( children's advocacy centers , court appointed special advocates , and child abuse training for judicial personnel and practitioners ) .

these programs received combined funding of $24 million in fy2012 and the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l .

113-6 ) includes support for them .

the following section discusses each of the child welfare legislative proposals included in the president's fy2013 budget as well as his proposals to increase , eliminate , or redirect funding for certain child welfare programs .

as noted at the beginning of this report , by far the largest share of federal support for child welfare programs is provided under the title iv - e foster care , kinship guardianship , and adoption assistance program .

the title iv - e program is an annually appropriated entitlement and congress typically provides the amount of funding that is estimated by the administration as necessary under current law .

this section of the report describes the meaning of an annually appropriated entitlement , before discussing some of the trends and assumptions behind the title iv - e funding request .

 table 1 lists the federal funding streams dedicated to child welfare purposes that were included in this analysis .

it also briefly describes those purposes and shows final funding levels for fy2010-fy2013 .

title iv - e program funding shown for foster care , adoption assistance , and guardianship assistance reflects final definite budget authority provided for each of those components .

finally , while this was not true for the title iv - e program , most federal child welfare programs were subject to sequestration .

the final fy2013 funding levels shown here reflect the march 1 sequestration order as implemented in administration operating plans for fy2013 .

