epa has identified and promulgated national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) under the clean air act ( caa ) for six principal pollutants commonly referred to as "criteria pollutants": particulate matter ( pm ) , ozone ( o 3 , a key measure of smog ) , nitrogen dioxide ( no 2 , or , inclusively , nitrogen oxides , nox ) , sulfur oxides ( sox , or , specifically , so 2 ) , carbon monoxide ( co ) , and lead ( pb ) .

on october 17 , 2006 , epa published its revisions to the naaqs for particulates to provide protection against potential health effects associated with short - and long - term exposure to particulate matter ( including chronic respiratory disease and premature mortality ) .

epa's revised particulates naaqs modified the standards established in 1987 that focused on particles smaller than 10 micrometers ( pm 10 , or coarse particles ) , and standards for "fine" particles smaller than 2.5 micrometers ( pm 2.5 ) introduced for the first time with the promulgation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs .

specifically , the agency lowered the allowable daily concentration averaged over 24-hour periods of pm 2.5 in the air from 65 micrograms per cubic meter ( µg / m 3 ) to 35 µg / m 3 .

the annual pm 2.5 standard , which is set in addition to the daily standard to address human health effects from chronic exposures to the pollutants , was unchanged .

the 2006 particulates naaqs also retained the 24-hour standard and revoked the annual standard for slightly larger , but still inhalable , particles less than or equal to 10 micrometers ( pm 10 ) .

the 2006 revisions to the particulates naaqs were the culmination of epa's statutorily required periodic review , based on its evaluation and analysis of more than 2,000 scientific studies available between 1997 and 2002 , and on determinations made by the administrator .

epa's review of the particulates naaqs and of the scientific criteria for setting the standards completed in 2006 was initiated not long after the 1997 promulgation .

the 2006 particulates naaqs generated national interest and debate , and oversight in congress , as did the previous changes to the particulates standards promulgated in 1997 .

while the 2006 particulates naaqs generally tightened the air quality standards for fine particulate matter , the action caused considerable controversy , including concerns that the standards were outside the range recommended by both epa staff and by the scientific advisory panel ( clean air scientific advisory committee , or casac ) established by the caa .

conversely , some contended that available data did not support the need for stricter standards or , in some cases , the standards as promulgated in 1997 .

a february 24 , 2009 , decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit to grant , in part , petitions challenging certain aspects of epa's revised naaqs generated renewed interest in the pm naaqs .

in december 2006 , 13 states , the district of columbia , and several state agencies had petitioned the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit to review the 2006 particulates naaqs .

in addition , several groups representing various industry and agriculture interests ( including coal , iron , steel , and corn refiners , oilseed processors , farmers , and cattle and pork producers ) , as well as environmental and public health organizations , filed petitions with the d.c .

circuit challenging the 2006 naaqs .

petitioners , joined by several interveners and amici , challenged both the fine and coarse particulates standards .

the court's decision did not vacate the pm standards but remanded certain aspects of the annual pm 2.5 standard to epa for reconsideration ; the petitions did not challenge the tightening of the daily ( 24-hour ) standard .

although implementation of the 2006 pm naaqs continues , epa initiated its statutorily required review of the pm naaqs , in part in response to the decision , not long after the 2006 promulgation of the pm naaqs .

epa staff reassessed scientific studies considered in setting the 2006 pm naaqs revisions , reviewed and analyzed extensive subsequent research , and considered public comments and recommendations of the casac .

based on the scientific evidence considered , epa administrator lisa p. jackson signed the proposal that would tighten the current standard primarily by lowering the annual health - based ( "primary" ) standard for pm 2.5 .

the proposal includes options for new secondary standards to address visibility impacts in urban areas associated with pm 2.5 , but did not modify the standards for inhalable coarse particles smaller than 10 micrometers ( pm 10 ) .

epa is to finalize its decision regarding the pm naaqs by december 14 , 2012 .

for an overview of the proposed revisions to the pm naaqs published june 29 , 2012 , see crs report r42671 , air quality: epa's 2012 proposed changes to the particulate matter ( pm ) standard , by [author name scrubbed] .

the range of issues raised prior to and shortly after the promulgation of the 2006 pm 2.5 naaqs could provide relevant insights as epa proceeds with finalizing its decisions with regard to revising particulates naaqs .

this crs report provides an analysis of the agency's final 2006 revisions to the particulates naaqs , and an overview of the estimated costs and benefits of the revised standards and of more stringent alternatives analyzed .

the report highlights concerns and issues raised regarding the 2006 revisions to the particulates standards , including those of the science advisory committee ( casac ) , and actions in congress .

establishing naaqs does not directly limit emissions ; rather , it represents the epa administrator's formal judgment regarding the level of ambient pollution that will protect public health with an adequate margin of safety .

under sections 108-109 of the caa , congress mandated that epa set national ambient ( outdoor ) air quality standards for pollutants whose emissions "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health ( primary standards ) or welfare ( secondary standards ) " and "the presence of which in the ambient air results from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources. .

the statute also requires that every five years epa review the latest scientific studies and reaffirm or modify previously established naaqs .

as discussed above , in setting and revising the naaqs , the caa directs the epa administrator to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety .

this language has been interpreted , both by the agency and by the courts , as requiring standards based on a review of the health impacts , without consideration of the costs , technological feasibility , or other non - health criteria .

costs and feasibility are generally taken into account in naaqs implementation ( a process that is primarily a state responsibility ) .

nevertheless , epa released a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) on october 6 , 2006 , to meet its obligations under executive order 12866 and in compliance with guidance from the white house office of management and budget .

the ria only analyzed the benefits and costs of implementing the pm 2.5 naaqs .

citing time , data , and modeling limitations , epa did not analyze the benefits and costs of retaining the pm 10 standard .

epa emphasized that the october 2006 ria differed from typical rias in that it did not analyze the regulatory impact of a specific action , and that it is primarily for illustrative purposes .

the basis for the benefits calculations are reductions in ambient concentrations of pm 2.5 resulting from a reasonable , but speculative , array of cost - effective state implementation strategies selected by epa for purposes of analysis .

the analysis does not model the specific actions that each state will undertake in implementing the 2006 pm 2.5 naaqs .

epa includes a detailed discussion of the limitations and uncertainties associated with the analysis .

in its impact analysis , epa's estimated baseline case incorporated expected impacts of other national regulations that contribute to lowering pm 2.5 concentrations in future years .

these other regulations included those addressing emissions from the power generation sector , in particular the 2005 clean air interstate rule ( cair ) .

cair was expected to serve as the primary tool to assist downwind states in meeting the pm 2.5 ( and 8-hour ozone ) naaqs by mitigating interstate transport of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) and nitrogen oxide ( nox ) emissions from electric generating units that contribute to the formation of pm 2.5 .

as discussed earlier in this report , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit initially vacated cair in its entirety in a july 11 , 2008 , decision , and then modified its decision , allowing cair to remain in effect until a new rule is promulgated by epa .

epa subsequently published a final rule replacing cair , the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr ) , on august 8 , 2011 .

as discussed above , csapr was stayed in december 2011 , and then vacated on august 21 , 2012 , by the d.c .

circuit court of appeals .

on october 5 , 2012 , the u.s. department of justice filed a petition seeking en banc rehearing of the d.c .

circuit's august 21 , 2012 , decision regarding the csapr .

building on emission reductions attributed to cair phase i , the csapr was expected to result in relatively comparable benefits to those associated with cair in epa's october 2006 ria .

the d.c .

circuit denied requests for both a panel and the en banc rehearing on january 24 , 2013 .

to date , epa has not made a decision regarding its response to the court's denial for a rehearing .

congress and a wide variety of stakeholders closely followed the development of the 2006 particulates naaqs since epa's review began nearly 10 years ago .

congressional hearings were held regarding implementation and review of the particulates naaqs .

well before epa formally proposed revising the particulates naaqs , stakeholders were providing evidence and arguments at public hearings and other forums for their preferred recommendations .

in general , business and industry opposed more stringent standards , and public health and environmental interest groups advocated tighter standards .

epa received thousands of comments during various stages of development of the particulates criteria document and in response to drafts of the epa particulates staff paper .

the agency reported receiving more than 120,000 comments in response to the january 2006 particulates naaqs proposal .

the administrator's proposed and final decisions represented the first time in the nearly 30-year history of the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) that the promulgated standards fell outside of the range of the scientific panel's recommendations .

in letters dated march 21 , 2006 , and september 29 , 2006 , the casac raised its concerns and objections regarding both pm 10 and pm 2.5 proposed standards .

the administrator is not required by statute to follow casac's recommendations ; the caa ( in section 307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ) requires only that the administrator set forth any pertinent findings , recommendations , and comments by casac and the national academy of sciences , and , if the administrator's proposal differs in an important respect from any of their recommendations , provide an explanation of the reasons for such differences .

courts , in reviewing epa regulations , also generally defer to the administrator's judgment on scientific matters , focusing more on issues of procedure , jurisdiction , and standing .

nevertheless , casac's detailed objections to the administrator's decisions and its description of the process as having failed to meet statutory and procedural requirements could play a role in the debate regarding epa's reviews of naaqs .

epa's october 17 , 2006 , promulgation of the final modifications to the existing particulates naaqs following completion of its statutorily required review sparked interest and conflicting concerns among a diverse array of stakeholders , and in congress .

as a result of epa's 2006 tightening of the fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) naaqs , additional areas were classified as nonattainment and needed to implement new controls on particulate matter in order to comply .

states and local governments were required to develop and implement new or modified plans for addressing emissions in those areas that do not meet the 2006 standards .

a stricter standard means increased costs for the transportation and industrial sectors most likely to be affected by particulate matter controls , including utilities , refineries , and the trucking industry .

in terms of public health , a stricter standard is expected to result in fewer adverse health effects for the general population and particularly sensitive populations , such as children , asthmatics , and the elderly , with the estimated value of these benefits significantly outweighing the costs .

because of health and cost implications , naaqs decisions have been the source of significant concern to some in congress .

the evolution and development of the particulates naaqs , in particular , have been the subject of extensive oversight .

as a result , the d.c .

circuit's february 2009 decision regarding challenges to the 2006 pm naaqs , delays in implementing the 2006 pm 2.5 naaqs resulting from the administration's review of the final designations , and epa's next round of periodic review of the particulate naaqs and subsequent june 2012 proposal to revise the standards , have prompted renewed interest in several of the issues associated with the promulgation of the 2006 pm naaqs discussed throughout this report .

