the "foreign service overseas pay equity act of 2008," h.r .

3202 , as amended , would eliminate , over three years , the pay difference between those foreign service personnel serving in washington , d.c. and those serving abroad who are not eligible for a locality pay adjustment .

this bill was referred to both the house committee on foreign affairs ( hcfa ) and the house committee on oversight and government reform ( hogr ) .

on july 16 , 2008 , hcfa favorably reported the bill by voice vote .

on august 1 , 2008 , an identical companion bill was introduced in the senate , s. 3426 , and referred to the senate committee on foreign relations ( sfrc ) .

on september 23 , sfrc considered and reported s. 3426 , without amendments .

on july 16 , 2008 , the senate committee on appropriations reported its fy2009 department of state , foreign operations and related programs appropriations bill , s. 3288 .

in its bill , the senate appropriations committee met the administration's request for funding needed to eliminate the existing 20.89% pay differential over two years .

at a time when 55% of u.s. foreign service personnel are serving at a hardship and / or danger post , the 110 th congress , in its closing days , may choose whether and how to address an issue that both the department of state and the foreign service consider to be a high priority personnel issue — the elimination of a 20.89% pay difference between service in the washington , d.c. and service abroad for the vast majority of the members of the foreign service below the senior foreign service level .

the pay difference is the result of federal locality pay laws not covering the salary of federal employees posted abroad .

while opponents question the need for a change in the compensation system because of the other allowances and benefits that foreign service often get when serving abroad , proponents for the elimination of the pay difference contend that the disparity has negative implications on the morale of the foreign service , considerations about overseas assignments , and possibly eventually on retention .

both the department of state and the american foreign service association ( afsa ) , the professional association and the recognized bargaining agent for the foreign service , said the elimination of this pay disparity is very important to them .

both the administration and the foreign service seek to remove the pay difference issue , but they are also motivated by different considerations .

for the past several years , both the bush administration and the members of the foreign service , through afsa , have sought to change the compensation system of the regular non - senior foreign service personnel to eliminate the pay disparity between service abroad and service in washington , d.c .

some members , congressional staff , and others engaged in this discussion also are aware that foreign service personnel serving abroad often get allowances and benefits for being abroad .

for example , if a member of the foreign service were to serve in mexico city , mexico , the person would receive a hardship differential of 15% of base salary ; 20% cost of living allowance ( 20% of an amount determined by a mexico city "shopping basket" ) ; an annual education allowance for each child ; and a quarters allowance to cover rent and utilities ( the amount for the allowance is based upon the grade of the foreign service member ) .

these allowances and benefits can change from post - to - post even within the same country .

further , if the member of the foreign service , for personal reasons , goes to the post by him / herself , the family will receive a separate maintenance allowance .

these economic questions as well as the questions of equity , recognition of the work of the foreign service , impact upon the morale , assignments process , and possibly retention are often weighed against each other as members and their staff consider this issue .

many view this proposed compensation system as a "pay raise" for the foreign service and ask why salaries should be increased when foreign service personnel already receive so many benefits .

supporters for the change state that this is not a pay raise , but rather a correction of 14 years of unintended inequity that is growing every year in the overseas compensation for the foreign service .

they argue that ending this pay difference would help validate the work the foreign service does , including the significant efforts and sacrifices that they and their families make in service to the united states .

in many posts abroad , foreign service personnel receive a post / hardship differential of 5 — 35% of base pay , a cost - of - living allowance , an education allowance for their children , and a housing allowance .

these can add significantly to the base salary level .

providing locality pay for those serving abroad would increase the compensation levels .

the lack of locality pay is no longer a matter of retirement benefits because the virtual locality pay for retirement computation in current law already takes care of the impact on an annuity .

those who question the need for this change argue that the foreign service is already well taken care of when they serve abroad .

those who support eliminating the pay differential contend that the allowances exist to address specific costs and hardships unique to working for long years overseas: danger pay compensates for the extreme risks of living in a country wracked by war , terrorism , political violence or endemic lawlessness .

education allowances make it possible for foreign service members to cover their children's education when no viable public schools are available .

cost - of - living allowances help defray the cost of food and other daily needs of life in countries where those things are vastly more expensive than in the united states .

these were never meant to obviate the need for the basic locality pay adjustment that all other federal employees get .

because one of the biggest benefits that members of the foreign service receive is free housing when posted abroad , many believe that this should compensate for any loss derived from the lack of locality pay .

these critics point out that if foreign service personnel own a home in the united states , they would be able to rent it out while they are gone , and build equity while the government takes care of their living quarters for free .

they ask if the locality pay adjustment is really necessary .

supporters of the change in the foreign service compensation system explain that while the housing abroad is free , members of the foreign service are not reaping a financial windfall even when they own a home in the united states .

these supporters explain: "most of our members own a home in the u.s. on which they have to pay a mortgage , upkeep , insurance and property taxes — and renting it out ( often impossible ) rarely covers all of these expenses and is itself a costly proposition. .

these supporters for eliminating the pay difference also point out that there are often hidden costs to serving overseas that do offset any gain from free housing .

among these is the fact that it is often impossible for the spouse to get employment and a salary equivalent to what could be earned in the united states .

also there are numerous out - of - pocket costs for being overseas .

these include travel not covered by authorized visitation basis from distant economically developing nations .

this type of travel may include attending the funeral of a family member , going to a family member's wedding , or graduation , or seeing a family member who is suffering from a life - threatening illness .

critics of the current death gratuity provisions believe the official status of a u.s. government employee working at an embassy should not matter in terms of a death gratuity .

the civil service employee detailed to an embassy and the foreign service member posted to the embassy should both receive the same death gratuity , particularly if either or both died in a similar manner such as the bombing of an embassy .

they were both serving the united states .

supporters of the foreign service personnel - only death gratuity provision in the legislation state that there is a difference between the civil service employee and the foreign service member who dies while detailed at an embassy .

for the civil service employee , it was a matter of choice .

for the foreign service officer , service abroad is a condition of employment .

foreign service personnel are expected to be "worldwide available," and expected to spend the larger proportion of their career abroad — that is why there are limits on the number of years a member of the foreign service can stay continuously in the united states , and why generally a member of the service spends about two - thirds of his / her career abroad .

they point out that when a member of the foreign service dies abroad , after a long career outside the united states , the family often does not have the same support structure to help them when they return to the united states as they would have had if they had lived continuously in a community .

the death gratuity is intended to help the family transition into a new life .

