scientific and technical knowledge and guidance influences many of today's public policies .

the following definition is used by some science and technology policy analysts as a cornerstone of thinking about science and technology ( s&t ) policy decisionmaking: [science and technology policy] is concerned with the allocation of resources for scientific research and technical development .

it includes government encouragement of science and technology as the roots of strategy for industrial development and in economic growth ; but it also includes the use of science in connection with problems of the public sector .

because of the close association of basic research with higher education , this aspect of science [and technology] policy is difficult to separate from overall educational policy and from [scientific and] technical [workforce] policy .

because science and technical knowledge and guidance influences public policy decisionmaking on many other issues , some think that science and technology policy does not need to be a separate field of inquiry .

others , however , view s&t policy as different from other public policy issue areas .

these differences include the rapidity of change in science and technology ; novelty of many issues in science and technology ; scale , complexity , and interdependence among technologies ; irreversibility of many scientific and technological effects ; public worries about real or imagined threats to human health and safety ; and the challenges to deeply held social values .

this report will provide a basic understanding of science and technology policy including the nature of s&t policy , how scientific and technical knowledge is useful for public policy decisionmaking , and an overview of the key stakeholders in science and technology policy .

note that the report places a greater emphasis on the executive branch science and technology policymaking as the federal government supports public policy decisionmaking as well as performing and funding research and development .

the nation's first formal science and technology policy decision may well have been in the u.s. constitution itself in 1787 , when the congress was given power to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries .

at the request of president washington , congress passed its first science and technology policy - related act , regarding patents , in 1790 .

these actions led to today's patent and trademark office ( pto ) .

the constitution also identified the utility of scientific and technical policy guidance in the sense of congressional power "to coin money , regulate the value thereof , and of foreign coin , and fix the standard of weights and measures. .

this is the origin of today's national institutes of standards and technology ( nist ) .

in addition , the constitution stated that "no capitation , or other direct , tax shall be laid , unless in the proportion to the census of enumeration herein before directed to be taken. .

this is the origin of today's u.s. census bureau .

other constitutional propositions , not enacted , included the power of congress to establish a university and seminaries for the promotion of the sciences , and encourage "by premiums & provisions , the advancement of useful knowledge and discoveries. .

advancement of science was also used as part of the justification for freedom of speech .

prior to the constitution , congress requested a geological survey in the land ordinance of 1785 to classify lands west of the allegheny mountains that had become a source of contention in writing the articles of confederation — the precursor of today's u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) .

the encompassing nature of science and technology policy makes it challenging to provide the full range perspectives on science and technology policy .

the purpose of this section is to highlight some of the most common differing perspectives that generate discussion regarding science and technology policy .

they include the sometimes different perspectives of the science and technology community and policymakers regarding science and technology policy .

this section also discusses different perspectives on federal funding of research ; policy for science and science for policy ; and policy for technology and technology for policy .

the perspectives identified here may arise regardless of the issue being discussed , whether it be energy , transportation , agriculture , or science itself .

congress makes decisions regarding all four of the s&t policy facets described earlier: science for policy , technology for policy , policy for science , and policy for technolog y .

science and technology policy guidance can be used to frame policy issues , craft legislation , oversee federal activities , and govern .

in addition , the decisions congress makes influence s&t issues such as the funding of research and technological development , setting priorities for that funding , and supporting science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education .

in making its decisions , congress receives advice from both internal sources such as congressional staff , s&t policy fellows , hearings , and congressional support agencies ( see box 3 ) as well as external sources that will be described later in this report .

science and technology policy issues tend to reach the presidential level if they involve multiple agencies ; have budgetary , economic , national security , or foreign policy dimensions ; or are highly visible to the public .

in recent years , ethical issues , such as federal funding of stem cell research , have also reached this level of attention .

throughout u.s. history , presidents have obtained s&t advice through federal scientists and engineers , or informal personal contacts .

since the early 1930s , presidents have attempted to expand their sources of science and technology advice through a series of advisory boards and committees .

these boards and committees tend to remain for discrete periods of time before being disbanded , often by the next president .

when again faced with the need for s&t advice , new advisory boards or committees , sometimes reconstituted from previously disbanded ones , would be formed .

during the period between world war i and through world war ii , the role of the application of research to provide technology for both military and economic purposes became evident .

as a result , president franklin d. roosevelt established the office of scientific research and development ( osrd ) in 1941 .

the next several presidents used a variety of mechanisms to obtain s&t advice within the eop , to enhance interagency coordination , and to receive counsel from outside advisors .

organizations within the eop included the office of the special assistant to the president for science and technology ( eisenhower ) , and office of science and technology ( ost ; kennedy , johnson ) .

examples of organizations focused on interagency coordination included the president's scientific research board ( truman ) , and the federal council for science and technology ( eisenhower , kennedy , johnson ) .

examples of external advisory committees are the science advisory committee ( truman , eisenhower ) , and the president's science advisory committee ( psac ; eisenhower , kennedy , johnson ) .

during the nixon administration , the s&t policy office in the white house , ost , was abolished , and relocated within nsf .

in addition , president nixon decided to not appoint new members to psac after its members resigned .

president ford supported the return of a science advisory mechanism to the white house , but he wished to establish it through legislation , not executive order .

he signed the national science and technology policy , organization , and priorities act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-282 ) into law on may 11 , 1976 .

this act established the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) and ostp director within the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

from the ford administration until today , all presidents have had an ostp with a stable organizational structure and a director who also serves as the president's science advisor .

the role and influence of this office , however , has varied among administrations depending both on the president and the individual who undertakes the role of ostp director .

the judicial branch uses scientific and technical knowledge in making its decisions .

the s&t community provides this knowledge to the judiciary through its writings and expert testimony .

examples of cases where scientific and technical knowledge can be useful include product liability , medical malpractice , and environmental litigation , as well as public policy debates such as differences of opinion between political parties regarding elections and voting that involve statistical analysis .

while the science and engineering research community is constantly refining its theories through empirical testing , the judiciary must make decisions based on the scientific "facts" at a particular point in time .

the judiciary also makes decisions that influence that same science and engineering community .

as supreme court justice stephen breyer states: the practice of science depends on sound law — law that at a minimum supports science by offering the scientist breathing space , within which he or she may search freely for the truth on which all knowledge depends .

it is equally true that the law itself increasingly requires access to sound science .

this need arises because society is becoming more dependent for its well - being on scientifically complex technology , so , to an increasing degree , this technology underlies legal issues of importance to all of us .

we see this conclusion illustrated throughout the legal system .

the u.s. supreme court has determined when judges should assess the reliability of the scientific methodology and reasoning that supports expert testimony .

at a 2006 workshop , some experts expressed concerns regarding the judiciary's use of scientific evidence and expertise including whether courts sufficiently recognize minority views in science ; appreciate differences among the sciences in collecting , validating , and synthesizing evidence ; understand that much of the available research relates to populations rather than to individuals and that complex questions may arise in extrapolating data to a particular person ; define validity in a way that corresponds with the scientific community's understanding of the term ; provide an appropriate level of scrutiny to forensic evidence in criminal cases .

the federal judicial center provides a reference manual , training , and videos for judges on scientific topics such as management of expert evidence , statistics , economic estimation , dna evidence , and engineering practices to help guide judges in managing cases centered around science and technology issues .

the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) provides a court appointed scientific experts ( case ) service to assist federal and state judges , administrative law judges and arbitrators in identifying highly qualified scientists , engineers , and healthcare professionals to serve as scientific experts .

the judiciary system can also influence science and technology .

in science , the courts are involved with two types of cases: those involving charges of scientific misconduct , such as research with human subjects ; and those related to religious or moral opposition to particular kinds of scientific research or the teaching of science , such as biotechnology research or the teaching of evolution in schools .

judiciary activities related to technology focus on issues such as patent policy , particularly for emerging technologies when a research discovery moves from the realm of basic research to something that can be patented .

an example in this area is a supreme court decision to allow patenting of a genetically engineered microorganism .

the amount of scientific and technical knowledge and data produced by the s&t community can be sometimes be overwhelming given the nature of the scientific and engineering research enterprise which relies on a system of peer review and replication .

organizations that provide scientific and technical advice to policymakers can help provide an overview and synthesis of scientific and technical knowledge and data , and provide their view of a consensus of the s&t community .

the science and engineering community , however , is not represented by one individual or organization .

on matters of scientific and technical knowledge and guidance , its opinions are consensus - based with groups of scientists and engineers coming together from different perspectives to debate an issue based on the available empirical evidence .

in the end , consensus is achieved if there is widespread agreement on the evidence and its implications .

if this occurs , the knowledge is conveyed to policymakers so they can determine , among other factors , whether or not to take policy actions in response .

if there are major disagreements within large portions of the community , however , the lack of consensus adds to the uncertainty facing policymakers responding to a concern .

several organizations , when requested by the federal government or congress , provide formal science and technology policy advice: federal advisory committees , congressionally chartered honorific organizations , and federally funded research and development corporations .

these organizations are constantly changing ( see box 4 ) .

federal advisory committees and the congressionally chartered honorific organizations described in this report are under the federal advisory committee act ( p.l .

92-463 ) .

ffrdcs are funded by the federal government .

federal government officials and members of the s&t community also participate in the activities of international organizations , which also provide a source of knowledge and advice to policymakers .

federal government officials and members of the s&t community also participate in the activities of international intergovernmental organizations , another source of knowledge and advice .

in addition , many other organizations and individuals — policy institutes , the public , professional organizations and disciplinary societies , universities and colleges , advocacy , special interest , industry , trade associations , and labor — also provide their thoughts ( see figure 5 ) .

these organizations may agree on the scientific and technical knowledge , but disagree on what actions to take in response on an s&t policy , as their values on a proposed policy may differ .

for example , there may be agreement that action needs to be taken in response to concerns about climate change , but proposed policy responses may range from calls for additional research to emission reductions to a gasoline tax .

if the groups agree on a general policy response , such as emission reduction , they may still disagree on the best way to achieve that goal .

these organizations , described below , use a variety of mechanisms including papers , reports , and events to convey information to policymakers .

this primer on s&t policy decisionmaking provides an overview how science and technology influences policy , and how policy influences s&t policy .

the report also describes the major sources of knowledge and advice for policymakers .

in surveying this landscape , it is perhaps worthwhile to also reflect on the opportunities and challenges facing the current s&t policy decisionmaking process .

science and technology policy decisionmaking is both democratic and decentralized .

in other words , many organizations and individuals representing a wide array of ideas and opinions participate in s&t policy decisionmaking .

no one organization or individual is viewed as speaking on behalf of the entire scientific and technical community — either inside or outside the federal government .

each freely offers sources of knowledge and advice .

this provides policymakers with an overwhelming amount of information , and it can be challenging to sort through it all to determine which information is the most germane to a particular issue or decision .

communication between policymakers and the science and engineering community can also be a challenge due to fundamentally different perspectives , regardless of the issue .

in addition , the science and engineering community may find it challenging to recognize that the information they provide is only one factor in a policymaker's decision process , which can include cultural , economic , and other values .

another challenge is that many federal government agencies can simultaneously influence a s&t policy issue .

agencies often have overlapping roles that can influence assessments of risk , allocation of responsibility , problem - solving , and patterns of participation .

for example , federal decisionmaking regarding nuclear power includes nuclear regulatory commission - safety and design ; federal power commission - rate bases and authority ; occupational safety & health administration - worker safety ; environmental protection agency - environmental impact studies ; department of energy - nuclear power research and development ; federal emergency management agency - nuclear power plant emergency ; department of homeland security , federal bureau of investigation , federal aviation administration , u.s. coast guard , and others - nuclear power plant security ; and department of transportation - shipment of radioactive materials .

critics of the current s&t policy decisionmaking process say it can be challenging to make logical and consistent policies as each of these federal agencies may assess the risk of a given policy from a different perspective without a unified assessment .

there are many organizations and individuals in congress , the judicial branch , state and local governments , and outside of government such as industry , advocacy groups , think tanks , and others who also offer their thoughts on any given s&t policy .

as a result , this diversity leads some experts to believe that s&t policy decisions can not be made coherently and consistently .

further , some critics say that public policies do not always reflect what is known about science and technology , and neither policymakers nor the public have sufficient understanding to make appropriate decisions .

a reliance on experts may help policymakers make decisions , but some express concerns that the experts themselves are unable to separate their personal biases sufficiently to provide an independent analysis of the situation .

for example , on climate change , some have expressed concerns that some scientists are unable to separate their personal beliefs regarding public policy when providing the results of their research to policymakers .

in addition , experts do not always agree with one another due to the inherent uncertainty in science .

as a result , policymakers may find it challenging to obtain a sufficiently clear answer for decisionmaking .

policymakers must often decide whether to make a choice on a current assessment of the costs and benefits of taking action based on imperfect information or to await additional scientific and technical information .

moreover , while scientific knowledge and technological development is changing constantly , the same is not always true of public policy .

as a result , policies developed a number of years ago may not reflect the latest scientific and technological knowledge .

finally , critics say that accountability for political decisions can also be a challenge .

the decentralized nature of s&t policy decisionmaking can make it challenging to separate sources of advice and make those providing advice accountable .

for example , a member of congress may rely on a presidential appointee who in turn relies on his or her science and engineering staff .

that staff may develop their opinion based on federal advisory committees , and experts outside the federal government , who in turn rely on peer reviews of the work of individual scientists and engineers , who are not able to be held accountable to the public for public policies based on their knowledge and guidance .

despite these challenges , scientific and technical knowledge and advice has the potential of being useful in making decisions related to public policy .

policymakers have an opportunity to make their decisions based on the best knowledge and guidance available , along with the other factors they must take into account .

perhaps one way to recognize the value of scientific and technical knowledge and guidance in the policymaking process is to think of the many countries in which policymakers must make decisions with limited scientific and technical advice .

an intuitive sense can only go so far in such situations , while scientific and technical knowledge and guidance can help policymakers assess the potential risk and benefits of a decision they make so that societal and economic benefits are enhanced and losses are mitigated .

