on december 17 , 2002 , president george w. bush signed the e - government act of 2002 into law .

building upon the clinger - cohen act , the e - government act serves as the primary legislative vehicle to guide evolving federal it management practices and to promote initiatives to make government information and services available online .

in doing so , it also represents a continuation of efforts to realize greater efficiencies and reduce redundancies through improved intergovernmental coordination , and by aligning it investments .

the law contains a variety of provisions related to federal government it management , information security , and the provision of services and information electronically .

one of the most recognized provisions involves the creation of an office of electronic government ( oeg ) within the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

the oeg is headed by an administrator , who is responsible for carrying out a variety of information resources management ( irm ) functions , as well as administering the interagency e - government fund authorized by the law .

the e - government act also served an important role in providing the first , and current , official federal definition of e - government .

as a somewhat amorphous concept , the term electronic government , or e - government , conjures different images for different people .

for some , it is submitting a form online .

for others , it might be sending an e - mail message to their member of congress .

a 2000 gartner group report described e - government as "the continuous optimization of service delivery , constituency participation , and governance by transforming internal and external relationships through technology , the internet , and new media. .

a year later , mark forman , the first associate director for information technology and e - government at ( omb ) , defined e - government as "the use of internet technology and protocols to transform agency effectiveness , efficiency , and service quality. .

section 2 of the e - government act defines e - government as: the use by the government of web - based internet applications and other information technologies , combined with processes that implement these technologies , to ( a ) enhance the access to and delivery of government information and services to the public , other agencies , and other government entities ; or ( b ) bring about improvements in government operations that may include effectiveness , efficiency , service quality , or transformation .

in addition , section 207 of the e - government act broke new ground by establishing requirements for the accessibility , usability , and preservation of electronic government information .

however , while the reporting requirements of this section appear to have been fulfilled , ongoing concerns about issues such as the archiving of official electronic records and the accessibility of current electronic information for citizens have prompted the introduction of new legislation in the 110 th congress .

for example , the revelation of deficiencies regarding the retention and preservation of official electronic communications ( i.e. , e - mail messages ) by the white house have contributed to calls for more stringent rules and oversight related to the archiving of such materials .

similarly , s. 2321 , the e - government reauthorization act of 2007 , includes a provision ( discussed later in this report ) requiring the director of omb to promulgate new guidelines to make federal websites more searchable by online search engines such as google or yahoo ! .

search .

while many of the bush administration's e - government initiatives are separate from , and pre - date , the e - government act , some of the goals of these initiatives are statutorily affirmed by the act's provisions .

for example , section 216 addresses the development of common protocols for geographic information systems , which is also one of the objectives of the geospatial one - stop project .

section 206 directs agencies to use electronic dockets in their rulemaking process , which represents a more distributed alternative to the centralized docket being implemented under the regulations.gov initiative .

section 203 directs agencies to adopt electronic signature methods .

likewise , the e - authentication initiative strives to develop a government - wide approach to electronic identity systems .

in addition , some of the act's broader provisions , such as those related to the development of privacy guidelines , information security standards , and the identification of means to bridge disparities in internet access among citizens , contribute to the technological and regulatory infrastructure needed to support e - government generally .

funding for e - government activities was to be primarily provided through a combination of a dedicated fund in the form of the e - government fund , as well as other appropriations specifically authorized in the e - government act .

as discussed later in this report , the e - government fund was established by title i of the e - government act to serve as a dedicated funding source for interagency it projects .

however , although the e - government act authorized a cumulative minimum of $345 million from fy2003-fy2007 , concerns regarding oversight have prompted congress to appropriate no more than $5 million in any given fiscal year since the passage of the act .

congress has also repeatedly declined to approve the bush administration's alternative proposals to allow omb to tap the $40 million surplus fund of gsa's general supply fund .

partly as a consequence of the relatively small amounts appropriated for the e - government fund , omb has attempted to finance various e - government projects through an interagency "pass - the - hat" approach .

using this model , departments and agencies have been expected to contribute a portion of their budget to the managing partner department or agency responsible for developing the shared e - government application or service .

shortly before the fifth anniversary of the passage of the e - government act , authorization of appropriations for several key provisions expired on september 30 , 2007 .

some of the activities and offices affected by the expiring authorizations include , but are not limited to , the general services administration ( gsa ) e - government fund ( sec .

101 ) ; the omb office of electronic government ( sec .

101 ) ; the gsa program to operate a federal internet portal ( sec .

204 ) ; the development of a government - wide online repository of federally funded research and development ( sec .

207 ) ; the gsa program to study and enhance the effectiveness of community technology centers that provide computer and internet access to the public ( sec .

213 ) ; the gsa program to develop and maintain common protocols for geographic information systems ( sec .

216 ) ; the federal information security management act ( fisma ) ( title iii ) ; and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) responsibility to develop standards , guidelines , and associated methods and techniques for protecting federal information systems ( sec .

303 ) .

although the authorizations of appropriations for these provisions have expired , the activities have continued to be funded through the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) for fy2008 .

congress does , at times , approve spending for unauthorized appropriations to maintain the continuity of programs and services .

however , the occasion to consider reauthorization of the e - government act provides congress the opportunity to assess the results of federal e - government initiatives since 2002 , consider how they have affected the administration of government , and decide what changes , if any , are necessary .

in considering whether to reauthorize any , some , or all of these provisions , congress could choose to amend the e - government act to establish a permanent authorization for the functions and structures that have become integral to the operation of government .

congress could also choose to add new provisions to reflect the maturing of both the initiatives and technology now in place .

likewise , congress could choose to eliminate provisions that have not met expectations or that have been subsumed by changes in events and / or technology .

alternatively , congress could choose not to reauthorize any of the provisions of the e - government act .

on november 7 , 2007 , senator joseph lieberman introduced , and senator susan collins and senator thomas carper co - sponsored , s. 2321 , the e - government reauthorization act of 2007 .

s. 2321 would amend and reauthorize appropriations for the e - government act of 2002 .

on november 14 , 2007 , the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs reported the bill favorably without amendment .

a comparable bill has not been introduced in the house .

the bill has five main sections .

section 1 includes the short title of the bill .

section 2 would reauthorize appropriations for a variety of activities through fy2012 .

the activities covered by this section include those related to the operation of the federal internet portal ( usa.gov ) ; activities related to the operation of an online repository of federally funded research and development ; gsa efforts to study and enhance the use of community centers to provide computer and internet access to the public ; gsa efforts to develop and maintain common protocols for geographic information systems ; the federal information security management act ; nist responsibilities for standards to protect federal information systems ; the information technology exchange program ; the e - government fund ; and to carry out activities related to title i and ii of the e - government act that are not otherwise specifically provided for .

section 3 would amend section 208 ( b ) ( 3 ) of the e - government act regarding privacy provisions by tasking the director of omb with the responsibility to "develop best practices for agencies to follow in conducting privacy impact assessments. .

section 4 would amend section 207 ( f ) of the e - government act regarding agency websites by requiring the director of omb to "promulgate guidance and best practices to ensure that publicly available online federal government information and services are made more accessible to external search capabilities , including commercial and governmental search capabilities. .

the director of omb would also be required to review periodically and update these best practices so that they were "consistent with any advances made in information technology. .

agencies , in turn , would be required to be in compliance with this guidance within two years of enactment of the e - government reauthorization act and would be required to include information about these activities in their annual e - government status reports to omb .

section 5 would amend section 3606 ( b ) of title 44 u.s.c .

by requiring omb to provide to congress copies of the annual agency e - government status reports that the e - government act requires agencies to submit to omb .

on december 11 , 2007 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing on s. 2321 and related issues .

the witnesses providing testimony at the hearing included karen evans , administrator of the office of electronic government and information technology at omb ; john lewis needham , manager of public sector content partnerships at google , inc. ; ari schwartz , deputy director of the center for democracy and technology ; and jimmy wales , founder of wikipedia .

in his opening statement , the chairman noted that the "issues of accessibility , accountability , interactivity , and public collaboration are essential to the future of an effective and responsive government. .

to that end , karen evans provided an overview of omb efforts to implement the e - government act and related e - government initiatives over the past five years .

several of these initiatives are designed to make it easier to find related information dispersed across many government websites .

one example is science.gov , which provides a means to search across several federal research and development ( r&d ) databases simultaneously .

another example is grants.gov , which provides a single site to search and apply for grants awarded by 26 federal grant - making agencies .

however , while these initiatives have improved citizens' access to government information , concerns were raised that significant amounts of online government information are "invisible" or are not accessible to commercial search engines .

this problem can affect government search engines as well , as many utilize the same technology used by commercial search engines .

ari schwartz , citing a pew internet project report , stated that while "commercial search engines are the most popular means to find government information," many publicly available federal websites , either purposely or unintentionally , do not enable content to be indexed by these search engines .

some sites purposely include code to limit the ability of search engines to index content , while other sites simply do not include commonly used protocols created to facilitate a search engine's ability to index the content of a site .

one protocol singled out during the hearing was the sitemap protocol .

this technical standard was originally developed by google and is compatible with several of the most widely used search engines .

according to john lewis needham , the sitemap protocol "provides a mechanism for a website owner to product a list - or a map - of all web pages on a site and systematically communicate this information or 'sitemap' to search engines. .

while an increasing number of federal websites appear to be using this protocol , some do not .

as discussed earlier in this report , section 4 of the e - government reauthorization act would direct omb to promulgate guidance and best practices to make online federal information more accessible to commercial and government search engines .

other matters discussed during the hearing included outcomes since the passage of the e - government act ; the effectiveness of current privacy protections for citizens ; and the potential for web 2.0 collaborative technologies to improve interaction between government agencies and citizens .

in considering whether to reauthorize the e - government act , congress may also wish to consider a number of other issues related to the implementation and oversight of the e - government act , and e - government initiatives generally .

these issues include , but are not limited to the following .

one issue congress might consider is the overall effectiveness of the federal e - government initiatives at improving the efficiency and functionality of government operations .

this includes not only improving the delivery of information and services to citizens , but also improving the administration of government back office operations .

in a february 2008 report to congress , omb estimated agencies achieved a gross cost savings of $508 million in fy2007 implementing e - government initiatives and shutting down duplicative legacy systems .

in contrast , the federal government spent $65.5 billion on information technology investments in fy2007 .

although the cost savings from e - government appears to be relatively small , congress may wish to consider whether these e - government initiatives have delivered other , non - financial benefits to government and citizens .

potential questions include: have these initiatives measurably improved performance and service levels ? .

have agencies been able to redirect resources toward providing additional or enhanced services ? .

do citizens believe the quality of services and information have improved ? .

the problem of cross agency funding highlights the clash between the horizontal nature of government - wide e - government initiatives and the vertical organization of government .

congressional authorizing committees and appropriations subcommittees are organized by program and / or agency .

the allocation of resources and the oversight of activities are likewise jurisdictionally defined .

there are relatively few mechanisms to facilitate cross - agency collaboration , regarding the spending of funds .

although the e - government act authorized a significant sum that can be spent on e - government initiatives in the form of the e - government fund ( a cumulative minimum of $345 million from fy2003-fy2007 ) , concerns regarding oversight have prompted congress to appropriate no more than $5 million in any given fiscal year since the passage of the e - government act .

congress has also repeatedly declined to approve bush administration's alternative proposals to allow omb to tap the $40 million surplus fund of gsa's general supply fund .

as the number of cross - agency initiatives continues to grow , solutions that adequately address the needs of such collaborative initiatives , while ensuring appropriate oversight , may be needed .

as a blueprint of the business functions of an organization , and the technology used to carry out these functions , the fea is the means to develop government - wide initiatives .

as such , it is also the means to address the problem of interoperability , the ability of a computer system or data to work with other systems or data using common standards or processes .

interoperability is an important part of the larger effort to improve interagency collaboration and information sharing .

it also represents a significant challenge as the federal government implements cross - agency initiatives , such as the e - payroll , govbenefits.gov , and lines of business projects , to eliminate redundant systems and facilitate a "one - stop service delivery" approach to e - government .

decisions made in the development of the federal enterprise architecture can have significant implications for future it projects , suggesting that regular assessments of this process may be necessary to help minimize any potential complications .

with the upcoming transition of presidential administrations , questions arise regarding the continuity and sustainability of it investments made over the past several years .

in many cases , the anticipated cost savings and efficiency gains of these investments is predicated on their ongoing operation .

each new administration brings its own prerogatives and priorities .

in anticipation of program and funding requests of a new administration , congress may wish to hold hearings and conduct a systematic analysis of e - government activities in order to better inform its oversight and funding decisions .

