y oung people who have spent time in foster care as teenagers often face challenges during the transition to adulthood .

compared to their counterparts in the general population , these youth fare poorly in education , employment , and other outcomes .

the federal government recognizes that foster youth may ultimately return to the care of the state as adults through the public welfare , criminal justice , or other systems .

in response , federal policy has focused on supporting youth while they are in foster care and in early adulthood .

this report provides background to congress on teens and young adults in and exiting from foster care , and the federal support available to them .

it begins with a discussion of the characteristics of youth who have had contact with the child welfare system , including those who entered care and those who exited care via "emancipation. .

this process means that youth reached the state legal age of adulthood without being reunified with their families or placed in new permanent families .

the report then discusses child welfare programs authorized under title iv - e of the social security act — specifically the foster care maintenance payments program ( "foster care program" ) and the john h. chafee program for successful transition to adulthood ( "chafee program" ) — that are intended to help prepare youth for adulthood .

the foster care program provides reimbursement to states for providing foster care , including , at state option , to youth between the ages of 18 and 21 .

it also includes certain requirements that are intended to support older youth in care .

the chafee program is the primary federal program that funds supportive services for teens and young adults during the transition from foster care .

the text box below summarizes recent developments in the chafee program .

appendix a includes funding data for the chafee program .

appendix b includes a summary of other federal programs , outside of child welfare law , that address older youth in foster care and those who have aged out .

children and adolescents can come to the attention of state child welfare systems due to abuse , neglect , or other reasons such as the death of a parent or child behavioral problems .

some children remain in their own homes and receive family support services , while others are placed in out - of - home settings .

such settings usually include a foster home , the home of a relative , or group care ( i.e. , non - family settings ranging from those that provide specialized treatment or other services to more general care settings or shelters ) .

a significant number of youth spend at least some time in foster care during their teenage years .

they may stay in care beyond age 18 , typically up to age 21 , if they are in a state that extends foster care .

the children's bureau at hhs' administration for children and families ( acf ) administers programs that are targeted to foster youth and authorized under title iv - e of the social security act , including the federal foster care program and the chafee program ( which includes the education and training voucher ( etv ) program ) .

under the federal foster care program , states may seek reimbursement for youth to remain in care up to age 18 , or up to age 21 at state option .

in addition , the program has protections in place to help meet the needs of older youth .

title iv - e entitlement ( or mandatory ) funding for foster care is authorized on a permanent basis ( no year limit ) and is provided in annual appropriations acts .

congress typically provides the amount of title iv - e foster care funding ( or "budget authority" ) that the administration estimates will be necessary for it to provide state or other title iv - e agencies with the promised level of federal reimbursement for all of their eligible title iv - e foster care costs under current law .

separately , the chafee program provides funding to states for services and supports to help youth who are or were in foster care make the transition to adulthood .

it is available up to age 21 ( or age 23 under certain circumstances ) .

the etv component includes a separate authorization for discretionary funding to support chafee - eligible youth in attending an institution of higher education for up to five years ( consecutive or nonconsecutive ) until they reach age 26 .

chafee program funding is mandatory and has no year limit .

the etv program is funded through discretionary appropriations , also with no year limit .

figure 1 summarizes the programs and the title iv - e requirements on older youth in foster care and those leaving foster care .

any state , territory , or tribe seeking federal funding under title iv - e must have a federally approved title iv - e plan that meets all the requirements of the law .

as discussed in appendix b , other federal programs are intended to help current and former youth in foster care make the transition to adulthood .

federal law authorizes funding for states and local jurisdictions to provide workforce support and housing to this population .

states must also provide medicaid coverage to youth who age out of foster care until they reach age 26 .

federal support is available to assist youth in pursuing higher education .

historically , states have been primarily responsible for providing child welfare services to families and children .

when a child is in out - of - home foster care , the state child welfare agency , under the supervision of the court ( and in consultation with the parents or primary caretakers in some cases ) , serves as the parent and makes decisions on the child's behalf to promote his / her safety , permanence , and well - being .

in most cases , the state relies on public and private entities to provide these services .

the federal government plays a role in shaping state child welfare systems by providing funds , which are linked to certain requirements under title iv - e of the social security act .

title iv - e requires states to follow certain case planning and management practices for all children in care ( figure 1 shows these requirements related to youth in foster care ) .

though not discussed in this report , title iv - b of the social security act , which authorizes funding for child welfare services , includes provisions on the oversight of children in foster care and support for families more broadly .

the federal foster care program reimburses states and some territories and tribes ( hereinafter , "states" ) for a part of the cost of providing foster care to eligible children and youth who have been removed by the state child welfare agency due to abuse or neglect .

the courts have given care and placement responsibility to the state .

under the program , a state may seek partial federal reimbursement to "cover the cost of ( and the cost of providing ) food , clothing , shelter , daily supervision , school supplies , a child's personal incidentals , liability insurance with respect to a child , and reasonable travel to the child's home for visitation and reasonable travel for the child to remain in the school in which the child is enrolled at the time of placement. .

federal reimbursement to states under title iv - e may be made only on behalf of a child who meets multiple federal eligibility criteria , including those related to the child's removal and the income and assets of the child's family .

for the purposes of this report , the most significant eligibility criteria for the federal foster care program are the child's age and placement setting .

states may also seek reimbursement on behalf of title iv - e eligible children for costs related to administration , case planning , training , and data collection .

beginning with fy2020 , states can seek federal support for up to 12 months of ( 1 ) in - home parent skills - based programs and ( 2 ) substance abuse and mental health treatment services for any child a state determines is at "imminent risk" of entering foster care , any pregnant or parenting youth in foster care , and the parents or kin caregivers of these children .

also as of fy2020 , any state electing to provide these prevention services and programs under its title iv - e program will be entitled to receive federal funding equal to at least 50% of its cost , as long as the services and programs meet certain evidence - based standards , and the spending is above the state's maintenance of effort ( moe ) level .

the john h. chafee foster care program for successful transition to adulthood , authorized under section 477 of title iv - e of the social security act , provides services to older youth in foster care and youth transitioning out of care .

this section provides an overview of the program , as well as information about program eligibility , youth participation , program administration , funding , data collection , and training and technical assistance .

the foster care independence act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-169 ) replaced the prior - law independent living program that was established in 1986 ( p.l .

99-272 ) .

the 1999 law created the john h. chafee foster care independence program and doubled the annual mandatory funds available to states for independent living services from $70 million to $140 million .

it also established new purpose areas , activities to be funded , and related requirements .

the program has been amended five times , to ( 1 ) add the education and training voucher ( etv ) program for funding higher education opportunities ( p.l .

107-133 ) , ( 2 ) expand eligibility for the chafee and etv programs to youth who exit foster care at age 16 or older for adoption or kinship guardianship ( p.l .

110-351 ) , ( 3 ) ensure that foster youth are informed about designating others to make health care treatment decisions on their behalf ( p.l .

111-148 ) , ( 4 ) increase funding for the chafee program and add a purpose area about supporting activities that are developmentally appropriate ( p.l .

113-183 ) , and ( 5 ) change data collection requirements and multiple purpose areas that address program eligibility ( p.l .

115-123 ) .

the purposes of the chafee program are to support all youth who have experienced foster care at age 14 or older in their transition to adulthood through transitional services such as assistance in obtaining a high school diploma and post - secondary education , career exploration , vocational training , job placement and retention , training and opportunities to practice daily living skills ( such as financial literacy training and driving instruction ) , substance abuse prevention , and preventive health activities ( including smoking avoidance , nutrition education , and pregnancy prevention ) ; help youth who have experienced foster care at age 14 or older achieve meaningful , permanent connections with a caring adult ; help youth who have experienced foster care at age 14 or older engage in age - or developmentally appropriate activities , positive youth development , and experiential learning that reflects what their peers in intact families experience ; provide financial , housing , counseling , employment , education , and other appropriate support and services to former foster care youth between the ages of 18 and 21 ( or up to age 23 in states that have extended foster care to age 21 using federal , state , or other funds , as determined by the hhs secretary ) to complement their own efforts to achieve self - sufficiency and to ensure that program participants recognize and accept their personal responsibility for preparing for and then making the transition from adolescence to adulthood ; make education and training vouchers , including postsecondary training and education , available to youth who have aged out of foster care ; provide chafee - funded services to youth who have left foster care for kinship guardianship or adoption after turning 16 ; and ensure that youth who are likely to remain in foster care until age 18 have regular , ongoing opportunities to engage in age - or developmentally appropriate activities .

states may use chafee funding to provide supports that are described in the purpose areas and other parts of the law .

they may dedicate as much as 30% of their program funding toward room and board for youth ages 18 to 21 ( or up to age 23 in states that have extended foster care to age 21 using federal , state , or other funds , as determined by the hhs secretary ) .

room and board are not defined in statute , but they typically include food and shelter , and may include rental deposits , rent payments , utilities , and the cost of household startup purchases .

chafee funds may not be used to acquire property to provide housing to current or former foster youth .

as described in hhs guidance , states may use chafee funding to establish trust funds for youth eligible under the program .

the chafee program authorizes discretionary funding for the etv program at $60 million annually , with no end year specified .

the program is intended to provide financial support for the cost of attendance to chafee - eligible youth enrolled at an institution of higher education , as defined by the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) , either on a full - time or part - time basis .

the law refers to this support as a "voucher," which must not exceed the lesser of $5,000 or the cost of attendance .

youth are eligible to receive etvs for five years until age 26 , regardless of whether they attend in consecutive years or not and are making satisfactory progress toward completion of their program .

funding received through the etv program does not count toward the student's expected family contribution , which is used by the federal government to determine a student's need for federal financial aid .

however , the total amount of education assistance provided under the etv program and other federal programs may not exceed the total cost of attendance , and students cannot claim the same education expenses under multiple federal programs .

the state child welfare agency is to take appropriate steps to prevent duplication of benefits under the chafee etv program and other federal programs , and to coordinate the program with other appropriate education and training programs .

a current fiscal year's etv funds may not be used to finance a youth's educational or vocational loans incurred prior to that year .

to be eligible for chafee and etv funds , a state must submit a five - year plan ( as part of what is known as the child and family service plan , or cfsp , and annual updates to that plan via the annual progress and service report , or apsr ) to hhs that describes how it intends to carry out its chafee - funded program .

the plan must be submitted on or before june 30 of the calendar year in which it is to begin .

states may make amendments to the plan and notify hhs within 30 days of modifying it .

hhs is to make the plans available to the public .

the chafee program addresses eligibility under the purpose areas and in provisions on the etv program .

the program , including the etv program , is available to youth in foster care between the ages of 14 and 21 ; who aged out of foster care and are between the ages of 18 and 21 ( or up to age 23 in states that extend foster care to age 21 ) ; who left foster care at age 16 or older for kinship guardianship or adoption until they reach age 21 ( or up to age 23 in states that extend care to age 21 ) ; who had been in foster care between the ages of 14 and 21 and left foster care for some other reason besides aging out of foster care , kinship guardianship , or adoption ; and who are likely to remain in foster care until age 18 years ( see the purpose area about "regular , ongoing opportunities to engage in age - or developmentally appropriate activities" ) .

the chafee program requires states to ensure that chafee - funded services serve children of "various ages" and in "various stages of achieving independence" and use objective criteria for determining eligibility for benefits and services under the program .

former foster youth continue to remain eligible until age 21 ( or age 23 , if applicable ) for services if they move to another state .

the state in which the former foster youth resides — whether or not the youth was in foster care in that state — is responsible for providing independent living services to him / her .

the number of youth who receive independent living program assistance from chafee funds and other sources ( state , local , and private ) is collected by hhs via states through the national youth in transition database ( nytd , discussed further in " data collection " ) .

in fy2017 , approximately 111,700 youth received an independent living service .

separately , states reported to hhs that they provided etv vouchers to 16,400 youth in fy2008 ; 16,650 youth in fy2009 ; 17,400 youth in program year ( py ) 2010 ; 17,100 youth in py2011 ; 16,554 youth in py2012 ; 16,548 youth in py2013 ; 15,514 youth in py2014 , and 14,619 youth in py2015 .

the chafee program requires a state to certify that each federally recognized indian tribe in it has been consulted about the state's chafee - funded programs and that there have been efforts to coordinate the programs with these tribal entities .

in addition , the chafee program specifies that the "benefits and services under the programs are to be made available to indian children in the state on the same basis as to other children in the state. .

"on the same basis" has been interpreted by hhs to mean that the state will provide program services equitably to children in both state custody and tribal custody .

the chafee program requires states to ensure that youth in chafee - funded programs participate directly in "designing their own program activities that prepare them for independent living" and that they "accept personal responsibility for living up to their part of the program. .

this language builds on the positive youth development approach to serving young people .

youth advocates that support this approach view youth as assets and promote the idea that they should be engaged in decisions about their lives and communities .

states have taken various approaches to involving young people in decisions about the services they receive .

most states have also established formal youth advisory boards to provide a forum for youth to become involved in issues facing those in care and aging out of care .

youth - serving organizations for current and former foster youth , such as foster club , provide an outlet for young people to become involved in the larger foster care community and advocate for other children in care .

states are not required to utilize life skills assessments or personal responsibility contracts with youth to comply with the youth participation requirement , although some states use these tools to assist youth in making the transition to adulthood .

states administer their chafee - funded programs in multiple ways .

some programs are overseen by the state program that addresses older and former foster youth , with an independent living coordinator and other program staff .

for example , in maine the state's independent living coordinator oversees specialized life skills education coordinators assigned to cover all of the state's department of health and human services district offices .

in some states , like california , each county administers its own program with some oversight and support from a statewide program .

other states , including florida , use contracted service providers to administer their programs .

many jurisdictions have partnered with private organizations to help fund and sometimes administer some aspect of their independent living programs .

for example , the jim casey youth opportunities initiative has provided funding and technical assistance to multiple cities to provide financial support and training to youth exiting care .

the state with the placement and responsibility for a youth in foster care is to provide the voucher to that youth .

the state must also continue to provide a voucher to any youth who is currently receiving one and moves to another state for the sole purpose of attending an institution of higher education .

if a youth moves permanently to another state after leaving care and subsequently enrolls in a qualified institution of higher education , the state where he or she resides would provide the voucher .

generally , states administer their etv program through their program that addresses older and former foster youth .

however , some states administer the etv program through their financial aid office ( eg , california student aid commission ) or at the local level ( eg , florida , where all child welfare programs are administered through community - based agencies ) .

some states contract with a nonprofit service provider , such as foster care to success .

states and counties may use etv dollars to fund the vouchers and the costs associated with program administration , including for salaries , expenses , and training of staff .

states are not permitted to use title iv - e foster care or adoption assistance program funds for administering the etv program .

however , they may spend additional funds from state sources or other sources to supplement the etv program or use etv funds to expand existing postsecondary funding programs .

several states have scholarship programs , tuition waivers , and grants for current and former foster youth that are funded through other sources .

chafee and etv funds are distributed to each state based on its proportion of the nation's children in foster care .

states must provide a 20% match ( in - kind or cash ) to receive their full federal chafee and etv allotment .

the chafee program includes a "hold harmless" clause that precludes any state from receiving less than the amount of general independent living funds it received under the former independent living program in fy1998 or $500,000 , whichever is greater .

there is no hold harmless provision for etv funds .

states may use chafee and etv funds to supplement , and not supplant , any other funds that are available for the types of activities authorized under the chafee program .

territories with an approved title iv - e plan may also apply for chafee funding .

currently , puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands have approved plans .

an indian tribe , tribal organization , or tribal consortium may apply to hhs and receive a direct federal allotment of chafee and / or etv funds .

to be eligible , a tribal entity must be receiving title iv - e funds to operate a foster care program under a title iv - e plan approved by hhs or via a cooperative agreement or contract with the state .

successful tribal applicants receive an allotment amount ( s ) out of the state's allotment for the program ( s ) based on the share of all children in foster care in the state under tribal custody .

tribal entities must satisfy the chafee program requirements established for states , as hhs determines appropriate .

four tribes — the prairie band of potawatomi ( kansas ) , santee sioux nation ( nebraska ) , confederated tribe of warm springs ( oregon ) , and port gamble s'klallam tribe ( washington ) — receive chafee and etv funds .

a state must certify that it will negotiate in good faith with any tribal entity that does not receive a direct federal allotment of child welfare funds but would like to enter into an agreement or contract with the state to receive funds for administering , supervising , or overseeing chafee and etv programs for eligible indian children under the tribal entity's authority .

appendix b provides the chafee and etv allotments for each state , four tribes , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands in fy2018 and fy2019 .

though not shown in the table , chafee funds are often combined with state , local , and other funding sources .

states and tribes have two fiscal years to spend their chafee and etv funds .

if a jurisdiction does not apply for all of its allotment , the remaining funds may be redistributed among states that need these funds as determined by hhs .

table a - 2 shows the percentage and share of funds returned for both programs from fy2005 through fy2014 , as well as a list of jurisdictions that have returned these funds .

fy2014 is the most recent year available .

hhs was recently given authority to reallocate funds that are not spent within the two - year period to states and tribes that apply for the funding .

if funds are reallocated , the statute specifies that the funds should be redistributed among the states and tribes that apply for any unused funds , provided hhs determines the state or tribe would use the funds according to the program purposes .

further , hhs is directed to allocate the funds based on the share of children in foster care among the states and tribes that successfully appl y for the unused funds .

any unspent funds can be made available to the applying states or tribes in the second fiscal year following the two - year period in which funds were originally awarded .

any redistributed funds are considered part of the state 's or tribe's allotment for the fiscal year in which the redistribution is made .

training and technical assistance grants for the chafee and etv programs had been awarded competitively every five years , most recently for fy2010 through fy2014 .

the national child welfare resource center for youth development ( ncwrcyd ) , housed at the university of oklahoma , provided assistance under the grant .

beginning with fy2015 , hhs has operated the child welfare capacity building collaborative via a contract with icf international , a policy management organization , to provide training and technical assistance on a number of child welfare issues , including youth development .

the chafee program required that hhs consult with state and local public officials responsible for administering independent living and other child welfare programs , child welfare advocates , members of congress , youth service providers , and researchers to "develop outcome measures ( including measures of educational attainment , high school diploma , avoidance of dependency , homelessness , non - marital childbirth , incarceration , and high - risk behaviors ) that can be used to assess the performance of states in operating independent living programs" ; identify the data needed to track the number and characteristics of children receiving services , the type and quantity of services provided , and state performance on the measures ; and develop and implement a plan to collect this information beginning with the second fiscal year after the chafee law was enacted in 1999 .

in response to these requirements , hhs created the national youth in transition database ( nytd ) .

the final rule establishing nytd became effective april 28 , 2008 , and it required states to report data on youth beginning in fy2011 .

hhs uses nytd to engage in two data collection and reporting activities .

first , states collect demographic data and information about receipt of services on eligible youth who currently receive independent living services .

this includes youth regardless of whether they continue to remain in foster care , were in foster care in another state , or received child welfare services through an indian tribe or privately operated foster care program .

second , states track information on outcomes of foster youth on or about their 17 th birthday , around their 19 th birthday , and around their 21 st birthday .

consistent with the authorizing statute for the chafee program , hhs is to penalize any state not meeting the data collection procedures for the nytd from 1% to 5% of its annual chafee fund allotment , which includes any allotted or re - allotted funds for the general chafee program only .

the penalty amount is to be withheld from the current fiscal year award of the funds .

hhs is to evaluate a state's data file against data compliance standards , provided by statute .

however , states have the opportunity to submit corrected data .

the text box indicates new information that hhs must report to congress .

the authorizing statute for the chafee program requires hhs to conduct evaluations of state ( or tribal ) programs funded by the chafee program deemed to be "innovative or of national significance. .

the law reserves 1.5% of total chafee funding annually for these evaluations , as well as related technical assistance , performance measurement , and data collection .

hhs conducted an evaluation of promising independent living programs from approximately 2007 to 2012 , and is in the process of identifying new ways of conducting research in this area .

for the initial evaluation , hhs contracted with the urban institute and its partners to conduct what is known as the multi - site evaluation of foster youth programs .

the goal of the evaluation was to determine the effects of programs funded by the chafee authorizing law in achieving key outcomes related to the transition to adulthood .

hhs and the evaluation team initially conducted an assessment to identify state and local programs that could be evaluated rigorously , through random assignment to treatment and control groups , as required under the law .

their work is the first to involve random assignment of programs for this population .

the evaluation team examined four programs in california and massachusetts — an employment services program in kern county , ca ; a one - on - one intensive , individualized life skills program in massachusetts ; and a classroom - based life skills training program and a tutoring / mentoring program , both in los angeles county , ca .

the evaluation of the los angeles and kern county programs found no statistically significant impacts as a result of the interventions ; however , the life skills program in massachusetts , known as outreach , showed impacts for some of the education outcomes that were measured .

the outreach program assists youth who enroll voluntarily in preparing to live independently and in having permanent connections to caring adults upon exiting care .

outreach youth were more likely than their counterparts in the control group to report having ever enrolled in college and staying enrolled .

outreach youth were also more likely to experience outcomes that were not a focus of the evaluation: these youth were more likely to remain in foster care and to report receiving more help in some areas of educational assistance , employment assistance , money management , and financial assistance for housing .

in short , the outreach youth may have been less successful on the educational front if they had not stayed in care .

youth in the program reported similar outcomes as the control group for multiple other measures , including in employment , economic well - being , housing , delinquency , and pregnancy .

hhs has contracted with the urban institute and chapin hall for additional research on the chafee program .

citing the lack of experimental research in child welfare , the research team is examining various models in other policy areas that could be used to better understand promising approaches of working with older youth in care and those transitioning from care .

researchers have identified a conceptual framework that takes into account the many individual characteristics and experiences that influence a youth's ability to transition successfully into adulthood .

the research team has also classified the various types of programs that foster youth could access to help in the transition , and the extent to which they are ready to be evaluated .

in addition , researchers have published a series of briefs that discuss outcomes and programs for youth in foster care in the areas of education , employment , and financial literacy .

the briefs discuss that few programs have impacts for foster youth in these areas .

the briefs also address issues to consider when designing and evaluating programs for youth in care .

appendix a .

funding for the john h. chafee foster care ( chafee ) program for successful transition to adulthood and education and training voucher ( etv ) program appendix b .

other federal support for older current and former foster youth in addition to the child welfare programs under title iv - e of the social security act , other federal programs provide assistance to older current and former foster youth .

this appendix describes medicaid pathways for foster youth who emancipated ; educational , workforce , and housing supports ; and a grant to fund training for child welfare practitioners working with older foster youth and youth emancipating from care .

medicaid the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) at hhs administers medicaid , a federal - state health program jointly financed by hhs and the states .

medicaid law provides for mandatory and optional pathways for youth who have aged out of foster care .

mandatory pathway as of january 1 , 2014 , certain former foster youth are eligible for medicaid under a mandatory pathway created for this population in the affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) .

former foster youth are eligible if they were "in foster care under the responsibility of the state" upon reaching age 18 ( or up to age 21 if the state extends federal foster care to that age ) ; were enrolled in medicaid while in foster care ; and are not eligible or enrolled in other mandatory medicaid coverage groups .

the aca specifies that income and assets are not considered when determining eligibility for this group .

nonetheless , foster youth with annual incomes above a certain level may be required to share in the costs of their health care .

in addition to the law , cms has provided additional parameters on the new pathway via a final rule promulgated in november 2016 and policy guidance .

the final rule specifies that former foster youth are eligible regardless of whether title iv - e foster care payments were made on their behalf .

states may not provide medicaid to individuals who left foster care before reaching age 18 via this pathway .

further , states may not provide medicaid coverage to former foster youth who move from another state ; however , states could apply to hhs under a waiver to provide such coverage via the research and demonstration waiver authority for the medicaid program .

the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l .

115-271 ) amended the medicaid statute on the former foster youth pathway .

it will permit states , as of january 2023 , to use state plan authority for providing coverage to former foster youth who move across state lines .

the law directs hhs , within one year of the its enactment , to issue guidance to states on best practices for removing barriers and ensuring timely coverage under this pathway , and on conducting related outreach and raising awareness among eligible youth .

consistent with existing regulations , the final rule affirms that states may not terminate medicaid eligibility for foster youth who reach age 18 without first determining whether they are eligible for other mandatory medicaid eligibility pathways available to adults ( eg , the coverage pathway for pregnant women ) .

optional pathway the pathway for former foster youth appears largely to supersede an optional pathway also provided for this population .

the 1999 law ( p.l .

106-169 ) that established the chafee program also created a new optional medicaid eligibility pathway for "independent foster care adolescents" ; this pathway is often called the "chafee option. .

the law further defined these adolescents as individuals under the age of 21 who were in foster care under the responsibility of the state on their 18 th birthday .

the law permits states to restrict eligibility based on the youth's income or resources , and whether or not the youth had received title iv - e funding .

as of late 2012 , more than half ( 30 ) of all states had extended the chafee option to eligible youth .

of these states , five reported requiring youth to have income less than a certain level of poverty ( 180% to 400% ) .

four states permitted youth who were in foster care at age 18 in another state to be eligible under the pathway .

states also reported whether the youth is involved in the process for enrolling under the chafee option .

in 15 states , youth are not directly involved in the enrollment process .

for example , some states automatically enroll youth .

in the other 15 states , youth are involved in enrollment with assistance from their caseworker or they enroll on their own .

most states that have implemented the chafee option require an annual review to verify that youth continue to be eligible for medicaid .

states generally have a hierarchy to determine under which pathway youth qualify .

for example , in most states , youth who qualify for the chafee option and receive supplemental security income ( ssi ) would be eligible for medicaid under the ssi medicaid pathway .

educational support federal funding and other supports for current and former foster youth are in place to help these youth aspire to , pay for , and graduate from college .

the higher education act ( hea ) authorizes financial aid and support programs that target this and other vulnerable populations .

federal financial aid for purposes of applying for federal financial aid , a student's expected family contribution ( efc ) is the amount that can be expected to be contributed by a student and the student's family toward his or her cost of education .

certain groups of students are considered "independent," meaning that only the income and assets of the student are counted .

individuals under age 24 who are or were orphans , in foster care , or wards of the court at age 13 or older are eligible to apply for independent student status .

the law does not specify the length of time that the youth must have been in foster care or the reason for exiting as factors for independent student status eligibility .

however , the federal financial aid form , known as the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) , instructs current and former foster youth that the financial aid administrator at their school may require the student to provide proof that they were in foster care .

as required by the fy2014 appropriations law ( 2014 , p.l .

113-76 ) , the department of education ( ed ) modified the fafsa form so that it includes a box for applicants to identify whether they are or were in foster care , and to require ed to provide these applicants with information about federal educational resources that may be available to them .

higher education support programs the higher education act provides that youth in foster care , including youth who have left foster care after reaching age 16 , and homeless children and youth are eligible for what are collectively called the federal trio programs .

the programs are known individually as talent search , upward bound , student support services , educational opportunity centers , and mcnair postbaccalaureate .

the trio programs are designed to identify potential postsecondary students from disadvantaged backgrounds , prepare these students for higher education , provide certain support services to them while they are in college , and train individuals who provide these services .

hea directs the department of education ( ed ) , which administers the programs , to ( as appropriate ) require applicants seeking trio funds to identify and make services available , including mentoring , tutoring , and other services , to these youth .

trio funds are awarded by ed on a competitive basis .

in addition , hea authorizes services for current and former foster youth ( and homeless youth ) through trio student support services — a program intended to improve the retention and graduation rates of disadvantaged college students — that include temporary housing during breaks in the academic year .

in fy2019 , congress appropriated $1.1 billion to trio programs .

separately , hea allows additional uses of funds through the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education ( fipse ) to establish demonstration projects that provide comprehensive support services for students who were in foster care ( or homeless ) at age 13 or older .

fipse is a grant program that seeks to support the implementation of innovative educational reform ideas and evaluate how well they work .

as specified in the law , the projects can provide housing to the youth when housing at an educational institution is closed or unavailable to other students .

congress appropriated $6 million in fy2018 and $5 million in fy2019 for fipse .

workforce support workforce innovation and opportunity act programs the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) authorizes job training programs to unemployed and underemployed individuals through the department of labor ( dol ) .

two of these programs — youth activities and job corps — provide job training and related services to targeted low - income vulnerable populations , including foster youth .

the youth activities program focuses on preventive strategies to help in - school youth stay in school and receive occupational skills , as well as on providing training and supportive services , such as assistance with child care , for out - of - school youth .

job corps is an educational and vocational training program that helps students learn a trade , complete their ged , and secure employment .

to be eligible , foster youth must meet age and income criteria as defined under the act .

young people currently or formerly in foster care may participate in both programs if they are ages 14 to 24 .

in fy2018 , congress appropriated $903 million to youth activities and $1.7 billion to job corps .

housing support family unification vouchers program current and former foster youth may be eligible for housing subsidies provided through programs administered by the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) family unification vouchers program ( fup vouchers ) .

the fup vouchers were initially created in 1990 under p.l .

101-625 for families that qualify for section 8 tenant - based assistance and for whom the lack of adequate housing is a primary factor in the separation , or threat of imminent separation , of children from their families or in preventing the reunification of the children with their families .

amendments to the program in 2000 under p.l .

106-377 made youth ages 18 to 21 eligible for the vouchers for up to 18 months if they are homeless or are at risk of becoming homeless at age 16 or older .

the housing opportunity through modernization act ( p.l .

114-201 ) , enacted in july 2016 , extended the upper age of eligibility for fup vouchers , from 21 to 24 , for youth who emancipated from foster care .

it also extended assistance under the program for these youth from 18 to 36 months and allows the voucher assistance to begin 90 days prior to a youth leaving care because they are aging out .

it also requires hud , after consulting with other appropriate federal agencies , to issue guidance to improve coordination between public housing agencies , which administer the vouchers , and child welfare agencies .

the guidance must address certain topics , including identifying eligible recipients for fup vouchers and identifying child welfare resources and supportive families for families and youth ( including the chafee program ) .

as of the date of this report , hud has not issued such guidance .

in correspondence with crs , hud explained that it has requested funding for this work , and until those funds can be secured , hud and hhs staff are studying how youth and families are served by fup .

fup vouchers were initially awarded from 1992 to 2001 .

over that period , approximately 39,000 vouchers were distributed .

each award included five years of funding per voucher and the voucher's use was restricted to voucher - eligible families for those five years .

at the end of those five years , public housing authorities ( phas ) were eligible to convert fup vouchers to regular section 8 housing vouchers for low - income families .

while the five - year use restrictions have expired for all family unification vouchers , some phas may have continued to use their original family unification vouchers for fup - eligible families and some may have chosen to use some regular - purpose vouchers for fup families ( but the extent to which this happened is unknown ) .

congress appropriated $20 million for new fup vouchers in each of fy2008 and fy2009 ; $15 million in fy2010 , $10 million in fy2017 , and $20 million in fy2018 and fy2019 .

congress has specified that amounts made available under section 8 tenant - based rental assistance and used for the fup vouchers are to remain available for the program .

a 2014 report on the fup program examined the use of fup vouchers for foster youth .

the study was based on a survey of phas , a survey of child welfare agencies that partnered with phas that served youth , and site visits to four areas that use fup to serve youth .

the survey of phas showed that slightly less than half of phas operating fup had awarded vouchers to former foster youth in the 18 months prior to the survey .

phas reported that youth were able to obtain a lease within the allotted time , and many kept their leases for the full 18-month period they were eligible for the vouchers .

in addition , 14% of total fup program participants qualified because of their foster care status .

according to the study , this relatively small share was due to the fact that less than half of phas were serving youth , and these phas tended to allocate less than one - third of their vouchers to youth , among other findings .

other support older current and former foster youth may be eligible for housing services and related supports through the runaway and homeless youth program , administered by hhs .

the program is comprised of three subprograms: the basic center program ( bcp ) , which provides short - term housing and counseling to youth up to the age of 18 ; the transitional living program ( tlp ) , which provides longer - term housing and counseling to youth ages 16 through 22 ; and the street outreach program ( sop ) , which provides outreach and referrals to youth who live on the streets .

youth transitioning out of foster care may also be eligible for select transitional living programs administered by hud , though the programs do not specifically target these youth .

the program was funded at $127 million in fy2019 .

the foreclosure prevention act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) was signed into law on july 30 , 2008 , and enables owners of properties financed in part with low - income housing tax credits ( lihtcs ) to claim as low - income units those occupied by low - income students who were in foster care .

owners of lihtc properties are required to maintain a certain percentage of their units for occupancy by low - income households ; students ( with some exceptions ) are not generally considered low - income households for this purpose .

the law does not specify the length of time these students must have spent in foster care nor require that youth are eligible only if they emancipated .

