in the united states , and elsewhere , a growing number of organizations and individuals who are not subject to mandatory emission caps are buying or selling carbon offsets .

these exchanges are voluntary because there is no requirement for these parties to curtail their greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

the motivation for exchanges can vary .

some businesses or organizations may be seeking to enhance their public image .

for example , buyers may be interested in offsetting some or all of their ghg emissions from various activities , reducing their "carbon footprint," or becoming "carbon neutral. .

buyers might also be preparing for future mandatory federal ghg emission reductions , getting into the market while prices are relatively low with the expectation that today's carbon offsets will be usable to achieve future federal emission ceilings or caps .

sellers are interested in receiving income for various activities , which , without the voluntary market , would likely not occur .

the concept of purchasing carbon offsets has spurred both interest and debate in recent years .

this report provides an overview of carbon offsets and examines some of the issues that are generating debate ( and controversy ) .

although there is some overlap of issues between voluntary carbon offsets and the offsets used to comply with mandatory reduction regimes , this report focuses on the voluntary offsets market .

unless otherwise stated , the carbon offsets in this report refer to those exchanged in the voluntary market .

a carbon offset is a measurable avoidance , reduction , or sequestration of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) or other greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

offsets generally fall within the following four categories ( discussed in greater detail later in the report ) : biological sequestration , renewable energy , energy efficiency , and reduction of non - co 2 emissions .

carbon offsets are sometimes described as project - based because they typically involve specific projects or activities that reduce , avoid , or sequester emissions .

because offset projects can involve different ghgs , they are quantified and described with a standard form of measure: either metric tons of carbon - equivalents ( mtc - e ) or metric tons of co 2 - equivalents ( mtco 2 - e ) .

to be considered a credible offset , the emissions reduced , avoided , or sequestered need to be additional to business - as - usual: that is , what would have happened anyway .

in the context of a mandatory ghg emission reduction regime , an offset can come only from sources not covered by the reduction program ( i.e. , outside the emissions cap ) .

emission reductions from regulated sources would be required under the cap , and thus would not be additional .

by comparison , a reduction activity may be additional if it occurs from a source in a nation that does not limit the source's ghg emissions .

as more nations ( or u.s. states ) establish mandatory caps or similar standards on emission sources , the universe of potential carbon offsets will shrink .

a primary concern regarding voluntary carbon offsets is their integrity .

it is generally agreed that a credible offset should equate to an emission reduction from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe .

several criteria determine the integrity or quality of an offset project .

in the voluntary market , carbon offsets can be generated from multiple economic sectors .

this report discusses carbon offsets grouped into the four categories identified above .

each category contains a list of possible carbon offset examples .

specific integrity issues may be associated with particular offset categories .

these issues are discussed below .

the potential problems highlighted below should not necessarily rule out entire carbon offset categories .

if offset project developers can address these potential obstacles , the offsets may be credible .

however , it may be difficult for offset buyers to know if these problems were addressed ( as discussed later in the report ) .

the precise size or value of the voluntary offset market is unknown , because there is currently no registry or tracking system that follows exchanges in the voluntary market .

however , several organizations — the world bank , point carbon , ecosystem marketplace — have provided estimates for recent years .

table 1 includes data from the last group .

the estimates indicate that the size of the market has increased rapidly every year since 2004 .

the world bank report cites forecasts of increasing growth in coming years .

one projection ( described as "optimistic" by the world bank ) indicates that the volume of transactions in the international voluntary market will be 400 mtco 2 - e by 2010 .

to put this figure in context , u.s. ghg emissions were approximately 7,125 mtco 2 - e in 2007 .

the primary components of the voluntary market are retail offsets and offsets generated through the chicago climate exchange .

these markets , in addition to voluntary reporting and registry programs , are discussed below .

numerous companies and organizations sell carbon offsets to individuals or groups in the international , voluntary carbon market .

the quality of the offsets may vary considerably , largely because there are no commonly accepted standards .

some offset sellers offer offsets that comply with standards that are generally regarded as the most stringent: for example , the clean development mechanism or the gold standard .

these standards generally have a robust test for additionality , as well as more substantial monitoring and verification procedures .

as such , offsets meeting these standards incur higher transaction costs , adding to the cost per ton of carbon .

some offset sellers offer offsets that meet the seller's self - established guidelines .

these self - established protocols can vary considerably , raising questions of integrity .

are the protocols addressing additionality concerns ? .

are the offsets accounted in such a way as to avoid double - counting ? .

are the offset projects verified by independent third parties ? .

assessing the standards can be challenging for a consumer .

moreover , some company's standards are not made public , but may be considered proprietary information .

two studies examined approximately 30 companies and / or groups that sell carbon offsets on the voluntary market .

the following list highlights findings from the analyses: the prices for carbon offsets range between $5 and $25 per ton of carbon .

offset prices show a correlation with offset quality .

overhead costs can vary substantially by seller .

however , this factor may not be a good indicator of offset quality .

the tax status of a seller ( profit firm vs. nonprofit group ) was not a good indicator of offset quality .

arguably , the most significant finding of the two studies is the general correlation between offset price and offset quality .

this correlation is more striking , considering the range of offset prices ( $5 to $25 per ton of carbon reduced ) .

carbon offset purchases are intended to generate emission reductions that would not have occurred otherwise .

in terms of global climate change mitigation , an emission reduction , avoidance , or sequestration is beneficial regardless of where or how it occurs .

for example , a ton of carbon reduced at a power plant will have the same atmospheric effect as a ton of carbon reduced , avoided , or sequestered through an offset project .

the core issue for carbon offset projects is: do they actually offset emissions generated elsewhere ? .

if the credibility of the voluntary offsets is uncertain , claims of carbon neutrality may lack merit .

evidence suggests that not all offset projects are of equal quality , because they are developed through a range of standards .

although some standards are considered stringent , others are less so .

in some cases , the standards used are not even made available to the purchaser .

due to the lack of common standards , some observers have referred to the current voluntary market as the "wild west. .

this does not suggest that all carbon offsets are low quality , but that the consumer is forced to adopt a buyer - beware mentality when purchasing carbon offsets .

this places the responsibility on consumers to judge the quality of carbon offsets .

the voluntary carbon offset market raises several issues that congress may consider .

the viability — both actual and perceived — of the offset market may influence future policy decisions regarding climate change .

for instance , some people are concerned that the range in the quality of voluntary market offsets may damage the overall credibility of carbon offsets .

if this occurs , it may affect policy decisions concerning whether or not to include offsets as an option in a mandatory reduction program .

this is an important policy question for congress .

although some oppose the use of offsets based on supplementarity concerns ( see discussion above ) , other argue that credible offsets would expand the compliance alternatives and likely lower the costs of a ghg emissions reduction program .

the voluntary program may inform the climate change policy debate in another manner .

if congress were to enact a federal ghg emissions control program that included the use of offsets , all of the integrity concerns — for example , additionality , permanence , accounting — would need to be addressed in some fashion .

the experiences gained in the voluntary market may help policymakers develop standards or a process by which the integrity of offset projects could be assessed .

