over the last 40 years , air quality in the united states has improved substantially .

since the passage of the clean air act in 1970 , annual emissions of the six most widespread ( "criteria" ) air pollutants have declined 180 million tons ( 59% ) , despite major increases in population , motor vehicle miles traveled , and economic activity .

emissions from shipping are a major exception to these trends .

although emission controls have reduced pollution from new cars and trucks by more than 90% , most ocean - going ships operate without any pollution controls at all .

new and remanufactured engines on tug boats , ferries , and other smaller ships are subject to emission controls beginning in 2008 and 2009 , but most existing engines in vessels of these types remain uncontrolled .

pollution from ships is also affected by the fuel they use .

marine vessels other than oceangoing ships have been required to use cleaner fuels , but ocean - going ships generally use bunker fuel , a fuel that contains a high level of contaminants: the average fuel used by oceangoing ships contains 27,000 parts per million ( ppm ) sulfur , for example — almost 2,000 times as much as would be allowed in trucks operating on u.s. roads .

in the los angeles - long beach area — which is both the nation's busiest port and the nation's most polluted area — the problem is particularly acute .

according to the south coast [l.a. - long beach] air quality management district ( aqmd ) : oceangoing vessels are among the largest sources of nitrogen oxides ( nox ) in the area , emitting more nox than all power plants and refineries in the south coast air basin combined .

nox reacts with volatile organic compounds in the atmosphere to produce ozone / smog .

70% of the area's emissions of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) come from ships .

these emissions need to be cut by over 90% , according to the aqmd , if the area is to attain the national air quality standard for particulates by the 2014 deadline .

particulates from marine vessels also create significant cancer risks ; more than 700 premature deaths are caused in the los angeles area annually by these emissions , according to the aqmd .

while the los angeles - long beach area may be the most extreme example , the problem is not limited to l.a. or to california .

according to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , more than 40 u.s. ports nationwide are located in "nonattainment" areas for ozone , fine particulates , or both ( figure 1 ) .

in addition , according to epa , "... the problem is not limited to port areas alone .

santa barbara county , which has no commercial ports , estimates that by 2020 , 67 percent of its nox inventory will come from shipping traffic transiting the california coast.... " oceangoing ships are perhaps the largest source of port emissions , but they are not the only source .

ports make use of tug boats to guide ships entering and leaving the harbor .

ports make connections to land - based transportation networks , such as railroads , and they generally operate large truck terminals .

ships at rest in the port need a source of power , which often comes from running auxiliary engines .

and , in many cases , a harbor is served by substantial local boat or barge traffic , sometimes including ferry service .

thus , addressing the sources of pollution in a port may require a multi - faceted approach .

pollution from ships ( not only air pollution , but pollution of all kinds ) is governed by the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships , first negotiated through the international maritime organization ( imo ) in 1973 .

the convention , known as marpol ( for "marine pollution" ) 73 / 78 ( the dates referring to the 1973 convention and its 1978 amendments ) , applies to all ships of the flag states that have ratified it .

about 150 countries , representing over 98.7% of world shipping tonnage , have done so .

the convention also applies to ships of non - signatory states while they are operating in waters under the jurisdiction of parties to marpol .

six annexes to marpol 73 / 78 cover various sources of pollution from ships ( oil , noxious liquids , sewage , garbage , etc. ) .

and provide an overarching framework for implementation .

before congress enacted the annex vi implementing legislation in 2008 , epa had already promulgated regulations under the clean air act that were as stringent as the 1997 annex vi standards , and shipping companies were already generally meeting the standards .

in addition , the agency has promulgated standards for smaller engines .

epa groups ship engines in three categories .

the largest of these engines — the main engines on oceangoing ships — are diesel engines with a per - cylinder displacement at or above 30 liters .

these are referred to as "category 3" or "c3" engines .

category 1 and 2 engines ( those smaller than 7 liters per cylinder , and those from 7 to 30 liters per cylinder , respectively ) , are used in boats or smaller ships — tugs , ferries , some great lakes freighters , fishing boats , and recreational boats , for example .

category 1 and 2 engines ( those smaller than 7 liters per cylinder , and those from 7 to 30 liters per cylinder , respectively ) , are used in boats or ships that operate in u.s. waters — tugs , ferries , smaller great lakes freighters , fishing boats , and recreational boats , for example — virtually all of which are registered in the united states .

while smaller than category 3 engines , these engines are still rather large: they generate at least 800 horsepower .

epa is further along in regulating the emissions of these categories , as compared to category 3 .

regulations that will reduce emissions of nox from new or remanufactured engines by 24% and emissions of particulates by 12% when fully implemented , were promulgated in 1999 and began taking effect between 2004 and 2007 .

more stringent standards were promulgated may 6 , 2008 , and will take effect between now and 2014 .

the final 2014 standards will require ultra low sulfur diesel fuel ( 15 ppm sulfur ) and high efficiency catalytic emission controls capable of reducing particulate matter emissions by 90% and nox emissions by 80% , along with "sizeable reductions" of hydrocarbon , carbon monoxide , and air toxic emissions , according to epa .

as with the new category 3 regulations , epa estimates that benefits of the may 2008 rule will substantially exceed the costs of compliance – in this case , by a figure of at least 9 to 1 .

the principal benefits that the agency estimated are health benefits: a reduction of between 1,150 and 1,400 premature deaths , 120,000 work days lost , and approximately 1,000,000 minor restricted - activity days annually .

the agency estimates that these benefits will be worth between $8.4 billion and $11 billion in 2030 , whereas the annual social costs will be approximately $740 million in that year .

the impact of these costs on society is expected to be manageable , with the price of marine transportation services estimated to increase by about 1.1% .

california , being more adversely affected than most other areas , has also played a leadership role in identifying and implementing emission reduction measures applicable to shipping .

the state has focused on port activities , in addition to fuel and emission standards for marine vessels .

california's measures fall into four categories: ( 1 ) requiring the use of lower sulfur fuel ; ( 2 ) requiring emission controls on harbor vessels and shore - side equipment ; ( 3 ) providing alternative ( electric ) power to ships while they are docked at marine terminals ; and ( 4 ) providing grants for the re - powering of harbor craft and short - haul trucks with cleaner engines .

ships are also an important source of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) pollutants .

although there is a wide range of estimates , the international maritime organization's consensus is that international shipping emitted 843 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide , 2.7% of global co 2 emissions in 2007 .

including domestic shipping and fishing vessels larger than 100 gross tonnes , the amount would increase to 1.019 billion tonnes , 3.3% of global emissions .

at these levels , only five countries ( the united states , china , russia , india , and japan ) account for a higher percentage of the world total of co 2 emissions .

in addition to the co 2 emissions , the low quality fuel ( bunker fuel ) that ships use and the absence of pollution controls result in significant emissions of black carbon and nitrogen oxides , which also contribute to climate change .

the refrigerants used on ships ( hydrofluorcarbons and perfluorocarbons — hfcs and pfcs ) are also potent greenhouse gases when released to the atmosphere .

thus , the total impact of ships on climate may be somewhat greater than 3% .

as pollution from cars , trucks , and land - based stationary sources has been more tightly controlled over the last 40 years , the contribution of ships and port operations to air pollution in port cities has become more important .

simultaneously , foreign trade has grown dramatically , adding to the burden of pollution from these sources .

thus , pollution from ships and the port operations that serve them is now among the most important sources of sulfur oxides , nitrogen oxides , particulates , and other pollutants in numerous u.s. cities .

controlling these sources of pollution is complicated by the fact that most oceangoing ships are registered in foreign countries .

as a result , initial efforts at control were focused on international negotiations through the imo , which established a basic structure ( marpol annex vi ) that appears likely to be the basis of more stringent future controls .

negotiating , ratifying , and implementing marpol agreements has been time - consuming , but now has resulted in significant levels of regulation that will gradually be implemented over the next six years .

epa and state and local agencies ( particularly those in california ) have also begun to address pollution from ships using the clean air act and comparable state authorities .

not all pollution from marine vessels comes from foreign ships .

smaller craft , such as ferries , tugboats , and fishing boats do tend to be registered in the united states , and are thus more amenable to control .

even for these smaller craft , the technical issues can be complex , as the vessels include a wide variety of engine sizes and ship configurations .

safety also poses important considerations , as ships must be able to depend on their sources of power in what may be extreme weather conditions and while dealing with a variety of navigational hazards .

a particular issue has arisen regarding great lakes freighters , many of which were built more than 50 years ago , and might face significant costs in upgrading to burn cleaner fuel .

the fy2010 appropriation for epa has prohibited the expenditure of funds in this fiscal year to issue final fuel sulfur standards applicable to existing steamships operating exclusively within the great lakes , and accompanying report language states that epa should develop waiver provisions available to these ships .

because ships and port operations are now such significant sources of air pollution , and because of the importance of shipping to the national and world economy , implementation of the emissions regulations for ships and ports , including the cleaner fuels requirements , may continue to be of interest to congress .

in addition , ships are a large and growing source of greenhouse gas emissions ; how and whether to regulate these emissions are the subject of imo discussions and are a small part of the larger debate over legislation to address climate change .

congress has begun efforts to address these problems , by enacting legislation to implement marpol annex vi in july 2008 .

but this is likely to be just the start of congressional attention to air pollution from ships .

action at the state level , in the courts , and at u.s. epa will continue to bring the issue to congress's attention , with numerous opportunities for oversight and legislation .

