some policymakers have concluded that the energy challenges facing the united states are so critical that a concentrated investment in energy research and development ( r&d ) should be undertaken .

the manhattan project , which produced the atomic bomb , and the apollo program , which landed american men on the moon , have been cited as examples of the success such r&d investments can yield .

investment in federal energy technology r&d programs of the 1970s , in response to two energy crises , have generally been viewed as less successful than the earlier two efforts .

this report compares and contrasts the goals of , and the investments in , the three initiatives , which may provide useful insights for congress as it assesses and debates the nation's energy policy .

the manhattan project took place from 1942 to 1946 .

beginning in 1939 , some key scientists expressed concern that germany might be building an atomic weapon and proposed that the united states accelerate atomic research in response .

following the pearl harbor attack in december 1941 , the united states entered world war ii .

in january 1942 , president franklin d. roosevelt gave secret , tentative approval for the development of an atomic bomb .

the army corps of engineers was assigned the task and set up the manhattan engineer district to manage the project .

a bomb research and design laboratory was built at los alamos , new mexico .

due to uncertainties regarding production effectiveness , two possible fuels for the reactors were produced with uranium enrichment facilities at oak ridge , tennessee , and plutonium production facilities at hanford , washington .

in december 1942 , roosevelt gave final approval to construct a nuclear bomb .

a bomb using plutonium as fuel was successfully tested south of los alamos in july 1945 .

in august 1945 , president truman decided to use the bomb against japan at two locations .

japan surrendered a few days after the second bomb attack .

at that point , the manhattan project was deemed to have fulfilled its mission , although some additional nuclear weapons were still assembled .

in 1946 , the civilian atomic energy commission was established to manage the nation's future atomic activities , and the manhattan project officially ended .

according to one estimate , the manhattan project cost $2.2 billion from 1942 to 1946 ( $22 billion in 2008 dollars ) , which is much greater than the original cost and time estimate of approximately $148 million for 1942 to 1944 .

general leslie groves , who managed the manhattan project , has written that members of congress who inquired about the project were discouraged by the secretary of war from asking questions or visiting sites .

after the project was under way for over a year , in february 1944 , war department officials received essentially a "blank check" for the project from congressional leadership who "remained completely in the dark" about the manhattan project , according to groves and other experts .

the apollo program , fy1960 to fy1973 , encompassed 17 missions , including six lunar landings .

nasa was created in response to the soviet launch of sputnik in 1958 and began operation in 1959 .

although preliminary discussions regarding the apollo program began in 1960 , congress did not decide to fund it until 1961 after the soviet union became the first nation to launch a human into space .

the goals of the apollo program were to land americans on the moon and return them safely to earth ; to establish the technology to meet other national interests in space ; to achieve preeminence in space for the united states ; to carry out a program of scientific exploration of the moon ; and to develop man's capability to work in the lunar environment .

the program included a three - part spacecraft to take two astronauts to the moon surface , support them while on the moon , and return them to earth .

saturn rockets were used to launch this equipment .

in july 1969 , apollo 11 achieved the goal of landing americans on the moon and returning them safely to earth .

the last lunar landing took place in december 1972 .

the apollo program was only one part of nasa's activities during this period .

nasa's peak funding during the apollo program occurred in fy1966 when its total funding was $4.5 billion ( in current dollars ) , of which $3.0 billion went to the apollo program .

according to nasa , the total cost of the apollo program for fy1960-fy1973 was $19.4 billion ( $97.9 billion in 2008 dollars ) .

the activities with the greatest cost were the saturn v rockets ( $6.4 billion in current dollars ) followed by the command and service modules ( $3.7 billion ) , the lunar modules ( $2.2 billion ) , and manned space flight operations ( $1.6 billion ) .

the arab oil embargo of 1973 ( the "first" energy crisis ) put energy policy on the national "agenda. .

at that time , americans began to experience rapidly rising prices for fuel and related goods and services .

until then , energy r&d had been focused on the development of nuclear power under the atomic energy commission ( aec ) .

after the manhattan project ended , congress had established the aec to manage both civilian and military projects in the atomic energy act of 1946 ( p.l .

79-585 ) .

in response to the energy crisis , congress subsumed the aec , including the manhattan project facilities , and other energy programs , into the energy research and development administration ( erda ) , which became the focus for federal energy technology r&d , and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) as part of the energy reorganization act of 1974 ( p.l .

93 - 438 ) .

in the department of energy organization act of 1977 ( p.l .

95 - 91 ) , congress decided to combine the activities of erda with approximately 50 other energy offices and programs in a new department of energy ( doe ) , which began operations on october 1 , 1977 .

in 1979 , the iranian revolution precipitated the "second" energy crisis that took place from 1978-1981 .

high oil prices and inflation lasted for several years .

an ensuing recession curbed demand and oil prices fell markedly by 1986 .

the scale of funding for most of doe's energy r&d programs dropped steadily during the 1980s ( see figure 1 ) .

the large energy technology demonstration projects funded during the late 1970s and early 1980s were viewed by some as too elaborate and insufficiently linked to either existing energy research or the marketplace .

a well known example is the synthetic fuels corporation ( sfc ) .

the goal of sfc was to support large - scale projects that industry was unwilling to support due to the technical , environmental , or financial uncertainties .

the program ended in 1986 due to a combination of lower energy prices , environmental issues , lack of support by the reagan administration , and administrative challenges .

oil prices rose substantially from 2004 to 2008 , but funding for energy technology r&d has not so far increased as it did during the energy crisis of the late 1970s to early 1980s .

however , the appropriations process for fy2009 and fy2010 has not yet been completed .

a general understanding of driving forces of and funding histories for the manhattan project and apollo program , and a comparison of these two initiatives to department of energy ( doe ) energy technology r&d programs , may provide useful insights for congress as it assesses and determines the nation's energy r&d policy .

four criteria that might be used to compare these programs are funding , perception of threat , goal clarity , and technology customer .

each is discussed in more depth below .

when the manhattan project and the apollo program are used as analogies for future doe energy technology r&d , the following points may be important to consider: to be equivalent in annual average funding , doe energy technology r&d funding would need to increase from approximately $3 billion in fy2008 to at least $4 billion per program year to match the manhattan project funding , or $7 billion per program year to match apollo program funding levels or doe energy technology r&d funding at its peak .

to be equivalent of peak year funding would require even greater increases .

in terms of federal outlays , energy technology r&d funding would need to increase from 0.5% to 1% ( manhattan project ) or 2.2 % ( apollo program ) of federal outlays .

as a percentage of gdp , this funding would need to increase from 0.1% to 0.4% of gdp ( for both the manhattan project and the apollo program ) .

both the manhattan project and the apollo program had a singular and specific goal .

for the manhattan project , the response to the threat of enemy development of a nuclear bomb was the goal to construct a bomb ; for the apollo program , the threat of soviet space dominance was translated into a specific goal of landing on the moon .

for energy , however , the response to the problems of insecure oil sources and high prices has resulted in multiple , sometimes conflicting goals .

both the manhattan project and the apollo program goals pointed to technologies primarily for governmental use with little concern about their environmental impact ; for energy , in contrast , the hoped for outcome depends on commercial viability and mitigation of the environmental impacts of the energy technologies developed .

although the manhattan project and the apollo program may provide some useful analogies for funding , these differences may limit their utility regarding energy policy .

rather , energy technology r&d has been driven by at least three not always commensurate goals — resource and technological diversity , commercial viability , and environmental protection — which were not goals of the historical programs .

the new manhattan project for energy independence ( h.r .

513 ) , a bill introduced in the house on january 14 , 2009 , would require the president to convene a summit to review the progress and promise of , the interrelationship of , and the additional funding needed to accelerate the progress of: ( 1 ) developing alternative technology vehicles that are not more than 10% more expensive than comparable model year vehicles ; ( 2 ) developing and building energy efficient buildings that use no more than 50% of the energy of buildings of similar size and type ; ( 3 ) constructing a large scale solar thermal power plant or solar photovoltaic power plant capable of generating 300 megawatts or more at a cost of 10 cents or less per kilowatt - hour ; ( 4 ) developing and producing biofuel that does not exceed 105% of the cost for the energy equivalent of unleaded gasoline ; ( 5 ) developing and implementing a carbon capture and storage system for a large scale coal - burning power plant that does not increase operating costs more than 15% compared to a baseline design without carbon capture and storage while providing an estimated chance of carbon dioxide escape of no greater than 1% over 5,000 years ; ( 6 ) developing both a process to remediate radioactive waste so that it is not harmful for at least 5,000 years and a model that accounts for the effects of nuclear waste in that process ; and ( 7 ) developing a sustainable nuclear fusion reaction capable of providing a large - scale sustainable source of electricity for residential , commercial , or government entities .

the bill would also require the secretary of energy to implement a program to support such technologies ; and competitively award cash prizes to advance the research , development , demonstration , and commercial application necessary to advance such technologies .

in addition , the bill would establish a new manhattan project commission on energy independence that would make recommendations to congress as to the steps necessary to achieve 50% energy independence within 10 years and 100% energy independence within 20 years , as well as assessing the impact of foreign energy dependence on national security .

on june 26 , 2009 , a proposed amendment to replace the text of h.r .

2454 with this bill failed in the house 172-256 .

