the notion of japan developing nuclear weapons has long been considered far - fetched and even taboo , particularly within japan .

hailed as an example of the success of the international non - proliferation regime , japan has consistently taken principled stands on non - proliferation and disarmament issues .

domestically , the largely pacifist japanese public , with lingering memories of the destruction of hiroshima and nagasaki by atomic bombs in the closing days of world war ii , has widely rejected any nuclear capacity as morally unacceptable .

the inclusion of japan under the u.s. nuclear "umbrella," with regular reiterations from u.s. officials , provides a guarantor to japanese security .

successive japanese administrations and commissions have concluded that japan has little to gain and much to lose in terms of its own security if it pursues a nuclear weapons capability .

today , japanese officials and experts remain remarkably uniform in their consensus that japan is unlikely to move toward nuclear status in the short - to - medium term .

however , as the security environment has shifted significantly , the topic is no longer toxic and has been broached by several leading politicians .

north korea's test of a nuclear device in 2006 and china's military modernization have altered the strategic dynamics in the region , and any signs of stress in the u.s. - japan alliance raises questions among some about the robustness of the u.s. security guarantee .

an ascendant hawkish , conservative movement — some of whom openly advocate for japan to develop an independent nuclear arsenal — has gained more traction in japanese politics , moving from the margins to a more influential position .

in addition , previous security - related taboos have been overcome in the past few years: the dispatch of japanese military equipment and personnel to iraq and afghanistan , the elevation of the japanese defense agency to a full - scale ministry , and japanese co - development of a missile defense system with the united states .

all of these factors together increase the still unlikely possibility that japan will reconsider its position on nuclear weapons .

any reconsideration of japan's policy of nuclear weapons abstention would have significant implications for u.s. policy in east asia .

globally , japan's withdrawal from the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) could damage the most durable international non - proliferation regime .

regionally , japan "going nuclear" could set off a nuclear arms race with china , south korea , and taiwan and , in turn , india , and pakistan may feel compelled to further strengthen their own nuclear weapons capability .

bilaterally , assuming that japan made the decision without u.s. support , the move could indicate tokyo's lack of trust in the american commitment to defend japan .

an erosion in the u.s. - japan alliance could upset the geopolitical balance in east asia , a shift that could indicate a further strengthening of china's position as an emerging hegemonic power .

these ramifications would likely be deeply destabilizing for the security of the asia pacific region and beyond .

japan's post - war policy on nuclear weapons and non - proliferation has been to reject officially a military nuclear program .

the japanese army and navy each conducted nuclear weapons research during world war ii , but neither was successful in gaining enough resources for the endeavor .

despite the fact that by the early 1970s japan had already acquired the technical , industrial and scientific resources needed to develop its own nuclear weapons , japanese policy has repeatedly stated its opposition to the development of nuclear weapons .

complicating japan's anti - nuclear weapons policy has been a post - world war ii dependence on the u.s. "nuclear umbrella" and security guarantee .

under the terms of the mutual security assistance pact signed in 1952 and the 1960 treaty of mutual cooperation and security , japan grants the u.s. military basing rights on its territory in return for a u.s. pledge to protect japan's security .

the rejection of nuclear weapons by the japanese public appears to be overwhelmingly driven by moral , rather than pragmatic , considerations , but japan's leaders have based their policy of forswearing nuclear weapons on protection by the u.s. nuclear arsenal .

the bedrock of domestic law on the subject , the "atomic energy basic law" of 1955 , requires japan's nuclear activities to be conducted only for peaceful purposes .

in 1967 , the "three non - nuclear principles" ( hikaku sangensoku ) were announced by prime minister eisaku sato , enshrining the policy of not possessing , not producing , and not permitting the introduction of nuclear weapons into japan .

when japan ratified the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) in 1976 , it reiterated its three non - nuclear principles , placed itself under the treaty obligation as a non - nuclear weapons state , and pledged not to produce or acquire nuclear weapons .

japan has been a staunch npt supporter in good standing ever since .

despite multiple reiterations of japan's non - nuclear status , this orthodoxy has been challenged on several occasions , usually when japan has felt strategic vulnerability .

probably the most prominent episode occurred in the mid - 1960s: china tested a nuclear device for the first time in 1964 , and the united states was engaged in the vietnam war .

prime minister eisaku sato secretly commissioned several academics to produce a study exploring the costs and benefits of japan's possible nuclearization , the so - called "1968 / 70 internal report. .

another secret investigation into japan's nuclear option was done by the japan defense agency ( jda ) in 1995 as japan assessed its standing in the new post - cold war environment after the 1994 north korean nuclear crisis in 1994 and as the international community was considering the indefinite extension of the npt .

both reports concluded that japan should continue to rely on the u.s. security guarantee and that development of nuclear weapons would threaten that relationship .

since the end of the cold war , and particularly in the past decade , developments in the region have increased japan's sense of vulnerability and caused some in the policy community to rethink japan's policy of forswearing nuclear weapons development .

during the cold war , the u.s. military presence in japan represented the pacific front of containing the soviets , a reassuring statement of commitment to japan's security to many japanese .

north korea's test of a ballistic missile over japan in august 1998 dispelled the sense of a more secure post - cold war environment for the archipelago .

moreover , india and pakistan both conducted underground nuclear weapons tests earlier that year , which to many undermined the success of the international non - proliferation regime and set off fears of a new nuclear arms race .

japan was particularly alarmed at the tests , and instituted a freeze on new loans and grants to the two states .

since then , more provocative behavior from pyongyang , particularly its 2006 tests of medium - range missiles and a nuclear device , have heightened japan's fear of potential attacks .

the nuclear test prompted prominent officials in the ruling party to call for an open debate on whether to pursue nuclear arms: both then - foreign minister ( and current prime minister ) taro aso and chairman of the party's policy council called for such a debate before later backing off their comments .

in addition to north korea's activities , a u.s. - india civilian nuclear deal has led to concern among some japanese non - proliferation experts that the npt has weakened further .

to these experts , the legitimacy and deterrent effect of the global non - proliferation regime underpins japan's commitment to its own non - nuclear status .

while north korea represents a more immediate danger , many defense experts see china as the more serious and long - term threat to japan's security .

china's rapid military modernization and advancements in weapons systems have compounded tokyo's concern .

japanese defense papers have pointed to beijing's apparent progress in short and medium range missiles , its submarine force ( some of which have on occasion intruded into japan's territorial waters ) , and nuclear force modernization as specific areas of concern .

as chinese military spending continues to accelerate , japanese defense budgets have stagnated or declined .

although sino - japanese relations appear to have stabilized since a period of tension under former prime minister junichiro koizumi's administration , fundamental distrust and the potential for conflict remains between the pacific powers .

perhaps the single most important factor to date in dissuading tokyo from developing a nuclear arsenal is the u.s. guarantee to protect japan's security .

since the threat of nuclear attack developed during the cold war , japan has been included under the u.s. "nuclear umbrella," although some ambiguity exists about whether the united states is committed to respond with nuclear weapons in the event of a nuclear attack on japan .

u.s. officials have hinted that it would: following north korea's 2006 nuclear test , former secretary of state condoleezza rice , in tokyo , said , " ... the united states has the will and the capability to meet the full range , and i underscore full range , of its deterrent and security commitments to japan. .

most policymakers in japan continue to emphasize that strengthening the alliance as well as shared conventional capabilities is more sound strategy than pursuing an independent nuclear capability .

during the cold war , the threat of mutually assured destruction to the united states and the soviet union created a sort of perverse stability in international politics ; japan , as the major pacific front of the u.s. containment strategy , felt confident in u.s. extended deterrence .

although the united states has reiterated its commitment to defend japan , the strategic stakes have changed , leading some in japan to question the american pledge .

some in japan are nervous that if the united states develops a closer relationship with china , the gap between tokyo's and washington's security perspectives will grow and further weaken the u.s. commitment .

these critics also point to what they perceive as the soft negotiating position on north korea's denuclearization in the six - party talks as further evidence that the united states does not share japan's strategic perspective .

a weakening of the bilateral alliance may strengthen the hand of those that want to explore the possibility of japan developing its own deterrence .

despite these concerns , many long - time observers assert that the alliance is fundamentally sound from years of cooperation and strong defense ties throughout even the rocky trade wars of the 1980s .

perhaps more importantly , china's rising stature likely means that the united states will want to keep its military presence in the region in place , and japan is the major readiness platform for the u.s. military in east asia .

if the united states continues to see the alliance with japan as a fundamental component of its presence in the pacific , u.s. leaders may need to continue to not only restate the u.s. commitment to defend japan , but to engage in high - level consultation with japanese leaders in order to allay concerns of alliance drift .

disagreement exists over the value of engaging in a joint dialogue on nuclear scenarios given the sensitivity of the issue to the public and the region , with some advocating the need for such formalized discussion and others insisting on the virtue on strategic ambiguity .

u.s. behavior plays an outsized role in determining japan's strategic calculations , particularly in any debate on developing nuclear weapons .

security experts concerned about japan's nuclear option have stressed that u.s. officials or influential commentators should not signal to the japanese any tacit approval of nuclearization .

threatening other countries with the possibility of japan going nuclear , for example , could be construed as approval by some quarters in tokyo .

u.s. - japanese joint development of a theater missile defense system reinforces the u.s. security commitment to japan , both psychologically and practically .

the test - launch of several missiles by north korea in july 2006 accelerated existing plans to jointly deploy patriot advanced capability 3 ( pac - 3 ) surface - to - air interceptors as well as a sea - based system on aegis destroyers .

if successfully operationalized , confidence in the ability to intercept incoming missiles may help assuage japan's fear of foreign attacks .

this reassurance may discourage any potential consideration of developing a deterrent nuclear force .

in addition , the joint effort would more closely intertwine u.s. and japan security , although obstacles still remain for a seamless integration .

to many security experts , the most alarming possible consequence of a japanese decision to develop nuclear weapons would be the development of a regional arms race .

the fear is based on the belief that a nuclear - armed japan could compel south korea to develop its own program ; encourage china to increase and / or improve its relatively small arsenal ; and possibly inspire taiwan to pursue nuclear weapons .

this in turn might have spill - over effects on the already nuclear - armed india and pakistan .

the prospect — or even reality — of several nuclear states rising in a region that is already rife with historical grievances and contemporary tension could be deeply destabilizing .

the counter - argument , made by some security experts , is that nuclear deterrence was stabilizing during the cold war , and a similar nuclear balance could be achieved in asia .

however , most observers maintain that the risks outweigh potential stabilizing factors .

the course of the relationship between beijing and washington over the next several years is likely to have a significant impact on the nuclearization debate in japan .

if the relationship chills substantially and a cold war - type standoff develops , there may be calls from some in the united states to reinforce the u.s. deterrent forces .

some hawkish u.s. commentators have called for japan to be "unleashed" in order to counter china's strength .

depending on the severity of the perceived threat from china , japanese and u.s. officials could reconsider their views on japan's non - nuclear status .

geopolitical calculations likely would have to shift considerably for this scenario to gain currency .

on the other hand , if u.s. - sino relations become much closer , japan may feel that it needs to develop a more independent defense posture .

this is particularly true if the united states and china engaged in any bilateral strategic or nuclear consultations .

despite improved relations today , distrust between beijing and tokyo remains strong , and many in japan's defense community view china's rapidly modernizing military as their primary threat .

any eventual reunification of the korean peninsula could further induce japan to reconsider its nuclear stance .

if the two koreas unify while north korea still holds nuclear weapons and the new state opts to keep a nuclear arsenal , japan may face a different calculation .

indeed , some japanese analysts have claimed that a nuclear - armed reunified korea would be more of a threat than a nuclear - armed north korea .

such a nuclear decision would depend on a variety of factors: the political orientation of the new country , its relationship with the united states , and how a reunified government approached its historically difficult ties with japan .

although south korea and japan normalized relations in 1965 , many koreans harbor resentment of japan's harsh colonial rule of the peninsula from 1910-1945 .

if the closely neighboring koreans exhibited hostility toward japan , it may feel more compelled to develop a nuclear weapons capability .

the united states is likely to be involved in any possible korean unification because of its military alliance with south korea and its leading role in the six - party talks .

u.s. contingency planning for future scenarios on the korean peninsula should take into account japan's calculus with regard to nuclear weapon development .

if japan decided to go nuclear , its international reputation as a principled advocate for non - proliferation would erode .

many observers say this would rule out japan's ambition of eventually holding a seat on the united nations security council .

japan , of course , would bear the brunt of these consequences , but it could be harmful to u.s. interests as well .

japan is generally viewed overwhelmingly positively by the international community , and its support for u.s. - led international issues can lend credibility and legitimacy to efforts such as democracy promotion , peacekeeping missions , environmental cooperation , and multilateral defense exercises , to name a few .

japan's development of its own nuclear arsenal could also have damaging impact on u.s. nonproliferation policy .

it would be more difficult for the united states to convince non - nuclear weapon states to keep their non - nuclear status or to persuade countries such as north korea to give up their weapons programs .

the damage to the npt as a guarantor of nuclear power for peaceful use and the iaea as an inspection regime could be irreparable if japan were to leave or violate the treaty .

if a close ally under its nuclear umbrella chose to acquire the bomb , perhaps other countries enjoying a strong bilateral relationship with the united states would be less inhibited in pursuing their own option .

it could also undermine confidence in u.s. security guarantees more generally .

