the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1940 ( s scra ) provided civil protections and rights to individuals based on their service in the u.s. armed forces .

on december 19 , 2003 , congress enacted p.l .

108-189 , the servicemembers civil relief act ( scra ) , in response to the increased utilization of reserve and national guard military units in the global war on terrorism , and as a modernization and restatement of the protections and rights previously available to servicemembers under the sscra .

much like with the sscra , the scra has been amended since its initial passage and proposed changes continue to be introduced in congress .

congress has long recognized the need for protective legislation for servicemembers whose service to the nation compromises their ability to meet obligations and protect their legal interests .

during the civil war , congress enacted an absolute moratorium on civil actions brought against soldiers and sailors .

during world war i , congress passed the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1918 , which did not create a moratorium on legal actions against servicemembers , but instead directed trial courts to apply principles of equity to determine the appropriate action to take whenever a servicemember's rights were involved in a controversy .

during world war ii , congress essentially reenacted the expired 1918 statute as the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1940 , and then amended it substantially in 1942 to take into account the new economic and legal landscape that had developed between the wars .

congress enacted amendments on several occasions during subsequent conflicts , including 2002 when the benefits of the sscra were extended to certain members of the national guard .

in 2003 , congress enacted the scra as a modernization and restatement of the sscra and its protections .

the scra is an exercise of congress's power to raise and support armies ( u.s. const .

art .

i , section 8 , cl .

12 ) and to declare war ( art .

i , section 8 , cl .

11 ) .

the purpose of the act is to provide for , strengthen , and expedite the national defense by protecting servicemembers , enabling them to "devote their entire energy to the defense needs of the nation. .

the scra protects servicemembers by temporarily suspending certain judicial and administrative proceedings and transactions that may adversely affect their legal rights during military service .

forgiveness of all debts or the extinguishment of contractual obligations on behalf of servicemembers , who have been called up for active duty , is not provided , nor is absolute immunity from civil lawsuits granted .

instead , it provides for the suspension of claims and protection from default judgments .

in this way , it seeks to balance the interests of servicemembers and their creditors , spreading the burden of national military service to a broader portion of the citizenry .

many of the scra provisions are especially beneficial for reservists activated to respond to a national crisis , but many provisions are also useful for career military personnel .

one measure that affects many who are called to active duty is the cap on interest at an annual rate of 6% on debts incurred prior to a person's entry into active duty military service ( section 207 ) .

other measures protect military families from being evicted from rental or mortgaged property ( §§301 and 303 ) ; from cancellation of life insurance ( §§402 through 409 ) ; from taxation in multiple jurisdictions ( §§510 and 511 ) ; from foreclosure of property to pay taxes that are due ( §§501 and 511 ) ; and from losing certain rights to public land ( §§501 through 508 ) .

this report provides a section - by - section summary of the scra , codified in 50 u.s.c .

§3901 et seq .

sections 201 through 208 describe the general relief available in most kinds of court actions .

they serve to suspend civil liabilities of military personnel and preserve causes of action either for or against them .

sections 301 through 308 provide protections from eviction and loss of other benefits or rights due to the failure of a servicemember to meet payments on rent , loans , mortgages , or insurance policies .

unlike the other parts of the scra , the rights described in these sections can be asserted by a servicemember's dependents in their own right .

title iv provides relief from insurance premiums and guarantees servicemembers continued coverage under certain commercial life insurance policies .

the fifth broad category of provisions of the scra provides certain rights regarding public lands and relieves servicemembers from having to pay certain taxes to multiple jurisdictions .

it also prevents the attachment of certain personal or real property in order to satisfy tax liens .

title vi provides courts the authority to deny remedies that would abuse the purpose of the scra , indicates how a servicemember's military and financial status can be established in court , and covers other procedural requirements .

title vii of the scra provides a means for servicemembers to petition for relief without having to wait until a creditor brings an enforcement action against them .

it also treats powers of attorney and provides relief from liability insurance premiums for servicemembers who need to maintain such policies for their civilian occupations .

this section authorizes the u.s. attorney general to commence a civil action in u.s. district court for violations of the scra by a person who ( 1 ) engages in a pattern or practice of violating the act ; or ( 2 ) engages in a violation that raises an issue of significant public importance .

courts may grant any appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages .

additionally , courts , in order to vindicate the public interest , may assess a civil penalty up to $55,000 for a first violation , and up to $110,000 for subsequent violations .

finally , individuals alleging violations of the scra , for which the attorney general has commenced an action , are authorized to intervene in previously commenced cases as a plaintiff .

in addition to the right to join a previously commenced case , covered individuals have the ability to commence a civil action for an alleged violation of the scra in their own right .

the court may grant an appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages .

the court is also authorized to award the costs of the action and reasonable attorney fees to a covered individual who prevails in a civil action under this section .

this section provides that sections 801 and 802 do not preclude or limit any other remedies available under the law , including consequential or punitive damages for violations of the scra .

