members of congress receive numerous requests from grant seekers , including state and local governments , nonprofit social service and community action organizations , private research groups , small businesses , and individuals , for information and help in obtaining funds for projects .

both government and private foundation funding may be appropriate .

federal grants are not benefits or entitlements to individuals .

most federal grant funds goes to state and local governments , which in turn sub - award to local entities such as nonprofit organizations .

grants may be available for projects serving communities and needs .

for example , government assistance may be available for nonprofit organizations ( including faith - based groups ) for initiatives such as establishing soup kitchens or after - school programs benefitting entire communities ; and local governments seeking funds for community services , infrastructure , and economic revitalization may be most eligible for state and federal funds .

congressional offices may often need to direct constituents seeking government aid to funding options other than grants .

community fund - raising may be most suitable for school enrichment activities such as field trips or for band or sports uniforms .

local business or private foundation funding might be more appropriate for supporting projects such as construction of local memorials or commemorative programs .

for others , such as for starting or expanding a small business or for students , loans may be available .

individuals looking for government benefits may find useful the website benefits.gov at https: / / www.benefits.gov .

students seeking financial aid should search the department of education website at http: / / studentaid.ed.gov / sa .

to start or expand a small business , the federal government provides assistance in the form of loans , advisory , or technical assistance .

see the small business administration website at http: / / www.sba.gov .

to respond to constituents who have seen ads promising federal grants for personal expenses , refer them to the federal trade commission consumer alert government grant scams at http: / / www.consumer.ftc.gov / articles / 0113-government - grant - scams .

given the competition for federal funds , the success rate in obtaining federal assistance is limited .

a grants staff's effectiveness often depends both on an understanding of the grants process and on the relations it establishes with federal departments and agencies , state grants administering agencies ( saas ) , private and local foundations , and other contacts .

this report does not constitute a blueprint for every office involved in grants and projects activity , nor does it present in - depth information about all aspects of staff activity in this area .

the discussion describes some basics about the grants process and some of the approaches and techniques used by congressional offices in dealing with this type of constituent service .

senate and house offices allocate staff and other resources to grants work to assist constituents with projects of potential benefit to their districts , cities , or states .

each congressional office handles grants requests in its own way , depending upon such factors as the member's philosophy on federal support for local projects , the relation of certain proposals to his or her legislative activity , or the member's particular interest in specific locations or types of projects .

other factors may include the degree of economic distress in any given locality and the current level of federal assistance it receives .

grants activities in any congressional office depend very much upon the overall organization , staff , and workload of the office .

most offices divide responsibility by function ( i.e. , legislation is assigned to legislative assistants and correspondents , media relations and newsletters are handled by a press secretary , and caseworkers help with problems of individuals ) .

offices organized in this way may have a full - time grants specialist or several staff members under the supervision of a grants coordinator working solely in the area of grants and projects .

some offices divide responsibilities by subject area ; that is , a specialist in health issues is involved with legislation , correspondence , casework , grants , projects , speeches , and press releases in that subject area .

in some offices , all grants requests are handled in the district or state office ; in others , they are answered by the washington , dc , staff ; still others divide grants and projects activity between the district or state office and the washington , dc , office .

regardless of how this responsibility is assigned , it is helpful to have at least one person in the district or state office and one person in the washington , dc , office familiar with the whole process .

district or state staff may be more readily able to communicate and develop relationships with federal state and federal regional offices , or state administering agencies , often the preferred contact office for federal programs .

state delegation cooperation: since some constituents request the aid of the entire state delegation for a grant or project , cooperation among members of the delegation can minimize duplication of effort and permit more effective use of staff time .

to increase the chances of a project's funding , members may solicit the support of other members either from the same geographic region if the proposal would benefit a wide area , or from those who hold key positions in leadership or on committees which exercise funding and oversight of the federal program .

political considerations can limit the amount of such cooperation .

one state's delegation has established a state projects office to help its constituents learn about the grants process and follow through on all applications until awards are made .

the grants person in the congressional office can serve constituents not only as a source of information but also as a facilitator with agencies and foundations and , in some cases , even as an advocate .

the congressional office is seen by constituents as a potential source of assistance , which includes providing facts about financial and nonfinancial assistance available through federal programs ; clarifying the intricacies of proposal development , application , and follow - up procedures ; writing letters of interest or support from the member to the granting agency once a grant proposal is ready for submission ; resolving problems that occur when an applicant is unsuccessful in obtaining funds or other assistance ; and suggesting other sources for grant assistance in both the private and public sectors .

the congressional office should first determine the priorities of its particular office: assess the volume of incoming grants requests ; determine criteria for how much attention should be given to each grants request , for example , number of people who will be affected , visibility of projects , or political implications ; decide the role of the congressional office: information source or active advocacy , or sometimes even earmarking appropriations for a project that mirrors the member's legislative agenda .

congressional grants staff can help their constituents best when they thoroughly understand the entire grants process: defining the project ; searching for likely funding sources , including federal grants administered and sub - awarded by states ; developing and writing proposals ; applying for grants ; understanding review and award procedures ; and knowing post - award requirements .

if a proposal or serious inquiry is submitted to a congressional office , an assessment of the stated problem should be made .

first , this benefits the grant seeker , since any application for assistance will require that the problem be clearly stated and that the proposed solution provide some remedy .

second , this initial assessment can provide staff with a sense of direction: are there other projects currently under way that address the problem ? .

is there already an appropriate federal or state program that is designed for such a project , or is the issue better addressed through local , state , or private organizations , or through legislation ? .

will the sought - after aid produce other problems for the community ? .

what are its chances for success ? .

the initial review of the request should also involve an assessment of the applicant .

a formal grant proposal will require an applicant to establish credibility .

individuals connected with a proposal might mention education , training , and professional credentials .

credibility for an organization may be established by giving its history , goals , activities , and primary accomplishments , as well as by letters of support , including by local governments .

by reviewing such information , an office may avoid the hazard of offering support for a questionable applicant and may be in a better position to make decisions about support when several communities or organizations are applying for the same program — will all be treated equally or will support be given to selected applicants ? .

a written request from a constituent should always be acknowledged .

if the request is a fairly common one , the office may be able to respond with a prepared packet of materials on available programs .

for large grants - in - aid projects , the congressional office may contact the federal or state agency congressional liaison and ask to speak to a grants specialist for a particular program or funding need .

this procedure is generally more time consuming for a congressional staffer than a simple referral , but it is often more informative .

the agency may provide facts about budget levels , authorizations and appropriations , the amount of money available for the program , the total amount requested in applications on file , the number of applications received , and the number likely to be approved , agency priorities , categories of competition or targets by region , key dates and deadlines , and information on who makes recommendations and decisions .

if your constituent decides to submit a formal grant application for a particular program , the congressional office may recommend or arrange a meeting with agency offices in the district or state .

another way to get input from the agency early in the process is a pre - review of the application .

some agencies provide procedural review of proposals one or two months before the application deadline .

such a review , while not dealing with the substance of the proposal , allows an agency to inform the applicant of any technical problems or omissions to be corrected before the proposal is formally submitted .

when a constituent notifies the congressional office that a proposal has been submitted , the office can send a letter to the agency expressing the member's interest in being kept informed of developments relating to the application .

in addition , the letter may also request a list of all applicants for the particular grant from the member's state or district .

this enables the office to consider initiating letters of support from the member to those applicants in his or her state or district who did not approach the office prior to submission of their application .

whether the member chooses to support an applicant or extends support to all applicants from the state or district , the office should maintain contact with all interested parties as it is notified of progress reports from agency contacts .

cutbacks in federal programs mean many projects are made possible only through a combination of funding sources — federal and state government grants as well as private or corporate foundation grants should be considered .

grant seekers should know that most federal funding goes to states in the form of formula or block grants .

for many programs , application for federal funds must be made through state administering agencies ( saas ) .

whatever the funding source , it is important to emphasize that once a project has been clearly defined , constituents can improve their likelihood of success by doing preliminary research to find potential funding sources whose goals are most nearly consistent with their own .

congressional offices can assist state , local , or private groups in identifying and obtaining available funding sources .

congressional grants staff can also serve as liaison between grant seekers and government executive offices , including their own state offices that administer federal grants .

some congressional offices may help grant seekers by forwarding to them descriptions and contact information on federal grants programs for particular projects .

the site beta.sam.gov offers keyword searching , searching by assistance type ( grant , loan , etc .

 ) , and listings by department , agency , and program title .

the assistance listing descriptions also link to related websites , such as federal department and agency home pages and office of management and budget grants management circulars .

grant seekers themselves can then track notices of actual federal funding opportunities at websites such as grants.gov at http: / / www.grants.gov and fedconnect at https: / / www.fedconnect.net .

congressional offices can also prepare their own information packets on federal grants programs , which are requested most frequently .

such packets could include program descriptions , brochures , the latest rules and regulations , changes in agency policy , application forms , and so on .

for example , members of rural states can become familiar with department of agriculture rural development programs ; members with urban constituencies and projects may want to consider department of housing and urban development programs .

although congressional staff do not write grant proposals , they are frequently approached by inexperienced constituents seeking guidance on what makes a good proposal .

offices aiding such constituents may find helpful crs report rl32159 , how to develop and write a grant proposal , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , which discusses preliminary information gathering and preparation , developing ideas for the proposal , gathering community support , identifying funding resources , and seeking preliminary review of the proposal and support of relevant administrative officials .

it also covers all aspects of writing the proposal , from outlining of project goals , stating the purpose and objectives of the proposal , explaining the program methods to solve the stated problem , and how the results of the project will be evaluated , to long - term project planning , and developing the proposal budget .

the last section of the report lists free grants writing websites .

the foundation center and other organizations also publish guides to writing proposals ; the foundation center offers a "proposal writing short course" on its website at https: / / grantspace.org / training / introduction - to - proposal - writing / and includes a version in spanish .

constituents may also be advised that computer software templates can be found by searching the internet under terms such as grant proposal and template .

congressional offices may pass on the following suggestions: allow sufficient time to prepare a thoroughly documented proposal , well before the application deadline .

if possible , have someone outside the organization critique the proposal prior to submission .

follow the instructions given in the application form or in other material provided by the agency or foundation .

answer questions as asked .

see that the proposal is clear and brief .

avoid jargon .

take pains to make the proposal interesting .

reviewing panels have limited time to devote to any single proposal .

whenever possible , fit the style of the proposal to the style of the agency or foundation being approached .

when no form or instructions for submitting grant proposals are provided , the proposal should include the following: 1. a cover letter on the applicant's letterhead giving a brief description of the purpose and amount of the grant proposal , conveying the applicant's willingness to discuss the proposal in further detail ; 2. a half - page summary that includes identification of the applicant , the reasons for the request , proposed objectives and means to accomplish them , along with the total cost of the project , an indication of funds already obtained , and the amount being requested for this grant ; 3. an introduction in which the history , credentials , and accomplishments of the applicant are presented briefly ( supporting documents can be included in an appendix ) ; 4. a description of current conditions demonstrating the need for the proposed project ; 5. a statement of the project's objectives in specific , measurable terms ; 6. a description of the methods to be used to accomplish these objectives ; 7. a description of the means by which the project will be monitored and evaluated ; 8. a discussion of plans for continuing the project beyond the period covered by the grant ; and 9. a detailed budget .

constituents seeking funds for projects frequently ask congressional offices to write letters to federal departments and agencies on their behalf .

some grants , such as funding for homeland security , are determined by formula to states and jurisdictions and letters may not be needed .

explain to constituents that the federal grants process is competitive and that your office can consider writing a letter to the department or agency once they submit a fully developed grant proposal .

for most requests , use neutral language expressing the member's "interest" in a proposal , rather than "support. .

lending "support" to a proposal that might not be funded under the competitive process ( and when there are competing applications from several constituents ) might lead to disappointment and reflect negatively on the member .

for most constituent requests , write a letter only when the grantseeker is ready to submit the grant proposal to the department or agency .

check with the department or agency congressional liaison to learn where letters should be sent .

information needed from the grant seeker: name of applicant ; contact person for the project if different grant program name and number agency contact address , grants officer's name if available deadline for proposal submission project name and summary the project summary should highlight: what the project / program does and how many people will benefit why this program is important to the community any unique features of the project , needs not already being met other support for the project such as local government specifically how the grant money will be used write directly to the person in the department of agency ; provide a copy of the letter to the constituent to submit with the proposal .

the member's letter could say why this is important to his or her district , what needs are being met , etc. — the summary supplied by the constituent should give the objectives of the proposal / project .

close by asking the grants officer to let the member know when a decision will be made and to keep your office informed about the progress of the proposal .

a sample letter of support , written on the member's letterhead , might read as follows .

although there is some variation , the usual announcement procedure in cases of allocated federal funds is for the agency making the award to notify the senate office first ( a senator of the president's party may be first notified ) , then the house office , and finally the recipient .

this allows members of congress an opportunity to notify recipients of grants .

not all awards are announced publicly .

in the case of block grants , the office of management and budget notifies senate offices of the allocations among the states .

the state's decision on how to distribute funds among local communities is , however , not necessarily communicated to congressional offices .

in these cases , a good state agency contact may be willing to provide the office with this information .

announcements of grants awarded are often posted on member websites .

many congressional offices develop files or databases of grants awarded to track funding to their districts and states .

detailed information is difficult to obtain .

p.l .

109-282 , the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 , called for the office of management and budget ( omb ) to develop a database , which became usaspending.gov .

for a summary of sources and limitations of currently available data , and the new law's requirements , see crs web page , tracking federal funds , by [author name scrubbed] , at http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / tracking - federal - funds .

contact the crs author for search strategies and best sources .

to avoid disappointment , congressional staff might consider cautioning grant seekers from making requests that are unlikely to be approved at the federal level .

suggest considering other funding sources early in the process .

in cases where grant applications are made and turned down , the congressional office may notify constituents of their right to know why the award was not granted and what the appeals process is .

constituents may ask the agency for an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal or may give the agency permission to provide the congressional office with this information .

alternative programs or other approaches may be suggested following an adverse decision .

the constituent might also decide to improve the initial application and start the process again .

hundreds of grants or loans for various purposes are available from federal departments and agencies .

most federal funding ( more than 80% ) goes to state and local governments that determine state and local needs , and they themselves offer competitive grants and funding opportunities .

new programs and federal funding to enhance homeland security or enhance emergency services are of particular interest to many local jurisdictions .

other federal funds not dispensed through grants , but highly sought after , are used for defense procurement , construction of federal installations , or infrastructure ( eg , military bases , federal office buildings , and federal projects such as flood control and highway construction ) .

congressional offices can assist state and local governments , nonprofit organizations , and other grant seekers in becoming aware of available funds and how to go about obtaining them .

staff members can contact federal agencies to find agency interest in certain projects ; relay the findings to those interested and qualified for assistance in their states and districts ; and notify home state governments , organizations , businesses , and people of what funds are available .

once a grant application is filed , offices frequently keep in touch with agencies .

contact can be maintained by email , phone , letter , or in person as the situation dictates .

concerted action on the part of the staff may result in more federal funds being spent in a state or district , thereby providing greater benefit to the constituency .

federal program and contact information for each program is given at beta.sam.gov .

current notices of competitive project grant opportunities for grant seekers themselves appear on the websites grants.gov at http: / / www.grants.gov and fedconnect at https: / / www.fedconnect.net .

see sections below for more information about these key sources .

with reductions in federal programs , congressional grants specialists may suggest other funding possibilities to their constituents as alternatives or supplements to federal grants .

private foundation funding can also be used for federal grants that have matching requirements .

small local projects should begin their search for help at the community level from local businesses or institutions .

support may be available in the form of cash contributions or in - kind contributions of property , buildings , equipment , or professional expertise .

evidence of such community - based support may strengthen a federal grant proposal .

grant making foundations are established for the express purpose of providing funds for projects in their areas of interest , and all must comply with specific internal revenue service regulations to maintain their tax - exempt status .

every year , each is required to give away money equal to at least 5% of the market value of its assets , and each must make its tax records public .

although there are all kinds of foundation and corporate grants available , competition for these funds is great , and , just as is the case in searching for federal support , grant seekers enhance their chances for success by doing preliminary research to find grant makers whose priorities and goals match their own .

by searching foundation websites , grant seekers can find guidelines , copies of annual reports , and tax returns to learn whether their proposals match a foundation's areas of interest and geographic guidelines ; whether the proposal is within its budgetary constraints ; and whether it normally funds the type of project being considered .

there are many different kinds of foundations , with widely varying resources and purposes .

some are national in scope ; others are set up purely for the purpose of local giving .

some are endowed by an individual or family to provide funds for specific social , educational , or religious purposes ; others are company - sponsored ; still others are publicly supported community foundations .

grant seekers might begin by identifying state or local foundations .

these may have a greater interest in local projects than larger foundations mainly concerned with programs of national significance .

direct corporate giving should also be explored: many corporations support local projects in areas where they have their headquarters or plants , or sponsor projects which somehow enhance their corporate image .

because of this variety , different strategies may be needed for dealing with different foundations .

a few foundations publicize their funding policies , and even initiate projects , but generally they do not .

usually , the grant seeker must take the first step and approach the foundation about his or her proposal .

although it is hard to generalize about foundations , they tend to be more flexible than federal funding agencies and to have fewer bureaucratic requirements .

many foundations see their purpose as providing short - term , startup funding for demonstration projects .

frequently , such foundations are the best source to turn to for funding emergency situations or small , high - risk , innovative programs .

in some cases , foundation officials will work closely with inexperienced grant seekers to help them develop realistic proposals .

the foundation center serves as a clearinghouse of information on private philanthropic giving and is a good starting point for identifying likely funding sources .

the center's office in washington , dc , can advise staff on other sources of private funding .

the foundation center can be contacted via phone at [phone number scrubbed] .

the center's website , http: / / www.foundationcenter.org , includes extensive information about private funders ; posts requests for proposals ( rfps ) for funding opportunities from foundations in all subject fields ; offers web and in - person training , many of them free , including a "proposal writing short course" ; and produces a number of directories and guides to private and corporate funding sources , in print , cd - rom , web , and other electronic formats .

the foundation center also posts irs form 990 for nonprofit organizations at http: / / foundationcenter.org / findfunders / 990finder / .

in addition to its major reference collections in new york , washington , dc , cleveland , and san francisco , the foundation center maintains a national network of cooperating library collections in each state , with print and electronic resources available free to the public .

addresses of these library collections are provided on the foundation center website at http: / / foundationcenter.org / fin .

at these libraries , grant seekers may search the foundation directory online by field of interest , by foundation location , and other categories to produce lists of likely funding sources for projects .

for congressional staff , the library of congress maintains a subscription to the foundation directory online .

other websites that provide free listings of foundations include the council on foundations web page , community foundation locator by state , at http: / / www.cof.org / community - foundation - locator ; and the grantsmanship center's funding sources , which for each state lists "top," corporate , and community foundations , at http: / / tgci.com / funding - sources .

congressional offices may send constituents state listings from these websites .

grants and federal assistance web page , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / grants focuses on crs grants web products and publications .

crs reports provide guidance to congressional staff on federal programs and funding , and may be forwarded to constituents in response to grants requests .

grants and federal domestic assistance web page , by [author name scrubbed] http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / member - grants - page provides internet links to free key federal and private grants and funding information , including beta.sam.gov , grants.gov , and other federal websites ; and the foundation center , and other private funding resources .

members may add this crs web page to their home page so grant seekers in districts and states can access web information directly using the member's home page as portal to key grants sources .

for beta.sam.gov and grants.gov , see sections of this report and the crs websites described above .

a - z index of u.s. government departments and agencies ( general services administration ) https: / / www.usa.gov / federal - agencies / a to better develop a grant proposal , search a department or agency's home page to learn more about its programs and objectives .

the site also includes the following: government benefits , grants and loans https: / / www.usa.gov / benefits - grants - loans starting a nonprofit organization https: / / www.usa.gov / start - nonprofit links to federal department and agency information on several types of nonprofit organizations and outlines the process of incorporating and applying for tax - exempt status .

grants management circulars ( office of management and budget ) https: / / obamawhitehouse.archives.gov / omb / circulars_default / omb establishes government - wide grants management policies and guidelines through circulars and common rules .

omb circulars are cited in beta.sam.gov program descriptions .

circulars target grants recipients and audit requirements for educational institutions , state and local governments , and nonprofit organizations .

grants and related resources ( michigan state university libraries ) http: / / staff.lib.msu.edu / harris23 / grants / index.htm the site provides government and private grants resources , primarily internet , by subject or group categories , and is updated frequently .

subpages include the following: funding for business and economic development http: / / staff.lib.msu.edu / harris23 / grants / 2biz.htm grants for nonprofit s http: / / staff.lib.msu.edu / harris23 / grants / 2sgalpha.htm grants for individuals ( primarily financial aid and scholarships ) http: / / staff.lib.msu.edu / harris23 / grants / 3subject.ht .

