the number of limited english proficient ( lep ) students enrolled in k - 12 education increased by 60.8% from the 1994-1995 school year to the 2004-2005 school year ; total student enrollment increased by 2.6% over the same time period .

given this tremendous growth in the lep student population and the likelihood that the 110 th congress will consider legislation to reauthorize the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ; p.l .

107-110 ) , this report examines the formula used to provide grants to states under the english language acquisition program , authorized by title iii of the esea .

this program provides grants to states to help ensure that lep and recent immigrant students attain proficiency in english .

much of the debate surrounding the reauthorization of this program has focused on the data used to determine how many lep and immigrant students are in each state , as these data are the basis upon which grants are determined .

this report begins with a general overview of the english language acquisition program , focusing specifically on the state grant formula .

this is followed by a detailed analysis of the american community survey ( acs ) data currently used by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) to calculate these grants , as well as state - reported data that could potentially be used to calculate these grants .

the third section of the report compares student counts based on acs data and state data and examines differences in estimated fy2007 state grants if state data were used as the basis for determining the awards .

the report concludes with an examination of some of the drawbacks of using either the acs or state - reported data for determining state grants and other possible alternative strategies for calculating state grants .

title iii , part a of the esea authorizes formula grants to states to ensure that limited english proficient ( lep ) students and immigrant children develop english proficiency .

prior to determining state grant allocations , statutory language provides for several reservations of funds .

these include reservations for national activities , for schools serving native american and alaska native students , and for the outlying areas .

after reserving the required funds , grants to the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico are determined based on the state's proportional share of lep students and immigrant students relative to the u.s. population of lep students and immigrant students .

these shares are then weighted , with a higher weight ( 0.8 ) being assigned to the state's population of lep students and a lower weight ( 0.2 ) being assigned to the state's population of recent immigrant students .

no state can receive a grant less than $500,000 .

the grant to puerto rico cannot exceed 0.5% of the total available for state distribution .

in determining the number of lep and immigrant students in an individual state and in the united states , statutory language directs ed to use "the more accurate" of ( 1 ) data available from the american community survey ( acs ) , or ( 2 ) the number of children being assessed for english proficiency as required under title i of the esea .

in practice , ed has been using the acs data to make state allocations since fy2005 .

title iii grants for a specific fiscal year have been based on acs data from two years prior .

for example , fy2007 grants are based on the 2005 acs data .

according to testimony provided by cornelia ashby , director of education , workforce , and income security issues at the government accountability office ( gao ) , ed has not used state data because it believes the state data are incomplete .

for example , ed noted that for the 2004-2005 school year , not every state provided data , and some data included only partial student counts .

this section makes direct comparisons between the most recent acs data and the most recent state data .

it begins with a discussion of data limitations in making these comparisons .

this discussion is followed by a detailed analysis of differences in lep and immigrant student counts between the two types of data .

the section concludes with an analysis of estimated fy2007 state grants using both data sources and how these grants would differ based on the underlying data used for the calculation .

an analysis of the differences in estimated fy2007 grant amounts if the aforementioned state data , rather than the 2005 acs data , were used to determine grant amounts revealed that grant amounts would change in most states , in some cases increasing or decreasing by substantial amounts .

for example , if state data , rather than acs data , had been used to calculate the fy2007 grant amounts , california's grant amount would have increased by $34.2 million or 20.2% ( table 7 ) .

other states that would have experienced substantial increases in their fy2007 grant amounts include florida ( $7.8 million or 19.2% ) , utah ( $4.4 million or 123.7% ) , and new mexico ( $4.3 million or 100.2% ) .

one interesting trend to note is the general reduction in state grant amounts that would occur in northeast states ( eg , connecticut , maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , pennsylvania , and rhode island ) , if state data were used to calculate grant amounts .

overall , increases would have ranged from $20,000 in south dakota to $34.2 million in california .

the largest loss of funds would have been experienced by new york ( $10.9 million or 24.3% ) , followed by new jersey ( $7.0 million or 38.5% ) , georgia ( $5.7 million or 37.5% ) , and pennsylvania ( $5.4 million or 47.2% ) .

overall , the decreases would have ranged from $12,000 in kansas to $10.9 million in new york .

with respect to the percentage change in grant amount , alaska would have received the largest increase ( 262.1% ) , and mississippi would have experienced the largest decrease ( 55.2% ) .

the use of either the acs or state data for calculating title iii state grants has drawbacks .

this section examines the methodological issues associated with using either the acs data or state data as the basis for distributing state grants .

it also examines issues specific to counting lep students and counting recent immigrant students .

the section concludes with a brief discussion of the requirement that ed use the most accurate of these data sources to allocate state grants .

given the drawbacks in using either the acs or state - reported data as the basis for determining state grants , other alternatives could be considered .

as previously mentioned , no research demonstrates that the acs data accurately reflect the actual lep student population .

one option may be to require the national academy of sciences ( nas ) to conduct a study to examine the methodology used to produce the acs data on which title iii state grants are currently based , the availability of alternative indicators , and the reliability of the data .

nas was required to conduct a similar study of the small area income and poverty estimates ( saipe ) data used for title i purposes ( improving america's schools act , p.l .

103-382 , title i , section 1124 ( c ) ( 4 ) ) .

in addition or alternatively , developing a formula based on both the acs data and the state - reported data could be considered , possibly averaging the student counts from each .

this strategy could be used on a long - term basis or as a means of transitioning from the use of acs data to state data to determine state grants .

using both types of data simultaneously , however , would require state data and acs data to be available from comparable years .

a third alternative , specifically designed to reduce the volatility of the acs data , would be to average the lep student counts produced by the acs for the last two or three available years , and do the same for the acs immigrant student counts .

