the wars in iraq and afghanistan brought renewed attention to the needs of veterans , including the needs of homeless veterans .

homeless veterans initially came to the country's attention in the 1970s and 1980s , when homelessness generally was becoming a more prevalent and noticeable phenomenon .

the first section of this report defines the term "homeless veteran," discusses attempts to estimate the number of veterans who are homeless , and presents the results of studies regarding the demographic characteristics of homeless veterans as well as those surveyed as part of hud's annual homeless assessment report to congress .

at the same time that the number of homeless persons began to grow , it became clear through various analyses of homeless individuals that homeless veterans were overrepresented in the homeless population .

the second section of this report summarizes research regarding the overrepresentation of both male and female veterans , who have been found to be present in greater percentages in the homeless population than their percentages in the general population .

this section also reviews research regarding possible explanations for why homeless veterans have been overrepresented .

in response to the issue of homelessness among veterans , congress has created numerous programs to fund services , transitional housing , and permanent housing specifically for homeless veterans .

the third section of this report discusses these programs .

the majority of programs are funded through the department of veterans affairs .

within the va , the veterans health administration ( vha ) , which is responsible for the health care of veterans , operates all but one of the programs for homeless veterans .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , which is responsible for compensation , pensions , educational assistance , home loan guarantees , and insurance , operates the other .

in addition , the department of labor ( dol ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) operate programs for homeless veterans .

several issues regarding homelessness among veterans have become prominent since the beginning of the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

the fourth section of this report discusses three of these issues .

the first is the va's plan to end homelessness among veterans .

a second issue is ensuring that an adequate transition process exists for returning veterans to assist them with issues that might put them at risk of homelessness .

third is the concern that adequate services might not exist to serve the needs of women veterans .

homelessness has always existed in the united states , but only in recent decades has the issue come to prominence .

in the 1970s and 1980s , the number of homeless persons increased , as did their visibility .

experts cite various causes for the increase in homelessness .

these include the demolition of single room occupancy dwellings in so - called "skid rows" where transient single men lived , the decreased availability of affordable housing generally , the reduced need for seasonal unskilled labor , the reduced likelihood that relatives will accommodate homeless family members , the decreased value of public benefits , and changed admissions standards at mental hospitals .

the increased visibility of homeless persons was due , in part , to the decriminalization of actions such as public drunkenness , loitering , and vagrancy .

homelessness occurs among families with children and single individuals , in rural communities as well as large urban cities , and for varying periods of time .

depending on circumstances , periods of homelessness may vary from days to years .

researchers have created three categories of homelessness based on the amount of time that individuals are homeless .

first , transitionally homeless people are those who have one short stay in a homeless shelter before returning to permanent housing .

in the second category , those who are episodically homeless frequently move in and out of homelessness but do not remain homeless for long periods of time .

third , chronically homeless individuals are those who are homeless continuously for a period of one year or have at least four episodes of homelessness in three years .

chronically homeless individuals often suffer from mental illness and / or substance use disorders .

although veterans experience all types of homelessness , some evidence exists that they may be chronically homeless in higher numbers than nonveterans .

homeless veterans began to come to the attention of the public at the same time that homelessness generally was becoming more common .

news accounts chronicled the plight of veterans who had served their country but were living ( and dying ) on the street .

the commonly held notion that the military experience provides young people with job training , educational and other benefits , as well as the maturity needed for a productive life , conflicted with the presence of veterans among the homeless population .

until the advent of the veterans supplement to the annual homeless assessment report , research that captures information about homeless veterans had not been conducted on a regular , systematic basis .

however , in addition to hud's ongoing efforts to collect information about homeless individuals , the va's relatively new national center for homelessness among veterans is conducting a variety of research studies .

one of the studies released by the va research center builds on earlier research about whether veterans are overrepresented in the homeless population using 2009 data from homeless management information systems ( hmis ) .

this section discusses previous studies regarding the overrepresentation of veterans in the homeless population and the va's more recent findings .

there are several prominent homelessness surveys from which much of the data regarding homeless veterans is drawn .

possibly the most comprehensive national data collection effort regarding persons experiencing homelessness prior to hmis took place in 1996 as part of the national survey of homeless assistance providers and clients ( nshapc ) , when researchers interviewed thousands of homeless assistance providers and homeless individuals across the country .

prior to the nshapc , in 1987 , researchers from the urban institute surveyed nearly 2,000 homeless individuals and clients in large cities nationwide as part of a national study .

the data from the nshapc and urban institute surveys served as the basis for more in - depth research regarding homeless veterans , but did not include veterans of the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

in 2012 , the va released research using 2009 hmis data from seven communities , called "continuums of care," which included veterans from the wars in iraq and afghanistan .

results from a total of five studies using these and other data are presented here .

the studies all looked at veterans as a percentage of the general population compared to veterans as a percentage of the homeless population and determined the likelihood of veterans to be homeless compared to non - veterans .

the data in each of the studies relied on samples of homeless individuals , and adjustments were made for such factors as age and race .

in each of the studies , both male and female veterans were more likely to be homeless than their nonveteran counterparts .

this was not always the case , however .

although veterans have always been present among the homeless population , the studies from the 1980s and 1990s found that cohorts serving in the vietnam and post - vietnam eras were overrepresented while veterans of world war ii and korea were less likely to be homeless than their nonveteran counterparts .

the va study using 2009 hmis data also found that vietnam and post - vietnam veterans were overrepresented .

the federal response to the needs of homeless veterans , like the federal response to homelessness generally , began in the late 1980s .

congress , aware of the data showing that veterans were disproportionately represented among homeless persons , began to hold hearings and enact legislation in the late 1980s .

among the programs enacted were health care for homeless veterans , domiciliary care for homeless veterans , and the homeless veterans reintegration program .

also around this time , the first national group dedicated to the cause of homeless veterans , the national coalition for homeless veterans , was founded by service providers that were concerned about the growing number of homeless veterans .

while homeless veterans are eligible for and receive services through programs that are not designed specifically for homeless veterans , the va funds multiple programs to serve homeless veterans .

the majority of homeless programs are run through the veterans health administration ( vha ) , which administers health care programs for veterans .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , which is responsible for compensation and pensions , education assistance , home loan guarantees , and insurance , operates one program for homeless veterans .

in addition , the department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for programs that provide employment services for homeless veterans while the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) collaborates with the va on two additional programs .

many of these programs are summarized in this section .

 table 4 , below , shows historical funding levels for seven programs that target services to homeless veterans .

following table 4 , table 5 shows funding for housing provided through the hud - va collaboration known as hud - vash .

hud has funded section 8 vouchers for homeless veterans since fy1992 , but after the initial appropriation for the vouchers , hud does not separately report the amount of funds necessary to provide rental assistance for each of the vouchers in subsequent years .

unlike programs included in table 4 , then , it is not possible to provide annual budget authority or obligations for hud - vash .

table 5 contains information regarding the initial budget authority needed to support the vouchers in the first year of appropriations .

on november 3 , 2009 , the va announced a plan to end homelessness among veterans within five years .

the va outlined six areas of focus for the new plan in its fy2011 budget justifications: ( 1 ) outreach and education , ( 2 ) treatment , ( 3 ) prevention , ( 4 ) housing and supportive services , ( 5 ) employment and benefits , and ( 6 ) community partnerships .

in the fy2011 through fy2013 budget documents , the va laid out plans to expand existing programs and to implement two new programs , the va - hud pilot to prevent veteran homelessness and the ssvf program .

since fy2009 , va obligations for targeted homeless veterans programs have increased from approximately $376 million to $1.5 billion in fy2014 .

during the same period , healthcare obligations for homeless veterans have increased from $2.5 billion to about $4.8 billion .

in october 2015 , the u.s. interagency council on homelessness , hud , and the va released guidance on what it means for a community to end veteran homelessness .

there are five criteria: the community has identified all veterans experiencing homelessness ; the community provides shelter immediately to any veteran experiencing unsheltered homelessness who wants it ; the community only provides service - intensive transitional housing in limited circumstances ; the community has capacity to assist veterans to move swiftly into permanent housing ; and the community has resources , plans , and system capacity in place should any veteran become homeless or be at risk of homelessness in the future .

during the last several years , estimates of homeless veterans have fallen .

the most recent point - in - time count of homeless veterans , from 2015 , reported not - quite 48,000 homeless veterans , a reduction of more than 25,000 since 2009 .

 ( for more information , see the section of this report entitled " estimates of the number of homeless veterans ." ) .

during this same time period , the need for permanent housing , as reported by homeless veterans and those who provide services , has also declined .

the va's annual "community homelessness assessment , local education and networking groups" ( chaleng ) report surveys homeless veterans , as well as government and community service providers , about the most pressing unmet needs among homeless veterans .

through fy2006 , the highest priority unmet need according to all respondents in the chaleng reports was long - term permanent housing .

however , in the fy2007 report , permanent housing was the second - highest unmet need , behind child care .

in fy2008 and fy2009 , it fell to the fourth - highest unmet need , in fy2010 , long - term housing was the ninth in the list of unmet needs for veterans , and in fy2011 , it was 16 th on the list .

one of the reasons that estimates of homeless veterans are declining and that the highest unmet need is no longer housing is an increasing emphasis on permanent supportive housing for veterans .

the permanent supportive housing model promotes stability by ensuring that residents receive services tailored to their particular needs , including health care , counseling , employment assistance , help with financial matters , and assistance with other daily activities that might present challenges to a formerly homeless individual .

historically , homeless programs targeted to veterans did not provide permanent supportive housing ( although veterans were eligible for housing through hud's homeless programs ) .

instead , programs such as grant and per diem offered transitional housing to help veterans become stable , find employment , and eventually transition to permanent housing .

however , after leaving transitional housing , veterans competed with other needy groups — including elderly residents , persons with disabilities , and families with young children — for government assisted housing .

with the advent of hud - vash ( discussed earlier in this report ) , tens of thousands of units of permanent supportive housing funded through the federal government have been targeted to homeless veterans for the last seven fiscal years .

congress has appropriated $575 million for the program , an amount sufficient to fund 79,000 vouchers for one year .

the additional section 8 vouchers , as well as increased funding through va program interventions ( see table 4 ) , could be making a difference in the number of veterans experiencing homelessness .

in addition to funding increases , the numbers of veterans served in va homeless programs have increased in the years since the plan was announced , as shown in table 6 .

in the year prior to the plan's announcement , about 118,000 veterans were served in dchv , hchv , cwt / tr , gpd , and hud - vash .

by fy2013 , the number had increased to nearly 223,000 .

 ( note that veterans may have been served by more than one program. ) .

as veterans return from operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) , operation enduring freedom ( oef ) , and operation new dawn ( ond ) , just as veterans before them , they face risks that could lead to homelessness .

in fy2013 , the va reported that 14% of the more - than 260,000 veterans served in va homeless programs were those from oif / oef / ond .

approximately 1.76 million oef / oif / ond troops have been separated from active duty and become eligible for va health benefits since 2003 .

if the experiences of the vietnam war are any indication , the risk of becoming homeless continues for many years after service .

one study found that after the vietnam war , 76% of vietnam era combat troops and 50% of non - combat troops who eventually became homeless reported that at least 10 years passed between the time they left military service and when they became homeless .

a number of studies have examined the mental health status of troops returning from iraq and afghanistan .

according to one study of troops returning from iraq published in the new england journal of medicine , between 15% and 17% screened positive for depression , generalized anxiety , and ptsd .

another study , conducted by the rand corporation , found that , of veterans surveyed , 14% reported screening positive for ptsd and 14% for major depression .

veterans returning from iraq also appear to be seeking out mental health services at higher rates than veterans returning from other conflicts .

research has also found that the length and number of deployments of troops in iraq result in greater risk of mental health problems .

access to va health services could be a critical component of reintegration into the community for some veterans , and there is concern that returning veterans might not be aware of available va health programs and services .

the va has multiple means of reaching out to injured veterans and veterans currently receiving treatment through the department of defense ( dod ) to ensure that they know about va health services and to help them make the transition from dod to va services .

however , for some veterans , health issues , particularly mental health issues , may arise later .

a study of iraq soldiers returning from deployment found that a higher percentage of soldiers reported mental health concerns six months after returning than immediately after returning .

the number and percentage of women enlisted in the military have increased since previous wars .

in fy2012 , approximately 14.3% of enlisted troops in the active components of the military ( army , navy , air force , and marines ) were female , up from approximately 3.3% in fy1974 and 10.9% in fy1990 .

the number of women veterans can be expected to grow commensurately .

according to the va , there were approximately 1.2 million female veterans in 1990 ( 4% of the veteran population ) and 1.6 million in 2000 ( 6% ) .

in 2010 , approximately 1.8 million veterans were women .

the va predicted that there would be 1.9 million female veterans ( 10% of the veteran population ) in 2020 .

at the same time , the number of male veterans is expected to decline .

women veterans face challenges that could contribute to their risks of homelessness .

a study of women veterans in the los angeles area compared homeless women veterans to women veterans who were housed and found that the characteristics most associated with homelessness were unemployment , having a disability , and being unmarried .

additional factors associated with homelessness were screening positive for ptsd , experiencing military sexual trauma , suffering from an anxiety disorder , and having fair or poor health .

experts have found that female veterans report incidents of sexual assault that exceed rates reported in the general population .

one study of all returning oef / oif veterans who used va mental and / or primary health care found that 15.1% of female veterans reported experiencing sexual assault or harassment while in the military ( referred to by the va as military sexual trauma , mst ) .

another study of mst among homeless veterans who were using vha care in fy2010 found that 39.1% of homeless women veterans experienced mst .

in the two studies , women veterans who had experienced military sexual trauma were more likely than other veterans to have been diagnosed with a mental health conditions .

in the study of returning oef / oif veterans , women veterans were more likely to have been diagnosed with depressive disorders , ptsd , anxiety disorders , alcohol and substance use disorders , and adjustment disorders .

in particular , the relationship between military sexual trauma and ptsd among women was stronger than it was for men .

in the study of homeless veterans , women veterans who had experienced mst were more likely than women veterans without a history of mst to have depressive disorders , ptsd , substance use disorders , anxiety disorders , bipolar disorders , personality disorders , and behaviors associated with suicide .

these factors can increase the difficulty with which women veterans readjust to civilian life , and could be risk factors for homelessness ( see earlier discussion in this report ) .

women veterans are estimated to make up a relatively small , but growing , proportion of the homeless veteran population .

according to the 2012 annual homeless assessment report , homeless women veterans represented 8% of veterans living in shelter .

as a result , programs serving homeless veterans may not have adequate facilities for female veterans at risk of homelessness , particularly transitional housing for women and women with children .

in fy2010 , 4.5% of individuals placed in grant and per diem programs were women while 4.9% of veterans served in the domiciliary care for homeless veterans program in fy2010 were women .

the program that serves the highest percentage of female veterans is hud - vash ; approximately 11% of veterans who have received vouchers are women .

the need for assistance among younger women veterans , in particular , appears to be increasing .

a report released by the va about the risk and prevalence of homelessness among veterans noted the increased risk of homelessness among young , female veterans , and that intervention upon return from service and during the transition to civilian life could benefit this group .

it is also noteworthy that child care was the highest unmet need reported by homeless veterans and service providers in four of the last five va chaleng reports ( in the most recent chaleng report , for fy2011 , child care is the third - highest unmet need ) .

in the 110 th congress , the veterans' mental health and other care improvements act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-387 ) added a provision to the statute governing the domiciliary care for homeless veterans program requiring the secretary to "take appropriate actions to ensure that the domiciliary care programs of the department are adequate , with respect to capacity and with respect to safety , to meet the needs of veterans who are women. .

in the 111 th congress , the veterans' benefits act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-275 ) , signed into law on october 13 , 2010 , created an hvrp grant program specifically targeted to serve women veterans and veterans with children .

the program , like hvrp , provides job training , counseling , and job placement services , but also provides child care for participants .

the program is authorized through fy2016 at $1 million per year .

