the focus of policy - makers on climate change science has shifted from debate over whether the earth's climate has changed and whether human - related greenhouse gases are responsible for a major portion of it .

focus has turned to debate over the magnitude and patterns of future climate change , how adverse such changes may be , and how projections may inform mitigation and adaptation policy choices .

there is also growing recognition of a wider variety of human - related "forcings" of climate change than the six "kyoto gases" to include other kinds of pollution , newly developed chemicals , and land use patterns .

understanding of potential impacts of climate change has deepened as well , but remains hindered by poor time and spatial resolution of predictions and , especially , by the wide divergence of projections across different climate models .

this divergence reflects continuing uncertainties concerning clouds , oceans , and vegetation feedbacks to climate change , among other questions .

it also reflects re - emerging recognition of the importance of socio - economic factors in technological change , climate change projections , potential damages ( or opportunities ) of those changes , and appropriate policy responses .

confidence has grown in some aspects of climate change science , allowing policy - makers to deliberate over appropriate risk management strategies , but needs for further research continue .

this report highlights major scientific observations , conclusions , and issues .

the principal scientific findings from the 2007 fourth assessment report ( ar4 ) of the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) continue to stand , and will be summarized in this report .

a fuller explanation of climate change processes , analytical methods , uncertainties , and controversies is provided in crs report rl33849 , climate change: science and policy implications , by [author name scrubbed] .

the ipcc in 2007 declared that "[w]arming of the climate system is unequivocal.... observational evidence from all continents and most oceans shows that many natural systems are being affected by regional climate changes. .

the earth's climate has warmed by 0.6 o to 0.9 o celsius ( 1.1 to 1.6 o fahrenheit ) since the industrial revolution and approximately 0.5 o c compared to the 20 th century average ( see figure 1 ) .

precipitation has increased over the past century , although some regions have become wetter and some have become drier , consistent with scientists' understanding of how heightened greenhouse gas concentrations affect climate regionally .

observed increases in ocean temperatures , altered wind patterns , extreme weather events , melting glaciers and sea ice , and timing of seasons are also attributed in part to greenhouse gas forcing .

although there is substantial natural variability in the climate system , a warming trend continued through 2008 , with the year tied with 2001 as the eighth warmest globally since reliable measurements began in 1880 .

figure 1 also shows that the global climate varies from year - to - year and over longer cycles , as well as showing a century - long trend to warming .

some influences are natural and some are very likely human - related .

at regional and local scales , climate is generally even more variable .

this illustrates the caution that should be exercised in trying to detect changes in trends in the context of variability .

one or a series of hot or cool years , or a few extreme weather events , do not necessarily represent more than normal climate variability .

for example , better scientific understanding of natural phenomena like la nina , and solar variability have helped scientists to understand their cooling influence on global average temperatures since the year 2000 , or the impact of el nino on the extreme high temperature of 1998 .

detecting changes in the climate system requires measurements and assessment over decades or longer .

the u.s .

climate change science program ( ccsp ) produced a new synthesis report in 2008 , "reanalyzing" the u.s. climate from 1950 to the present , evaluating observed and modeled changes , and attributing changes to different factors .

the researchers estimated average warming over north america to have been 0.9 o c ( 1.6 o f ) from 1951 to 2006 , with almost all of the warming later than 1970 .

the reanalysis concluded , among other findings , that: •    the largest yearly average regional temperature increases have occurred over northern and western north america , with up to 2.0°c ( 3.6°f ) warming in 56 years over alaska , the yukon territories , alberta , and saskatchewan .

on the other hand , there have been no significant yearly average temperature changes in the southern united sates and eastern canada .

•    there has not been a significant trend in north american precipitation since 1951 , although there have been substantial changes from year to year and even decade to decade .

the report did not find a significant trend in continental precipitation .

nor did it find systematic changes in how often or where severe droughts have occurred in the contiguous united states over the past decades .

however , the demands and competition for water resources have increased in some regions , so that the vulnerability to drought is more severe .

in 2007 , the ipcc fourth assessment report concluded that "[m]ost of the observed increase in globally - averaged temperatures since the mid - 20 th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic ghg concentrations. .

according to the report , natural phenomena , such as volcanoes , solar variability and land cover change , have undoubtedly influenced the observed climate change , but the dominant driver of change since the 1970s is estimated to be the increase of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) in the earth's atmosphere due to emissions from human - related activities .

the ccsp reanalysis of north american climate data concluded that there is more than a 66% likelihood that more than half the average continental warming since 1951 has been due to human activities , but also that the regional differences in summer surface temperatures are unlikely to have been driven by human influences alone .

the reanalysis found that sea surface temperatures likely have affected temperature trends , regional differences in temperature and regional and seasonal differences in precipitation .

it also concluded that sea surface temperatures have likely contributed to multi - year droughts .

the ipcc concluded in 2007 that: "... discernible human influences extend beyond average temperature to other aspects of climate. .

human influences have: very likely contributed to sea level rise during the latter half of the 20 th century likely contributed to changes in wind patterns , affecting extra - tropical storm tracks and temperature patterns likely increased temperatures of extreme hot nights , cold nights and cold days more likely than not increased risk of heat waves , area affected by drought since the 1970s and frequency of heavy precipitation events .

anthropogenic warming over the last three decades has likely had a discernible influence at the global scale on observed changes in many physical and biological systems .

the u.s .

climate change science program ( us ccsp ) released its second report in 2007 , entitled "scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric concentrations and review of integrated scenario development and application. .

this research produced new scenarios of future ghg emissions and concluded that "in the reference scenarios , economic and energy growth , combined with continued fossil fuel use , lead to changes in the earth's radiation balance that are three to four times that already experienced since the beginning of the industrial age. .

this research also explored scenarios aimed at stabilizing the growth of ghg concentrations in the atmosphere at four increasingly stringent levels: roughly 750 parts per million ( ppm ) , 650 ppm , 550 ppm , and 450 ppm ( including multiple ghgs as co 2 - equivalents ) .

the analysis concluded , "the timing of ghg emissions reductions varies substantially across the four radiative forcing stabilization levels .

under the most stringent stabilization levels [450-550 ppm] emissions begin to decline immediately or within a matter of decades .

under the less stringent stabilization levels [750 ppm] , co 2 emissions do not peak until late in the century or beyond , and they are 1½ to over 2½ times today's levels in 2100. .

the results of the ccsp reference scenarios are similar to those of the 2000 special report on emission scenarios ( sres ) of the ipcc , though the latter explored a wider range of uncertainty in its reference projections .

the sres projected global ghg emissions , without further climate change mitigation policies , to increase by 25-90% ( co 2 - equivalent ) from 2000 to 2030 , with co 2 - equivalent concentrations growing in the atmosphere to 600-1550 ppm .

scientists have found it very likely that rising greenhouse gas concentrations , if they continue unabated , will increase global average temperature above natural variability by at least 1.5 o celsius ( 2.7 o fahrenheit ) during the 21 st century ( above 1990 temperatures ) , with a small likelihood that the temperature rise may exceed 5 o c ( 9 o f ) .

the projections thought most likely by many climate modelers are for greenhouse gas - induced temperature rise of approximately 2.5 o to 3.5 o c ( 4.5 to 6.3 o f ) by 2100 .

future climate change may advance smoothly or sporadically , with some regions experiencing more fluctuations in temperature , precipitation , and frequency or intensity of extreme events than others .

wet regions are expected to get more precipitation and dry regions are expected to become drier .

floods , droughts , storms and other extreme weather events are projected to increase , with impacts for ecological and human systems .

a report by the ccsp found that short - lived air pollutants , such as tropospheric ozone and black carbon aerosols could contribute as much as 20% of global warming by 2050 .

it found that one "climate model using projected changes in emissions and pollutant levels that occur primarily over asia predicts significant increases in surface temperature and decreases in rainfall over the continental united states during the summertime throughout the second half of this century. .

while most policy attention has been on the long - lived ghg , such as carbon dioxide and methane , including other climate forcings , such as short - lived air pollution , offers additional opportunities to abate near - term climate change , with the co - benefits of reducing health and environmental impacts .

with projected global warming , sea levels could rise by between 18 and 59 centimeters ( between 7 and 23 inches ) by 2100 due to expansion of oceans' waters as they warm and additions of meltwater ( at current rates of melting ) from land - based glaciers and ice caps .

the ipcc scientists were unable to include a quantitative estimate of the risks of accelerated melting or possible collapse of the greenland or antarctic ice sheets due to inadequacies of existing understanding of their dynamics .

some people are concerned less about chronic damages due to slow and continuing climate change than they are about the potential for abrupt "tipping points" in the current climate system .

once the climate system reaches certain thresholds of change or tipping points , major aspects of the earth's climate could change abruptly and in uncertain ways .

figure 3 shows one recent set of estimates of where dangerous "tipping points" may exist in the climate system relative to potential future global temperature increases .

it also shows an estimate of the likelihoods , or probability density function ( the black curve ) , that human - related ghg emissions since 1750 have already committed the planet to degrees of warming .

in other words , according to the estimates represented in this figure , it is most likely that greenhouse gas emissions from 1750 to 2005 will lead to global average warming of 1 o - 3 o c , and potentially result in ice - free arctic summers , major reduction of area and volume of the hindu - kush - himalaya - tibetan ( hkht ) glaciers , major melting of the greenland ice sheet , and so non .

according to the estimates in the cited study , it is less likely that the committed warming is already greater than the "tipping points" for collapse of the amazon rain forest and other identified components .

some impacts of climate change are expected to be beneficial in some locations with a few degrees of warming ( eg , increased agricultural productivity in some regions , less need for space heating , opening of the northwest passage for shipping and resource exploitation ) .

most impacts are expected to be adverse ( eg , lower agricultural productivity in many regions , drought , rising sea levels , spread of disease vectors , greater needs for cooling ) .

risks of abrupt , perhaps unidentified climate changes in aspects of the environment , with accompanying dislocations , are expected to increase as global average temperature increases , and could push natural and socio - economic systems past key thresholds .

an example that recently occurred is the rapid and widespread infestation of beetles in western north america .

such changes could precipitate major reorganization of ecosystems , and under some circumstances , stresses on nearby or dependent human systems .

impacts on water resources are expected to be among the most serious due to climate change , combined with rising demand and management issues in many regions .

earlier melting of snowpack and ice in some regions ( eg , the andes , the u.s. west ) and loss of ice and snow would reduce water supply to settlements that now depend on the snowmelt , and change the seasonality of water supply .

snowfall in some regions is expected to increase , however , with greater atmospheric moisture .

one ccsp assessment examined the implications of projected sea level rise , with emphasis on the u.s. mid - atlantic region .

it concluded: today , rising sea levels are submerging low - lying lands , eroding beaches , converting wetlands to open water , exacerbating coastal flooding , and increasing the salinity of estuaries and freshwater aquifers .

other impacts of climate change , coastal development , and natural coastal processes also contribute to these impacts .

in undeveloped or less developed coastal areas where human influence is minimal , ecosystems and geological systems can sometimes shift upward and landward with the rising water levels .

coastal development , including buildings , roads , and other infrastructure , are less mobile and more vulnerable .

vulnerability to an accelerating rate of sea - level rise is compounded by the high population density along the coast , the possibility of other effects of climate change , and the susceptibility of coastal regions to storms and environmental stressors , such as drought or invasive species .

agriculture in many regions , especially in the tropics , may experience losses of productivity , especially where higher temperatures coincide with increased dryness and limits on irrigation .

the general shift upward in growing season temperatures could raise typical temperatures to or above those considered extreme today .

agriculture may also confront challenges from invasive species , including pests .

one 2008 study examined four key pests of maize in the united states with climate change .

it projected increased winter survival and expanded ranges of all four pests , especially of the corn earworm , which may be resistant to insecticides .

the authors concluded that even with pest management adaptations , the effects of climate change could increase seed and insecticide costs , decrease yields and alter crop yield variability .

in 2008 , a number of studies highlighted risks to human health with climate change , and at least one study found potential benefits of reduced cold weather mortality .

raised risks and adaptation costs could be associated with increased diarrhoeal disease , renal disease , heat stress , malaria , cholera , malnutrition , and respiratory and other health effects associated with elevated ozone and particulate air pollution due to higher temperatures , among other concerns .

effects on , and concerns about , mental health have been raised by several studies , especially associated with projected increases in extreme weather events .

one 2008 study found potential for higher temperatures to result in lower ratios of male to female births and reduced male longevity in humans , at least in nordic countries .

as the degree and distribution of climate changes continue , ranges of species are likely to change .

climate change is highly likely to create substantial changes in ecological systems and services in some locations , and may lead to ecological surprises .

the disappearance of some types of climate also raises risks of extinctions of species , especially those with narrow geographic or climatic distributions , and where existing communities disintegrate .

one study projected that , under the highest ipcc emissions scenario , 12% to 39% of the earth's land areas may experience novel climates ( i.e. , climate conditions not existing now ) while 10% to 48% of land areas' climates may disappear by 2100 ad .

in the lowest ipcc climate change scenarios , 4% to 20% of land areas gain novel climates and 4% to 20% see existing climates disappear .

because climate change will occur with different magnitudes and characteristics in different regions , resulting dislocations and disparities across locations are expected to increase pressure on international aid and migration , with possible implications for political stability and security .

impacts may be alleviated with investments in adaptation .

adaptation as a strategy , however , is thought to be more challenging and potentially less effective the more widespread , uncertain and severe the climate changes .

on november 16 , 2007 , government officials from most countries — including the united states — agreed on a summary for policymakers of the synthesis report of the ipcc fourth assessment report .

the synthesis report is derived from three technical reports: "the physical science basis" ( february 2007 ) ; "impacts , adaptation and vulnerability" ( april 2007 ) ; and "mitigation of climate change" ( may 2007 ) .

it represents a consensus among government officials and researchers , and will "constitute the core source of factual information about climate change [upon which policymakers will] base their political action... in the coming years" ( ipcc media advisory , november 17 , 2007 ) .

key conclusions are excerpted ( and slightly reordered ) below: "warming of the climate system is unequivocal.... " ( p. 1 ) "observational evidence from all continents and most oceans shows that many natural systems are being affected by regional climate changes. .

 ( p. 2 ) "global ghg emissions due to human activities have grown since pre - industrial times... .

carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) is the most important anthropogenic [greenhouse gas] ghg .

its annual emissions grew by about 80% between 1970 and 2004 .

the long - term trend of declining co 2 emissions per unit of energy supplied reversed after 2000. .

 ( p. 4 ) "atmospheric concentrations of co 2 ( 379ppm ) and ch 4 ( 1774 ppb ) in 2005 exceed by far the natural range over the last 650,000 years .

global increases in co 2 concentrations are due primarily to fossil fuel use , with land - use change providing another significant but smaller contribution. .

 ( p. 4 ) "most of the observed increase in globally - averaged temperatures since the mid - 20 th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic ghg concentrations. .

 ( p. 5 ) "even if the concentrations of all greenhouse gases and aerosols had been kept constant at year 2000 levels , a further warming of about 0.1 o c per decade would be expected .

afterwards , temperature projections increasingly depend on specific emission scenarios. .

 ( p. 6 ) "anthropogenic warming could lead to some impacts that are abrupt or irreversible , depending upon the rate and magnitude of the climate change. .

 ( p. 13 ) "the uptake of anthropogenic carbon since 1750 has led to the ocean becoming more acidic.... increasing atmospheric co 2 concentrations lead to further acidification.... [p]rogressive acidification of oceans is expected to have negative impacts on marine shell - forming organisms ( e.g .

corals ) and their dependent species. .

 ( p. 11 ) "sea level rise under warming is inevitable... .

the eventual contributions from greenland ice sheet loss could be several metres ... should warming in excess of 1.9-4.6 o c above pre - industrial be sustained over many centuries. .

 ( p. 21 ) "some systems , sectors and regions are likely to be especially affected by climate change .

terrestrial ecosystems: tundra , boreal forest and mountain regions because of sensitivity to warming ; mediterranean - type ecosystems because of reduction in rainfall ; and tropical rainforests where precipitation declines coastal ecosystems: mangroves and salt marshes , due to multiple stresses marine ecosystems: coral reefs due to multiple stresses ; the sea ice biome because of sensitivity to warming water resources in some dry regions at mid - latitudes and in the dry tropics , due to changes in rainfall and evapotranspiration , and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt agriculture in low - latitudes , due to reduced water availability low - lying coastal systems , due to threat of sea level rise and increased risk from extreme weather events human health in populations with low adaptive capacity. .

 ( p. 11 ) "[m]ore extensive adaptation than is currently occurring is required to reduce vulnerability to climate change .

there are barriers , limits and costs , which are not fully understood. .

 ( p. 14 ) "[international cooperation] will help to reduce global costs for achieving a given level of mitigation , or will improve environmental effectiveness .

efforts can include ... emissions targets ; sectoral , local , sub - national and regional actions ; rd&d programmes ; adopting common policies ; implementing development oriented actions ; or expanding financing instruments. .

 ( p. 19 ) "decisions about macroeconomic and other non - climate policies can significantly affect emissions , adaptive capacity and vulnerability. .

 ( p. 19 ) "determining what constitutes 'dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system' in relation to article 2 of the unfccc involves value judgements. .

 ( p. 19 ) "limited and early analytical results from integrated analyses of the costs and benefits of mitigation indicate that they are broadly comparable in magnitude , but do not as yet permit an unambiguous determination of an emissions pathway or stabilisation level where benefits exceed costs. .

 ( p. 23 ) "many impacts can be reduced , delayed or avoided by mitigation. .

 ( p. 20 ) "there is high agreement and much evidence that all stabilisation levels assessed can be achieved by deployment of a portfolio of technologies that are either currently available or expected to be commercialised in coming decades , assuming appropriate and effective incentives are in place.... " ( p. 22 ) "an effective carbon - price signal could realise significant mitigation potential in all sectors .

modelling studies show global carbon prices rising to 20-80 us$ / tco2-eq by 2030 are consistent with stabilisation at around 550 ppm co 2 - eq by 2100 .

for the same stabilisation level , induced technological change may lower these price ranges to 5-65 us$ / tco2-eq in 2030. .

 ( p. 18 ) "all assessed stabilisation scenarios indicate that 60-80% of the reductions would come from energy supply and use , and industrial processes , with energy efficiency playing a key role in many scenarios .

including non - co 2 and co 2 land - use and forestry mitigation options provides greater flexibility and cost - effectiveness .

low stabilisation levels require early investments and substantially more rapid diffusion and commercialisation of advanced low emissions technologies .

without substantial investment flows and effective technology transfer , it may be difficult to achieve emission reduction at a significant scale .

mobilizing financing of incremental costs of low - carbon technologies is important. .

 ( p. 22 ) "the macro - economic costs of mitigation generally rise with the stringency of the stabilisation target. .

 ( p. 22 ) "impacts of climate change are very likely to impose net annual costs which will increase over time as global temperatures increase .

peer - reviewed estimates of the social cost of carbon in 2005 average us$12 per tonne of co 2 , but the range from 100 estimates is large ( - $3 to $95 / t co 2 ) .

this is due in large part to differences in assumptions regarding climate sensitivity , response lags , the treatment of risk and equity , economic and non - economic impacts , the inclusion of potentially catastrophic losses , and discount rates .

aggregate estimates of costs mask significant differences in impacts across sectors , regions and populations and very likely underestimate damage costs because they cannot include many non - quantifiable impacts. .

 ( p. 23 ) "choices about the scale and timing of ghg mitigation involve balancing the economic costs of more rapid emission reductions now against the corresponding medium - term and long - term climate risks of delay. .

 ( p. 23 ) .

