there is growing debate about whether the food and drug administration ( fda ) has the ability to accomplish its mission with the resources provided by congressional appropriations and industry user fees .

fda plays a central role in protecting the public health in the united states by regulating most of the food supply and vitally important medical products , including drugs , devices , and biologics that affect american lives on a daily basis .

a 2006 report on drug safety by the institute of medicine ( iom ) made the following observation in a chapter devoted to fda resources: the food and drug administration lacks the resources needed to accomplish its large and complex mission today , let alone to position itself for an increasingly challenging future... .

there is little dispute that fda in general is ... severely underfunded .

several individuals who previously held high - ranking positions in fda or the department of health and human services ( hhs ) have organized advocacy groups to lobby for increased funding for the entire agency .

these groups present data to support their position that fda has fallen behind in overall funding in the last 25 years .

they warn that the agency is at risk of being unable to adequately fulfill the many statutory responsibilities that congress has assigned it .

while the call for more resources has been heard from many quarters , including some in congress , some agency critics are concerned about inefficiencies within fda and that it needs to do a better job managing what resources it does have .

in general , former fda commissioners and interest groups argue that fda is underfunded for its mission .

calls for cutting the fda budget or maintaining it at the current level come from organizations , like cato and the hoover institute , that propose limitations on fda's authority and , therefore , the need for funding .

the main voices in support of fda budget levels , past and present , have been representatives of the various presidential administrations .

over the last 25 years , incumbent fda commissioners , when asked during congressional hearings about the adequacy of the fda budget , have testified that the budget is sufficient to accomplish the job before the agency .

however , in non - congressional venues , those same commissioners have expressed concerns about the constraints on fda resources and that the agency's core budget has not increased in concert with its rising responsibilities .

they have expressed concern about whether the agency can continue to be considered the world's premier consumer protection agency when it is forced to focus its priorities based on the current level of resources that it receives .

this report examines fda's appropriations history and traces the evolution of the agency's statutory responsibilities .

the information is presented to help inform the ongoing discussion about fda .

crs takes no position on whether the agency has the necessary resources to meet its statutory responsibilities .

the report first provides an overview of fda's budget and personnel levels from fy1980 through fy2007 .

that is followed by a more detailed examination of the budget and personnel level over the same period in each of the agency's major activity areas .

for each activity area , the report also summarizes the major pieces of legislation that have been enacted since fy1980 .

unless noted otherwise , all budget data have been adjusted for inflation to permit comparison across the 28-year period under investigation .

the information presented in this report is intended to facilitate an examination of the impact that administrations' budget requests and congressional decision making have had on the ability of fda to accomplish its public health mission .

fda regulates a wide range of products valued at more than $1 trillion in the u.s. economy .

about 25% of american consumer dollars are spent on these fda - regulated products .

as one of the agencies within hhs that comprise the public health service , fda is responsible for the safety of most foods ( human and animal ) and cosmetics .

fda also regulates both the safety and the effectiveness of human drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , and animal drugs .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , as amended , is the principal source of fda's authority .

the agency also derives some of its authority from certain provisions in other laws , most notably the public health service ( phs ) act .

under the phs act , fda licenses biological products and performs other activities , such as setting standards for mammography quality .

an extensive list of the public laws that significantly affect fda activities is in table a - 4 in the appendix .

in addition to statutory responsibilities that directly involve product regulation , the fda must also comply with statutory requirements affecting all or most federal executive agencies , regarding such matters as information management , strategic planning , performance measurement , financial management , property management , and human resources management .

additional requirements apply only to those agencies , including fda , that have regulatory responsibilities .

fda's role in implementing provisions of some general federal management laws is substantial .

for example , the agency supports more than 50 advisory committees , most of which are mandated in statute and are subject to requirements of the federal advisory committee act .

also , the agency reports that in fy2006 it processed more than 20,000 information requests pursuant to requirements of the freedom of information act .

the congressional authorizing committees that oversee fda activities are those with jurisdiction over public health issues: the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , and the house committee on energy and commerce .

because medicare pays for fda - regulated products , the agency also falls under the jurisdiction of the senate committee on finance and the house committee on ways and means .

other committees that exercise oversight roles regarding fda include the house committee on oversight and government reform , and the senate committees on aging , homeland security and governmental affairs , and the judiciary .

the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on agriculture have jurisdiction over fda's appropriations .

this arrangement reflects , in part , the agency's origin within the department of agriculture as the bureau of chemistry in 1862 .

since 1940 , fda has administratively been part of federal health agencies , specifically hhs and its predecessors .

advocates for increasing fda funding point to this jurisdictional separation of fda appropriations decisions from the rest of phs and hhs as a contributing factor to what they see as underfunding .

in 2002 , former acting fda commissioner michael friedman recommended moving the fda budget process from the purview of the agriculture appropriations subcommittees to the labor , health and human services , education and related agencies subcommittees .

five years later , former fda commissioner frank young raised the same concern and made the same recommendation in congressional testimony .

former fda commissioner jane henney made a similar observation in february 2007: [t]here are other things congress can do that directly impact this agency's resources ... if they really wanted to look long and hard , fda would no longer be under the purview of the agriculture appropriations committees .

those people that serve on those committees do it with honor , but they do it primarily because of their interest in agricultural issues .

by the time the allocations come out and the interest of the agriculture areas are satisfied , there are very limited resources that the agency [fda] can ever hope to receive out of that process .

if somebody wanted to do something bold ... it would be looking at appropriations in an area that is more compatible ... with the interests of the members of that committee particularly the ones that oversee health issues .

the next sections of this report provide , for each fda major activity area , a brief description of the statutory responsibilities in 1980 and an overview of how the agency's responsibilities have expanded over the years up through 2007 .

juxtaposed with the presentation of increasing responsibilities for the activity area is a presentation and analysis of the budget and number of ftes for the period fy1980 through fy2007 .

the descriptions of fda's responsibilities and resources provide a background against which to examine fda funding needs .

other crs reports examine the particulars of many fda activities and their funding .

this report provides information on changes in fda's resources , both budget and ftes , as well as the evolution of its statutory responsibilities .

resources and responsibilities are juxtaposed because , as congress requires more from the agency , it is important to assess whether fda has the necessary financial resources to meet all those statutory responsibilities .

the report is intended to assist members and their staff in evaluating whether fda's resources have fallen short , and , if so , how to enhance fda's performance .

the status of fda resources and agency performance is important to congress because each day fda - regulated products touch the lives of every american citizen as well as people around the world .

as stated previously , about 25% of american consumer dollars are spent on these fda - regulated products .

among the industries that fda regulates are some of the most successful and innovative in the u.s. economy .

the agency regulates a wide range of products valued at more than $1 trillion .

problems with their safety or effectiveness could affect anyone , as is evident from the following sample of things fda regulates: the calorie and fat content information on food labels ; permissible and required information in televised prescription drug ads ; the coloring in foods , medicines , and cosmetics ; the purity of ingredients in prepared foods — for people and animals ; inspection requirements for mammography and mri equipment ; and antibiotics in the feed fed to animals bred for human consumption .

the data in this report , assembled from the annual material that each president submits to congress for the next year's appropriation , indicate some year - by - year variation , but mostly illustrate a few trends .

for fda as a whole , comparing fy2006 , the most recent year for which we have parallel data sources for both dollars and ftes , to fy1980 yields these inflation - adjusted findings ( see figure 1 ) : fda budget: almost a doubling of direct congressional appropriations ( budget authority ) ; more than an 10-fold increase in other funds , mostly user fees ; resulting in an overall budget in fy2006 almost 2-1 / 2 times that in fy1980 .

fda ftes: less than a 1% increase in budget authority - funded ftes ; an almost fourfold increase in ftes funded by other sources , mostly user fees ; resulting in an overall 19% increase from fy1980 to fy2006 .

similar relationships are observed in each of the major activity areas that receive user fees ( the foods program does not have user - fee funds ) and are discussed in this report .

the human drugs program , along with biologics , was the first to include user fee revenue in its budget and is a good example to illustrate the relationship over time between congressionally appropriated dollars and user fee generated dollars .

again from fy1980 to fy2006 , the data show that the human drugs total budget ( program level ) , which included user fee revenue , more than tripled ( a 231% increase ) although the direct congressional appropriations ( budget authority ) increased by 78% .

the effect of user fees is even more evident in comparing the number of ftes .

the budget authority funded ftes decreased by 14% , but the overall human drug fte level increased by 40% because of user fee funding .

for the human drug program in fy2006 , user fees contributed 46% of the budget and funded 39% of the ftes .

in general , congress has either kept direct appropriations in line with inflation ( fy1980-fy1988 , fy1994-fy1997 , and fy2002-2007 ) or increased them gradually ( fy1989-fy1993 and fy1998-fy2001 ) .

the exception is fy2002 , when congress increased direct appropriations to fda by 23% , along with increases to other public safety agencies in response to the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and the anthrax mailings soon after .

congress and various administrations have allowed fda's research program to diminish and its many data systems are not meeting the agency's needs .

the context of this report does not allow a distinction between program decisions made by budget constraints and those made by policy intent .

the focus of this report is the fda budget .

the discussion does not , therefore , explore other possible constraints on fda's meeting its responsibilities and the public's expectations .

such factors could include the agency's lack of strong advocates , both externally ( such as nih has with its patient advocacy groups ) and internally ( because of chronic vacancies in key leadership positions , including the commissioner ) .

independent of whether the fda budget is sufficient to cover agency responsibilities is how fda manages the resources it does have .

the influence of non - budgetary factors likely complicates agency actions , though analyzing that is beyond the scope of this report .

from 1980 through 2007 , 36 new major statutes were enacted that address fda activities .

this report does not evaluate the impact of individual statutory requirements on the workload and resources needs of the agency .

however , an examination of the fda amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) provides examples of the funding issues discussed in this report .

some news coverage of fdaaa hailed it as "the most sweeping overhaul of the food and drug administration in a decade. .

in addition to the widely expected reauthorization of drug and device user fees and pediatric drug research incentives , fdaaa , among other things , authorized demonstration grants , including ones for improving pediatric device availability ; established mechanisms for public - private partnerships to support fda's mission to accelerate medical product innovation , translational therapeutics , and enhanced medical product safety ; required an expanded clinical trial registry databank ; and strengthened fda's authority to require studies and labeling changes for drugs already on the market .

implementation of these and other provisions is to involve the development of new regulations and extensive communication with industry and the public .

carrying out these new responsibilities will require time and resources .

to fund all these provisions , fdaaa authorized annually an additional $250 million in appropriations and $32 million in user fee revenue .

absent appropriations , these authorizations remain congressional statements of intent .

this report has focused on the presentation of fda's financial and human resources and statutory responsibilities over time .

in presenting that information in context , the report also identifies actions — other than a straightforward increase in direct appropriations — that others have suggested as possible steps to help fda's budget situation .

these propose to: restructure the pdufa trigger mechanism to minimize its unintended effect of pulling resources from non - pdufa activities .

authorize fda to bypass the hhs and omb budget offices in submitting its request for appropriations to congress .

require , in addition to the omb - processed budget request , that the fda commissioner submit to congress a professional judgment budget based on his or her personal expertise and experience .

move fda appropriations from the appropriations subcommittees on agriculture to the labor - hhs subcommittees , which handle most other agencies involved in protecting the public's health .

this report tracks , as consistently as possible with publicly available material , the fda budget numbers and employee numbers ( ftes ) from fy2007 back to fy1980 .

the goal was to provide about 25 years of budget and fte history accompanied by changes in the agency's statutory responsibilities .

only limited budget and fte data are available from bills and reports of the congressional appropriations committees .

citing constraints on its staff time , fda indicated that it would only be able to provide data for recent years .

therefore , this report used data prepared annually by fda for congress at the beginning of each budget cycle and presented in the justification documents .

the justifications are prepared initially by fda and transmitted through hhs to omb , often with adjustments made by hhs and omb .

these documents provide detailed budget and fte data along with an extensive narrative .

over the years , changes in agency organization , accounting methods , definitions , and other conditions resulted in variations in data presentation in the justification documents .

although some data inconsistencies found in the documents could be explained , other inconsistencies could not .

this section of the report provides the basic approach used to calculate historical budget and fte numbers , highlights inconsistencies among the justification documents , and describes the steps taken to make the data as consistent as possible .

there may be additional data inconsistencies that were not found because they were less readily apparent .

the annual justification documents present first the overall fda information ( narrative , and budget and fte data ) followed by information for the various activity areas within the agency .

except as noted below , this report uses data from the actuals column in tables labeled: all purpose table — total program level ; all purpose table — budget authority ; and all purpose table — user fees .

these tables are found at the beginning of each justification document .

the report also uses activity - specific data from similar tables that are included at the beginning of the justification ' s narrative section on each activity area .

overall fda budget the fda's total budget , also called the program level , consists of ( 1 ) direct congressional appropriations , referred to by fda as budget authority , and ( 2 ) funds collected or transferred from other sources , which this report refers to as other funds and which fda lists under user fees in recent justifications .

other funds include all of the financial and fte resources that are available to fda as itemized in the justifications that are from sources other than direct congressional appropriations .

in recent years , the largest component of other funds comes from user fees collected under the authority of the prescription drug user fee act , the medical device user fee and modernization act , and the animal drug user fee act .

grouped separately in some years' justifications are other fees obtained under the mammography quality standards act , and fees collected for color certification , export certification , and freedom of information act ( foia ) requests .

additional sources itemized in the justifications include advances and reimbursements ; parklawn computer center ftes ; cradas ; and p.l .

83-480 ( agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 ) funds .

note that overall fda budget authority includes appropriations for both "salaries and expenses" and "buildings and facilities. .

 ( in contrast , as indicated below , activity - area budgets include only "salary and expenses." ) .

activity area budgets this report follows the order in the fy2008 justification document in presenting information on fda's five major activity areas: foods , human drugs , biologics , animal drugs and feeds , and medical devices and radiological health .

for each activity area , the justification provides the amount given by direct congressional appropriations ( budget authority ) and user fees ( a narrower category than other funds ) , the total of which is the program level .

the justification documents do not allocate an amount for buildings and facilities to each activity - area .

buildings and facilities is recorded as a separate line within the overall fda budget .

activity area amounts in this report's tables and graphs are for salaries and expenses .

the report groups remaining fda activities ( toxicological research ) , agency - wide responsibilities ( headquarters and office of the commissioner ) and expenditures ( rent , buildings and facilities ) into an "other activities" category .

tables a2 and a3 in the appendix of this report include budget and ftes for other activities within the fda total columns , but do not provide a separate other activities column .

budget amounts for other activities are included in figure 1 and figure 3 , which present overall fda data .

inflation adjustment data in table a - 2 in the appendix are as reported in the justifications and have not been adjusted for inflation .

for figures 1 and 2 as well as figures 4-9 , data have been adjusted for inflation using "total non - defense" deflators from table 10.1 , gross domestic product and deflators used in the historical tables: 1940-2012 , found on pages 192-193 in: office of management and budget , historical tables , budget of the united states , fiscal year 2008 .

basic approach as stated above , this report uses data found in the actuals column of tables in the justification documents .

budget and fte information for each activity area found in the overall summary tables at the front of the justification document was compared with information found in the tables within the activity - area sections of the same document for confirmation .

when a justification included inconsistent information , justification documents from the preceding and succeeding fiscal years were used to resolve the problem .

the steps taken to resolve specific inconsistencies are described below in table a - 1 in the appendix .

the reporting format that fda has used within the justification documents to describe both its overall budget and those of its various activities has changed over the past 28 years .

the format in this report was kept as consistent as possible with the format found in the fy2008 justification .

