both chambers of congress have passed comprehensive legislation to reauthorize expiring programs at the food and drug administration ( fda ) , and to expand the agency's authority to help ensure the safety of certain medical products .

the bills are the food and drug administration revitalization act ( s. 1082 ) , and the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( h.r .

2900 ) .

s. 1082 and h.r .

2900 represent the most comprehensive fda legislation since the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama ; p.l .

105-115 ) .

the primary driver of the legislation is the renewal of fda's authority for two key user fee programs set to expire at the end of fy2007: the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ; p.l .

107-188 ) , and the medical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma ; p.l .

107-250 ) .

fda had reportedly urged congress to complete its reauthorization efforts before august 1 , 2007 ( rather than by the program's termination date of october 1 , 2007 ) , because of a requirement that fda notify employees at least 60 days in advance of layoffs , which would be necessary without pdufa and mdufma funds .

the media report that fda has switched to reserve funds to forestall the issuance of layoff notifications , the effect of which is a hiring freeze at fda .

in addition , the fda commissioner has reportedly stressed that the funding uncertainty is harming the morale of employees: 30% of whom are at a point where they can retire .

the bills also would reauthorize two other expiring authorities , which are related to pediatric pharmaceuticals: the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca ; p.l .

105-115 ; reauthorized in p.l .

107-109 ) , and the pediatric research equity act ( prea ; p.l .

108-155 ) .

in addition , the bills address a number of other issues of concern to congress and to the public .

the fda , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , regulates the safety of most human foods , all animal feeds , and certain other products such as cosmetics .

the agency also regulates the safety and effectiveness of human drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , and animal drugs .

those products regulated for effectiveness must be reviewed and approved by fda before they can be placed in commerce , a process called premarket approval .

 ( fda is tasked with postmarket surveillance for these products as well. ) .

products regulated only for safety may enter commerce with little fda oversight , though the agency may inspect production facilities and require that certain good manufacturing practices be carried out .

fda has the statutory authority to withdraw from commerce any product it regulates that it determines to be unsafe .

media coverage of issues related to the safety of food ( eg , spinach ) , drugs ( eg , vioxx ) , and medical devices ( eg , cardiac stents ) have brought congressional attention to fda's performance and the funding it has available to carry out its statutory responsibilities .

for those products requiring premarket approval , a central issue for the 110 th congress is how best to balance the need for the agency to help speed the products it regulates to market if they are safe and effective , and correct them or keep or remove them from the market if they are not .

for human foods , animal feeds , and other products not requiring premarket approval , key issues relate to fda's ability to assure product safety and protect public health by preventing health threats from occurring , or by identifying and responding to problems quickly .

in order to bring revenue into fda to help speed products to market , congress has passed several measures authorizing fda to collect user fees from the products' manufacturers .

some have questioned whether the agency's reliance on fees it collects from the companies that it regulates is appropriate , calling instead for greatly increased appropriations for the agency .

nevertheless , efforts to reauthorize the two expiring user fee authorities ( pdufa and mdufma ) are already underway .

income from pdufa and mdufma represents , by far , the largest proportion of fda's user fee revenue , and a significant proportion of the agency's overall budget .

according to fda's fy2008 budget request , pdufa will generate $339,195,000 , and mdufma will generate $47,500,000 .

combined , these fees would account for 87% of fda's user fee revenue , and 19% of its total program level budget in fy2008 .

pdufa was first enacted in 1992 ( p.l .

102-571 ) , and has been reauthorized twice ; once by the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama , p.l .

105-115 ) , and a second time by the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) .

pdufa authorizes the fda to collect fees from companies that produce certain human drugs and biological products , and to use the revenue for the review of new product applications .

pdufa also incorporates , by reference , performance goals aimed primarily at reducing fda premarket review times .

mdufma , first enacted in 2002 , established user fees for fda's review of medical device applications .

like pdufa , mdufma incorporated , by reference , performance goals for many types of premarket device reviews .

mdufma also allowed third - parties to conduct establishment inspections , and added new regulatory requirements for reprocessed single - use devices .

the expiring authorities within mdufma are those related to user fees and the associated performance goals .

in part to protect children from the risks of participating in clinical trials , researchers did not often test drugs on that population .

as a result , information about appropriate dosage levels for and potential side effects of "adult" medications in children were unknown , frequently leaving clinicians with pediatric patients the choice of prescribing nothing , or something with an unknown effect .

in 1997 , congress gave fda a tool , in bpca , to encourage pediatric drug research — extended marketing exclusivity in exchange for trials investigating a drug's effect on pediatric populations .

meanwhile , fda's attempts to require , as part of new drug applications , assessments of how new drugs would affect pediatric populations were stopped by the courts until congress , in 2003 , codified that requirement in prea .

bpca and prea provide marketing exclusivity incentives and requirements for studying pediatric use of both on - and off - patent drugs .

the following topics are addressed in one or both reauthorization bills .

the two comprehensive fda reauthorization and reform bills address many , but not all of the same topics , though not always in the same way .

 ( see table 1 ) .

the remaining sections of this report contain descriptions of the key fda programs addressed in the bills , certain programs considered but not included in the bills , and links to relevant crs reports .

topics include prescription drug user fees , medical device user fees , pediatric drugs and devices , drug safety , clinical trials databases , conflicts of interest , importation of prescription drugs , reagan - udall foundation , office of the chief scientist , food safety , and miscellaneous provisions in one bill or the other .

fda's authority to collect user fees pursuant to the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ; section 735 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act [ffdca] , 21 u.s.c .

379g ) will expire on october 1 , 2007 , unless congress reauthorizes the program .

first enacted in 1992 , pdufa gives fda a revenue source — fees paid by pharmaceutical manufacturers — to supplement direct appropriations .

at the time , fda , consumers , and manufacturers all sought to shorten the time between a manufacturer's submission of an application and the agency's decision on whether to approve the product .

therefore , pdufa restricted the use of collected funds to new product review , and established a mechanism for agency - industry collaboration to create performance goals that set targets primarily for review times .

as a result of pdufa , application review times decreased , and the addition of fee revenue raised the level of the premarket review activities relative to that for postmarket activities .

congress , therefore , in reauthorizing pdufa in 1997 ( pdufa ii ) and 2002 ( pdufa iii ) , gave fda limited authority to use some of the fees for postmarket drug safety activities .

due , in part , to recent widely publicized safety problems with aggressively marketed drugs , discussions surrounding a 2007 pdufa iv reauthorization have included an increased focus on postmarket drug safety .

both s. 1082 and h.r .

2900 include , as title i , the prescription drug user fee amendments of 2007 .

both bills would reauthorize the assessment , collection , and use of three types of fees: application , establishment , and product fees .

they would cover applications for both prescription and nonprescription drugs , eliminating the distinction in current law that covers only some nonprescription drugs .

user fees were introduced into the medical device review process for the first time by the medical device user fee and modernization act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-250 ; mdufma ) .

mdufma amended the ffdca to enact three significant provisions for medical devices: ( 1 ) it established user fees for premarket reviews of devices ; ( 2 ) it allowed establishment inspections to be conducted by accredited third parties ; and ( 3 ) it instituted new regulatory requirements for reprocessed single - use devices .

fda's authority for the first of these ( the collection of user fees ) will expire on october 1 , 2007 , unless congress reauthorizes it , as is proposed in s. 1082 ( title iii ) , and h.r .

2900 ( title ii ) .

both bills also contain certain other provisions related to the regulation of medical devices .

fda has approved for adult use many products never tested in children .

yet clinicians often prescribe them for children believing that the safety and effectiveness demonstrated with adults would hold for younger patients .

however , this off - label prescribing can result in children receiving ineffective products , or too much or too little of a potentially useful drug .

some side effects are unique to children or children of specific ages , including effects on growth and development .

studies show that , depending on the maturation and development of a child's organs and other factors , some drugs vary in how long they stay in the body , affecting their usefulness .

with the better pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca ; included in fdama of 1997 ) , congress provided drug manufacturers with the following incentive to conduct pediatric use studies on their patented products: if a manufacturer complied with a written fda request for a specific pediatric study , fda would add six months to its market exclusivity for that product .

for drugs no longer covered by patent or other marketing exclusivity agreements , bpca required the secretary to list those off - patent products for which pediatric studies are needed to assess safety and effectiveness .

it also authorized the appropriation of national institutes of health ( nih ) funding for these studies .

for on - patent drugs whose manufacturers declined fda's written requests for pediatric use studies , bpca provided for their referral by fda to the foundation for the nih .

the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( also bpca ) reauthorized the exclusivity provisions for another five years .

they are set to expire on october 1 , 2007 .

in 1998 , fda published the pediatric rule , which mandated that manufacturers submit pediatric testing data , referred to as a pediatric assessment , at the time of all new drug applications .

in 2002 , a federal court declared the rule invalid , holding that fda lacked the statutory authority to promulgate it .

congress gave fda that authority with the enactment of the pediatric research equity act of 2003 ( prea ; p.l .

108-155 ) .

prea covers drugs and biological products and includes provisions for deferrals , waivers , and the required pediatric assessment of an approved marketed product .

prea did not include a specific sunset date ; its provisions remain in effect as long as bpca is authorized .

since the 1938 passage of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , the manufacturer of a new drug has had to demonstrate to fda the product's safety before fda would approve it for marketing in the united states .

in 1962 , the harris - kefauver amendments to the ffdca added product effectiveness to the premarket requirements .

the prescription drug user fee act of 1992 maintained the focus on premarket review .

however , as previously noted , until a very large number of individuals have taken a drug , a rare adverse effect may not occur or a very common condition may not be recognized as drug - associated .

fda , therefore , cannot assert that any drug is completely safe .

instead , it considers whether , given the available information , the drug is safe enough when used correctly by the types of individuals and for the diseases or conditions for which it was tested .

fda and others must remain alert to new information as those drugs are used more widely .

in recent years , researchers revealed that a few widely used ( and advertised ) drugs were more dangerous than known or expected .

some felt that the public health and regulatory problems were compounded by questions about: ( 1 ) industry's reticence in sharing its knowledge of possible risks ; and ( 2 ) fda's authority , ability ( resources ) , and willingness to identify and correct postmarket safety concerns .

as a result , fda asked the institute of medicine ( iom ) to examine its handling of drug safety .

iom responded with a 2006 report that addressed the agency's organizational culture , science and expertise , regulation , communication , and resources .

at the same time , many consumers , health experts , and members of congress looked for ways to enhance fda's actions to protect the public .

s. 1082 ( title ii , drug safety ) and h.r .

2900 ( title ix , enhanced authorities regarding postmarket safety of drugs ) reflect those concerns .

they would establish some new authorities and expand others to allow fda to identify postmarket drug safety problems and to correct or minimize them .

federal registration requirements for clinical trials were created by §113 of the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama ) , which amended §402 of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

282 ; phsa ) .

registration is currently required for clinical trials of drugs ( but not biologics or medical devices ) intended to treat serious or life - threatening diseases and conditions .

the current registry is available online at clinicaltrials.gov .

s. 1082 ( title ii , subtitle c ) and h.r .

2900 ( title viii ) contain proposals to expand both the types of trials and types of information about the trials in the registry ( either expanding or supplanting clinicaltrials.gov ) .

they also contain provisions requiring the publication of the results of many clinical trials .

both s. 1082 ( title ii , subtitle d ) and h.r .

2900 ( title vii ) contain provisions that would affect fda's treatment of conflicts of interest in its advisory committees .

current law generally requires that committee members be free from conflicts of interest , but allows for exceptions to that rule under specific circumstances .

under fda's current approach , a conflict of interest may require a potential committee member to disclose the conflict , refrain from voting , and / or not participate in a committee , depending on the nature of the conflict .

the law is articulated primarily in three sources: ( 1 ) the federal advisory committee act ( 5 u.s.c .

appendix ; faca ) ; ( 2 ) the fda advisory committee policy ( 21 u.s.c .

355 ( n ) ) ; and ( 3 ) a law governing special government employees — which advisory committee members are — acts affecting personal financial interest ( 18 u.s.c .

chapter 11 , §208 ) .

s. 1082 and h.r .

2900 would both insert a new provision into chapter vii subchapter a of the ffdca , effective october 1 , 2007 , that would change both the process of recruiting advisory committee members , as well as some circumstances under which and processes by which conflict - of - interest waivers may be granted .

the new provisions would also cause some requirements currently only applicable to drug and biologic advisory committees to apply to committees providing advice on all topics .

both bills define advisory committee as a faca - covered entity that provides the secretary with advice and recommendations regarding activities of the fda , and define financial interest as defined under 18 u.s.c .

208 ( a ) .

this definition covers activities such as a person's or their family members' current or future employment , trusteeship , or directorship .

on its face , it does not apply to activities such as stock ownership , former employment , or receipt of a grant or contract , although fda's regulations do require disclosure of these types of activities .

an alternative definition , offered in 21 u.s.c .

355 ( n ) , has been interpreted to require disclosure relating to a broad range of activities , including those listed above .

however , as encoded in statute , this definition applies only to drug and biologics committees , not to medical device committees .

s. 1082 and h.r .

2900 would require advisory committee member recruitment mechanisms , generally focused on reaching experts from areas such as academia , medical research institutions , public interest and consumer groups .

both contain provisions to discourage financial conflict waivers .

h.r .

2900 contains a section that would specifically permit the participation of a non - voting guest expert with financial interest if the secretary determined that the guest had particular required expertise .

s. 1082 and h.r .

2900 would require advisory committee members' full financial disclosure prior to a meeting on a related matter .

they would preclude voting by a member with a conflict of interest unless exempted by the office of government ethics .

the bills would allow a waiver of the voting restriction if necessary to provide the committee with essential expertise .

h.r .

2900 would only allow one such waiver per meeting .

the bills would require public disclosures for conflict - of - interest determinations , certifications , and waivers , and would require the secretary to submit annual reports regarding advisory committee membership , and conflict - of - interest waivers .

both bills would require the secretary to review and update fda conflict - of - interest guidance not less than once every five years .

s. 1082 ( title i , subtitle b ) and h.r .

2900 ( title vi ) would establish a nonprofit corporation to advance fda's mission regarding product development , innovation , and safety .

the initial board of directors ( the fda commissioner , and the directors of nih , cdc , and ahrq ) would select the appointed members from a national academy of sciences - provided candidate list and then resign from the board .

the ongoing board would include representatives from industry , academic research organizations , government agencies , patient or consumer advocacy organizations , and health care providers .

the foundation would establish goals and priorities relating to unmet needs and then coordinate with federal programs , and award grants , contracts , and other agreements with public and private individuals and entities to advance those goals .

the house and senate bills would direct the commissioner to transfer between $500,000 and $1,250,000 to the foundation .

the senate and house bills would require the secretary to establish an office of the chief scientist within the fda office of the commissioner .

among the duties of the secretary - appointed chief scientist would be to oversee , coordinate , and ensure quality and regulatory focus of fda's intramural research programs .

s. 1082 contains a number of provisions that are not present in h.r .

2900 , as described below .

a provision considered only in the house bill addresses another public - private partnership .

the house bill would require the secretary , through the fda commissioner , to enter into collaborative agreements ( critical path public - private partnerships ) with educational or tax - exempt organizations to implement the fda critical path initiative "by developing innovative , collaborative projects in research , education , and outreach for the purpose of fostering medical product innovation , enabling the acceleration of medical product development , and enhancing medical product safety ; " and authorizes to be appropriated $5 million for fy2008 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fys 2009 through 2012 .

