nato held a summit in bucharest , romania , on april 2-4 , 2008 .

a principal issue was consideration of the candidacies for membership of albania , croatia , and the former yugoslav republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) .

their candidacies initiated the third round of enlargement in the post - cold war era .

in 1997 , nato invited poland , the czech republic , and hungary to join the alliance ; they were admitted in 1999 .

in 2002 , the allies invited bulgaria , romania , lithuania , latvia , estonia , slovenia , and slovakia to join the alliance ; they were admitted in 2004 .

these last two rounds of enlargement were "strategic" in the sense that the new members' territory lay in regions that russia once deemed critical to its own national interest , and in the sense that the region had been intensely involved in conflict for much of modern european history .

in addition , several of these countries are sizeable , with considerable armed forces and significant resources .

at bucharest , the allies issued invitations to albania and croatia to join the alliance .

greece blocked an invitation to macedonia due to a dispute over macedonia's name .

today , nato's purpose extends well beyond the mission of collective defense of the cold war era .

while collective defense remains a core function , the allies now undertake missions against terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

a global military reach is necessary for such missions .

the bush administration has pressed the allies to develop more deployable forces , able to go long distances and sustain themselves .

such resources are beyond the means of small member states , which are expected instead to develop "niche" capabilities , such as special forces or troops able to contain a chemical weapons attack .

nato has also developed a collective security mission , such as its stabilization and peacekeeping mission in kosovo .

albania and croatia are small countries , with correspondingly small militaries .

croatia was part of the former yugoslavia , a communist state but one that kept the soviet union at arms' length and had reasonably friendly relations with the west .

albania , also once a communist state during the cold war , was for many years the most isolated country in europe .

with the collapse of yugoslavia and the end of the cold war , the countries put themselves on the path to democracy and a commitment to join western institutions .

the two countries have aspirations to join the european union as well as nato .

albania is a poor country with few natural resources .

albania and croatia , in the sense of their military importance and their general resources , would not represent a "strategic" presence in the alliance , although their consistent contributions to nato operations have been lauded .

however , due to the continuing instability in the region , further stirred by serbia's and russia's sharply negative reaction to kosovo's independence , the two countries are a potential factor for stabilization in southeastern europe .

this report will review the process by which candidate states are selected , including a sketch of the responsibilities of congress and allied governments in final approval or disapproval of albania and croatia .

the report will review general political factors for qualification , as well as external issues such as the views of russia and regional geopolitical considerations .

there will then follow an analysis of current conditions in the two states nominated to join , as well as in macedonia .

in addition , there will be a brief analysis of the debate over the qualifications of georgia and ukraine for nato's membership action plan ( map ) , a set of guidelines laid out by the alliance for governments that wish to take the next step of becoming actual candidates .

the allies were divided over the map for georgia and ukraine , and they were not extended the map at bucharest .

an appendix will examine key legislation on enlargement during the past fifteen years .

the washington treaty of 1949 , nato's founding instrument , does not describe detailed qualifications for membership .

it does require that member states be democracies and follow the rule of law .

it also requires that they take steps to strengthen their militaries , and refrain from the use of force in settling disputes outside the treaty framework .

article x of the treaty leaves the door open to any states able to meet the general qualifications for membership , including a contribution to the security of member states .

the process by which governments interested in membership may join has been refined since the end of the cold war .

in 1994 nato established the partnership for peace ( pfp ) , a program in which non - member states might train with nato forces , participate in peacekeeping or other allied activities , and seek avenues to draw closer to the alliance .

some pfp members , such as austria , are not necessarily interested in membership .

in 1995 nato published a study on nato enlargement .

the report remains the most detailed public roadmap for governments wishing to enter nato .

it describes the need for candidate states to develop democratic structures and a market economy , respect human rights and the rights of ethnic minorities , and build a military capable of contributing to collective defense .

the 1995 study nato included other requirements , principally the need to settle all disputes , such as border demarcations , with neighboring countries .

the balkan conflicts of the 1990s gave this requirement special significance .

with the collapse of the soviet union , nato has also become a collective security as well as a collective defense organization .

prospective members must develop military forces trained for peacekeeping and state - building , as well as for collective defense .

after the admission of poland , the czech republic and hungary in 1999 , the allies , led by the united states , developed a more detailed process for prospective members .

this process , called the membership action plan ( map ) , lays out in considerable detail specific steps that a government must follow to become a member .

such steps might include laws designating its parliament as having civilian oversight of the military , or the downsizing and professionalization of a large military , or the settlement of a border dispute with a neighbor .

each country's map is classified , as is its evaluation by the allies .

during the 2003-2004 round of enlargement , the map was made available to the united states senate for review .

some allies have criticized the map process .

they contend that it is primarily a creation of the united states , and that the ultimate decision on whether map requirements are met is made principally in washington .

they say , for example , that the full range of qualifications outlined in the map in the 2003 round of enlargement was not adequately assessed for several states that became members of the alliance .

they contend , therefore , that designation of candidate states as prospective members is above all a political process , and that actual accomplishment of requirements is secondary to the will of the alliance's leader .

u.s. officials dispute this characterization .

for a candidate state to have been invited to join the alliance at bucharest , consensus among the 26 member governments was necessary to approve an invitation .

each candidate was considered separately .

one or more votes against a state means would block that state's progress to the next stage in the process of becoming a member .

it was greece's opposition to macedonia that brought skopje's failure to obtain an invitation .

in march 2008 , greek prime minister karamanlis said , "no solution – no invitation. .

there were other issues under discussion as well .

according to some officials in allied states , albania and macedonia continue to have problems of governance and issues detrimental to internal political comity .

at the same time , the two governments have evidently made considerable progress in military reform , and their populations overwhelmingly support nato membership .

croatia has a settled political environment .

a somewhat narrow majority of its population supports nato membership , a figure that has been rising in recent months .

these issues will be more fully discussed below .

the member states had hoped to make a preliminary determination about invitations at a nato foreign ministers' meeting on march 6 , 2008 , but resolution of the issue surrounding macedonia's name , and other issues , prevented a collective decision .

at least two governments , france and germany , expressed reservations about offering the map to georgia and ukraine .

at bucharest , other governments such as spain and italy shared the french and german view .

the allies will draw up and sign a protocol for albania and croatia , probably by the end of july 2008 .

the protocol will outline nato's expectations of the two prospective members .

the protocol will then be deposited with each allied government .

from that point , member governments will go through their constitutional processes to amend the washington treaty and admit a new state or states .

in some member states , such as the united kingdom , the government has the authority to determine whether the executive alone may decide to admit a state nominated for entry , or instead , if issues of broad significance are involved , may send the protocol to parliament for approval .

at the other end of the spectrum , the netherlands has a meticulous , time - consuming process involving a parliamentary study and debate before a final vote is taken .

nato hopes to admit prospective candidate states at its next summit , to be held on the french - german border , scheduled for late 2009 .

the united states senate has the constitutional authority to give its advice and consent by a two - thirds majority to the amendment of any treaty .

in the case of nato enlargement , it must decide whether to amend the washington treaty to commit the united states to defend additional geographic territory .

the senate foreign relations committee is the committee holding the initial authority to consider the issue .

both the senate foreign relations committee and the full senate may decide whether to vote on each candidate state separately , or all together .

during the previous two rounds of enlargement , house and senate committees held hearings on enlargement .

one purpose of the hearings is to create more widespread knowledge of possibly pending new obligations of the united states government .

in the past , committees have also discussed such issues as the costs of enlargement , the qualifications of the candidate states , regional security implications of enlargement , implications for relations with russia , and new issues in nato's future , such as the viability of new missions .

the bush administration reflects the general nato view that the door to nato must remain open to qualified states .

since the clinton administration , u.s. officials have supported the idea of a europe "whole and free. .

while nato remains an organization for the defense of the united states , canada , and the european allies , it has increasingly developed a political agenda .

for example , it now routinely discusses such matters as energy security , disaster relief , and a range of political issues with russia .

the united states designed the map process , and takes a leading role in requiring candidate states to develop a professional military , democratic structures , a transparent defense budget process , civilian control of the military , and free market structures .

the bush administration also supports the entry of nato governments into the european union as a means to build stability .

some nato governments have contended that the bush administration is less interested in the alliance than its post - world war ii predecessors .

this view , more apparent in the first five years of the bush administration , has brought challenges to u.s. leadership of the alliance .

in the last several years , however , the administration has dropped former defense secretary donald rumsfeld's use of what many consider the divisive terms "coalitions of the willing" and "the old and new europe," and sought instead to engage all allied governments in decision - making about nato's general missions and its specific operations .

some allied governments say that meetings of the north atlantic council ( nac ) , nato's political governing body , have become more collegial and productive in recent years as a result .

the administration supported invitations to albania , croatia , and macedonia at bucharest .

while u.s. officials acknowledged that all three states must continue to improve their militaries and their political institutions , they also believe that each state has made considerable progress over the last several years .

these officials also contended that the three governments would contribute to the political stabilization of southeastern europe .

the bush administration supports the idea of a "nato with global partners. .

this idea does not necessarily imply membership for countries beyond the euro - atlantic region .

instead , the administration has sought , for example , to engage such countries as australia , new zealand , and japan in the effort to stabilize afghanistan , but does not actively promote their membership in the alliance .

the administration does have , however , a view of nato's long - term membership roster that is broader than that of some allies .

at bucharest , these allies questioned whether georgia and ukraine should be invited to join the map process .

in the days leading to the summit , president bush made a highly visible tour of georgia and ukraine , where he touted their qualifications for the map .

he may have expended considerable political capital with other allies , as several member states had already made clear their opposition to the map for the two states .

the allies have extended partnership for peace to a number of central asian governments , a move that the administration strongly supports .

there are several reasons for this policy , even though these governments are not democratic: these governments provide logistical support to allied operations in afghanistan ; the united states and its allies wish to encourage greater respect for human rights and nascent democratic practices in central asia ; and several of these countries are key to the development of greater energy security because of their oil and natural gas resources and the pipelines that cross their territory .

as in previous rounds of enlargement , a range of political factors attends consideration of the candidate states' application for membership .

beyond the qualifications achieved by a candidate state in the map process , such matters as the stabilization of southeastern europe , russia's voice in european security , and bilateral relations between a member state and a candidate state also come into play .

stability in southeastern europe is an issue of great importance both to nato and the european union , and current member governments believe that enlargement can serve this goal .

nato's decision to go to war against serbia in 1999 to stop ethnic cleansing in kosovo , and the alliance's subsequent creation of kfor to contribute to kosovo's stability are evidence of this point .

further evidence is the eu's decision to lead kosovo's "supervised independence. .

both serbia and russia reacted strongly against kosovo's independence , declared on february 17 , 2008 .

the united states and most eu governments recognized kosovo's independence the following week .

on february 21 the u.s. embassy in belgrade was attacked , as was the croatian embassy , and part of the slovenian embassy was sacked and burned .

serbian police reportedly stood by while mobs carried out these attacks .

most serbian government leaders have vowed never to accept kosovo's independence , and some may be complicit in stirring up unrest among the serbian minority in northern kosovo .

nato secretary general jaap de hoop scheffer has described serbia as having sunk into a "sullen nationalism. .

of the three candidate states , albania and croatia have recognized kosovo's new status , but macedonia is expected to do so as well in the near future .

croatia has sought to serve as a channel for the united states and europe with serbia , and has resettled half of the 300,000 serb refugees who fled croatia during the balkan conflicts of the 1990s .

according to a range of european governments , there is minimal discrimination in croatia against the serbian minority .

the ability of the three candidate states to put to rest enmity towards serbia resulting from the conflicts of the 1990s is an argument in favor of their serving as a factor for stabilization in southeastern europe , in the view of some member states .

their entry into nato could also serve as a positive example for future nato candidates , including serbia .

others contend that serbia is a key government in southeastern europe , and that nato must find accommodation with belgrade before absorbing three states whose membership would further antagonize serbia's leadership .

in contrast , russia's role in european security remains an important question to the united states and its allies .

russia opposes inclusion of the three candidate states in the alliance , but its claim that their membership would be detrimental to russian interests is less plausible than its complaints during the previous two rounds of enlargement .

none of the candidate governments is either contiguous to russian territory , nor was any ever part of the warsaw pact .

and , as already noted , neither albania , croatia , nor macedonia has a formidable military or notable natural resources .

russia's opposition to the candidacies of ukraine and georgia for the map was shrill and threatening .

president putin , likely soon to be the new prime minister , has said that russia will target nuclear weapons on ukraine should it ever become a member of nato .

russia has reduced natural gas supplies to ukraine and georgia several times in the last several years , ostensibly because the two countries would not agree to pay a market price , but also as a likely act of intimidation .

more broadly , gazprom , russia's government - owned national energy company that was once led by the president - elect dmitri medvedev , has been attempting to purchase distribution networks in europe .

nato discussed energy security at the bucharest summit , and some european governments believe that the alliance must first come to grips with how to respond to energy cut - offs before moving closer to states such as georgia and ukraine that are vulnerable to moscow's energy politics .

this debate may have affected the two countries's failure to secure the map at the summit .

russia has also posed other obstacles to improved relations with nato .

estonian officials contend that cyber attacks on computers in estonian banks and governmental offices in spring 2007 originated from within the russian government .

moscow opposes the bush administration's ideas for a missile defense system in europe , and has reportedly spurned a range of proposals to include russia in the system .

some european governments contend that nato and the eu must maintain a fully open communication with moscow and continue to seek to find a measure of accommodation under these circumstances .

at the same time , the allies assert that russia must not be allowed effectively to veto further nato enlargement , or any nato policies .

some allies that are also in the european union believe that a nato candidate state that becomes a member of the alliance is propelled forward in the line to become an eu member .

these eu members wish to see future union enlargement move more slowly .

they believe that eu decision - making has been complicated by recent enlargements , although the recent lisbon reform treaty is meant to ease some of these problems ( a view echoed by some in the alliance about nato decision - making ) .

some eu governments wish to devise a more workable plan to reach important decisions in the eu before admitting more states .

croatia and macedonia are eu candidate states , but only croatia is deemed to have made sufficient progress to have begun accession negotiations .

officials in some eu governments are wary that albania and macedonia have passed legislation , for example , to reduce corruption and fight organized crime , but that implementation of the legislation is at an early stage .

the current example of bulgaria's and romania's record in the eu could adversely affect albania's ( and eventually macedonia's ) efforts to join nato , and then the eu .

bulgaria and romania joined the eu in january 2007 .

however , in february 2008 the eu sharply criticized the two governments for poor implementation of legislation to fight organized crime and corruption , and threatened to suspend them in six months from the union's justice and interior policies unless rapid progress is made .

some officials in eu states believe that a clear message should be sent to albania and macedonia that more progress must be made in the same areas before admission to nato , and to the eu .

several allied governments believe that the overall pace of nato enlargement is too compressed , and wish to consider first how to resolve a complex range of issues .

in their view , if albania and croatia succeed in joining the alliance , then the next round should go more slowly .

these governments tended to oppose placing georgia and ukraine in the map at bucharest , and contend that other issues – the calming of nationalist emotions in serbia , an overall improvement in nato - russian relations , and coming to grips with the wide - ranging problems in energy security – must first be resolved before considering new countries for the map .

waiting further in the wings for the map could be bosnia and herzegovina , montenegro , an eventually united cyprus , and even serbia .

nato member states contribute to the activities of the alliance in several ways , the chief of which is through the deployment of their own armed forces , funded by their national budgets .

certain commonly conducted activities , however , are paid for out of three nato - run budgets .

these three accounts — the civil budget , the military budget , and the security investment program — are funded by individual contributions from the member states .

the countries' percentage shares of the common funds are negotiated among the members , and are based upon per capita gdp and several other factors .

nato staff have been tasked with recalculating cost shares for all member nations in light of the addition of invitations to two new states .

the resulting changes – reductions in the contributions of existing member states – will be quite small .

during the period leading up to first round of enlargement in central and eastern europe in 1999 , analysts estimated the cost of adding new members at between $10 billion and $125 billion , depending upon different threat scenarios and accounting techniques .

some members of congress expressed concern over these cost projections and were also worried that the united states might be left to shoulder a large share of the expenditures ; they questioned whether existing burdensharing arrangements should continue and suggested that the european allies should be encouraged to assume a larger financial share for the security of the continent .

however , a nato study estimated that enlargement would require only $1.5 billion in common funds expenditures over 10 years , and dod concurred .

it was further forecast that the 2004 round of enlargement would cost a similar amount , "with greater benefits" to u.s. security .

in addition , the inclusion of ten new contributors to the nato common funds actually reduced the percentage shares of the established members — including the united states .

in preparation for the bucharest summit in april 2008 , nato staff are preparing estimates of the total cost and the cost - sharing implications of a new round of enlargement .

u.s. officials state informally that the methodologies and assumptions used to estimate costs and cost sharing arrangements in prior rounds of enlargement are believed to be still valid , and that any addition of new members in 2008 would not entail significant costs .

the only expenses likely to be charged directly to the alliance's common military budget would be for the procurement of secure communications between nato headquarters in brussels and mons , and capitals of the new member countries .

any other common - funded projects in new member states would be assessed and funded in terms of their contributions to nato capabilities or support to ongoing missions and are not directly attributable to enlargement .

in recent years , the cost issue in general has received relatively little attention from policymakers and the media .

the focus has instead been on 1 ) specialized capabilities that new – and existing – members can bring to the alliance , and 2 ) member states' willingness to contribute military assets to alliance operations , particularly in afghanistan .

the bucharest summit did not make significant strategic decisions concerning enlargement or the map process .

however , most allies seem to believe that albania's and croatia's road to membership in the alliance could lead to greater stability in southeastern europe , especially given the recent independence of kosovo and the enduring hostility to nato of important political factions in serbia .

an ongoing strategic concern of the alliance is the stabilization of afghanistan .

enlargement is only tangentially related to this issue .

albania's and croatia's militaries and resources are modest .

but the united states and several other leading governments in the alliance expect new member states to develop niche capabilities to contribute to nato operations around the world ; and in afghanistan , financial assistance to the government in kabul , whether through the eu or other organizations , is important not only to stabilize the country , but as a demonstration of solidarity in the effort to accomplish the alliance's most important mission .

nato is facing future challenges that may shape any following rounds of enlargement .

strategically , one of the most important is energy security .

gazprom , russia's national energy company , is making strong efforts to control parts of europe's oil and natural gas distribution network .

even without such control , much of europe and the caucasus depend upon russia for portions of their energy supply .

gazprom's repeated supply disruptions to customer countries underscores a stark reality: russia can cut off a vital lifeline if it so desires .

countermeasures – new pipelines skirting russia and drawing supplies from a range of sources , and conservation – will require years to plan and implement , probably at great expense .

some allies believe that energy security must be enhanced before new members in succeeding rounds may be extended invitations to join , particularly if they are vulnerable to russian pressure .

concurrent efforts to improve relations with russia are likely to be a centerpiece of european allies' policy during this period .

another important strategic consideration will likely be the ongoing effort to improve nato - eu coordination .

one issue is the different membership of the two organizations .

governments in one of the two organizations sometimes block coordination with the other organization to promote a national agenda .

the two organizations are now working closely together to stabilize kosovo .

yet nato and the eu have different means to arrive at key decisions .

the essence of eu policymaking is in the social and economic sphere .

in that environment , internal compromises and horse - trading are common when eu member states bargain for resolution of a key issue .

while nato decision - making is often complicated , the trade - offs apparent in eu processes are less common , and decisions are often more quickly made .

nato and the eu have important objectives that are the same , namely stabilization of a country or region that threatens their interests .

working together effectively , however , can prove a difficult undertaking , as in afghanistan .

the senate has given its assent to all five rounds of nato enlargement .

however , congress has played a particularly active role in shaping the alliance's eastward expansion since the end of the cold war .

in the nato participation act of 1994 ( title ii of p.l .

103-447 ) , congress for the first time authorized the president both to assist designated former soviet bloc countries to become full nato members , and to provide excess defense articles , international military education and training , and foreign military financing assistance to these countries .

in subsequent legislation in 1996 , 1998 , and 2002 , congress further encouraged and endorsed nato's eastward enlargement , while outlining the conditions under which such enlargement should take place .

before ratifying the treaty protocols enabling the alliance's 1998 and 2004 enlargements , the senate broke with past practice , subjecting its approval of the protocols to several conditions .

one such condition , as articulated in the senate's resolutions of ratification for both enlargements , requires the president to submit to the appropriate congressional committees a detailed report on each country being actively considered for nato membership before beginning accession talks and to submit updated reports on each country before signing any protocols of accession .

specifically , these reports are to include an evaluation of how a country being actively considered for nato membership will further the principles of nato and contribute to the security of the north atlantic area ; an evaluation of the country's eligibility for membership , including military readiness ; an explanation of how an invitation to the country would affect the national security interests of the united states ; a u.s. government analysis of common - funded military requirements and costs associated with integrating the country into nato and an analysis of the shares of those costs to be borne by nato members ; and a preliminary analysis of the budgetary implications for the united states of integrating that country into nato .

members of the 109 th and 110 th congresses have expressed continued support for nato enlargement .

on september 29 , 2006 , towards the end of the 109 th congress , senator richard lugar introduced s. 4014 , the freedom consolidation act of 2006 .

the bill , expressing support for nato enlargement and designating albania , croatia , georgia , and macedonia as eligible to receive assistance under the nato participation act of 2004 , passed the senate on november 16 , 2006 .

s. 4014 was referred to the house international relations committee , but was not taken up before the end of the 109 th congress .

in the 110 th congress , both the senate and house passed successor bills to the bill that passed the senate in the 109 th congress .

the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 , introduced by senator lugar on february 6 , 2007 , passed the senate by unanimous consent on march 15 , 2007 .

a companion bill , h.r .

987 , introduced by representative john tanner in the house on february 12 , 2007 passed the house on march 6 , 2007 .

president bush signed the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 into law ( p.l .

110-17 ) on april 9 , 2007 .

the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 reaffirms the united states "commitment to further enlargement of the north atlantic treaty organization to include european democracies that are able and willing to meet the responsibilities of membership..." the act calls for the "timely admission" of albania , croatia , georgia , the "republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) ," and ukraine to nato , recognizes progress made by albania , croatia , and macedonia on their membership action plans ( maps ) , and applauds political and military advances made by georgia and ukraine while signaling regret that the alliance has not entered into a map with either country .

at the same time , congress affirms that admission of these five countries into the alliance should be "contingent upon their continued implementation of democratic , defense , and economic reform , and their willingness and ability to meet the responsibilities of membership in [nato] and a clear expression of national intent to do so. .

in addition to expressing support for the candidacies and potential candidacies of albania , croatia , georgia , macedonia , and ukraine , the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 authorizes fy2008 appropriations for security assistance to each of these countries .

this assistance shall be consistent with the conditions set by the nato participation act of 1994 , which limit the types of security assistance offered by the united states to prospective nato member states to the transfer of excess defense articles ( as determined under section 516 and 519 of the foreign assistance act ) , international military education and training ( as determined under chapter 5 of part ii of the foreign assistance act ) , and foreign military financing assistance ( as determined under section 23 of the arms export control act ) .

according to the nato participation act , security assistance should encourage joint planning , training , and military exercises with nato forces , greater interoperability , and conformity of military doctrine .

both the senate and house have expressed further support for a strengthening of allied relations with georgia and ukraine passing companion resolutions expressing strong support "for [nato] to enter into a membership action plan with georgia and ukraine. .

the resolutions draw attention to contributions made by georgia and ukraine to the collective security of the alliance , and highlight progress made in each country towards a stronger relationship with nato .

in what could be an effort to address some european allies' concern that a map would be understood as a guarantee of future nato membership , the resolutions explicitly state that a map does not ensure membership .

as discussed earlier in the report , congressional deliberation over post - cold war nato enlargement has revolved largely around three issues: cost ; burdensharing ; and relations with russia .

in terms of cost , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that additional costs to the united states associated with nato expansion to the five countries designated in the nato freedom consolidation act would not exceed $30 million over the 2008-2012 period .

based on the state department's 2008 appropriation request , cbo estimates that outlays would total $12 million of 2008 , and $30 million over the period from 2008-2012 .

neither the nato freedom consolidation act nor the accompanying senate foreign relations committee report directly addresses potential concerns regarding burden - sharing within the alliance or the effect a further round of enlargement might have on relations with russia .

however , members of the 110 th congress have expressed such concerns in several congressional hearings , and members on the united states congressional delegation to the nato parliamentary assembly are said to have discussed these issues with their european counterparts , as well as officials in candidate countries albania , croatia , and macedonia .

