obstruction of justice is the frustration of governmental purposes by violence , corruption , destruction of evidence , or deceit .

it is a federal crime .

in fact , federal obstruction of justice laws are legion ; too many for even passing reference to all of them in a single report .

this is a brief description of some of the more prominent .

the general federal obstruction of justice provisions are six: 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( tampering with federal witnesses ) , 1513 ( retaliating against federal witnesses ) , 1503 ( obstruction of pending federal court proceedings ) , 1505 ( obstruction of pending congressional or federal administrative proceedings ) , 371 ( conspiracy ) , and contempt .

in addition to these , there are a host of other statutes that penalize obstruction by violence , corruption , destruction of evidence , or deceit .

section 1512 applies to the obstruction of federal proceedings — judicial , congressional , or executive .

it consists of four somewhat overlapping crimes: use of force or the threat of the use of force to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( a ) ) ; use of deception or corruption or intimidation to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( b ) ) ; destruction or concealment of evidence or attempts to do so ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( c ) ) ; and witness harassment to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( d ) ) .

the offenses have similar , but not identical , objectives and distinctive elements of knowledge and intent .

section 1512 also contains freestanding provisions that apply to one or more of the offenses within the section .

these deal with affirmative defenses ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( e ) ) ; jurisdictional issues ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( f ) , ( g ) , ( h ) ) ; venue ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( i ) ) ; sentencing ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( j ) ) ; and conspiracy ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( k ) ) .

section 1505 outlaws interfering with justice department civil investigative demands issued in antitrust cases .

however , it deals primarily with obstructing congressional or federal administrative proceedings , condemning: i. whoever ii .

a. corruptly , or b. by threats or c. force , or d. by any threatening letter or communication iii .

a. influences , b. obstructs , or c. impedes or d. endeavors to 1. influence , 2. obstruct , or 3. impede iv .

a .

1. the due and proper administration of the law under which 2. any pending proceeding is being had 3. before any department or agency of the united states , or b .

1. the due and proper exercise of the power of inquiry under which 2. any inquiry or investigation is being had 3. by a. either house , or b. any committee of either house or c. any joint committee of the congress shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years ( not more than 8 years if the offense involves domestic or international terrorism ) , or both .

prosecutions under §1505 have been relatively few , at least until recently , and most of these arise as obstructions of administrative proceedings .

"the crime of obstruction of [such] proceedings has three essential elements .

first , there must be a proceeding pending before a department or agency of the united states .

second , the defendant must be aware of the pending proceeding .

third , the defendant must have intentionally endeavored corruptly to influence , obstruct or impede the pending proceeding. .

perhaps due to the breadth of judicial construction , the question of what constitutes a pending proceeding has arisen most often .

taken as a whole , the cases suggest that a "proceeding" describes virtually any manner in which an administrative agency proceeds to do its business .

the district of columbia circuit , for example , has held that an investigation by the inspector general of the agency for international development may qualify as a "proceeding" for purposes of §1505 .

in doing so , it rejected the notion "that §1505 applies only to adjudicatory or rule - making activities , and does not apply to wholly investigatory activity. .

moreover , proximity to an agency's adjudicatory or rule - making activities , such as auditors working under the direction of an officer with adjudicatory authority , has been used to support a claim that an obstructed agency activity constitutes a proceeding .

the courts seem to see comparable breadth in the congressional equivalent ( "obstructing the due and proper exercise of the power of inquiry" by congress and its committees ) .

in the case of either congressional or administrative proceedings , §1505 condemns only that misconduct which is intended to obstruct the administrative proceedings or the due and proper exercise of the power of inquiry .

in order to overcome judicially identified uncertainty as to the intent required , congress added a definition of "corruptly" in 1996: "as used in §1505 , the term 'corruptly' means acting with an improper purpose , personally or by influencing another , including making a false or misleading statement , or withholding , concealing , altering , or destroying a document or other information," 18 u.s.c .

1515 ( b ) .

examples of the type of conduct that have been found obstructive vary .

section 1505 offenses are not rico or money laundering predicate offenses .

section 1505 has neither separate conspiracy provision nor an explicit exterritorial jurisdiction provision .

however , conspiracy to obstruct administrative or congressional proceedings may be prosecuted under 18 u.s.c .

371 , and the courts would likely find that overseas violations of §1505 may be tried in this country .

moreover , the general aiding and abetting , accessory after the fact , and misprision statutes are likely to apply with equal force in the case of obstruction of an administrative or congressional proceeding .

congress outlawed retaliation against federal witnesses under §1513 at the same time it outlawed witness tampering under §1512 .

although somewhat more streamlined , §1513 shares a number of attributes with §1512 .

the definitions in §1515 apply to both sections .

consequently , the prohibitions apply to witnesses in judicial , congressional , and administrative proceedings .

there is extraterritorial jurisdiction over both offenses .

in slightly different terms , both protect witnesses against murder and physical abuse — committed , attempted , conspired , or threatened .

offenses under the two are comparably punished .

section 1513 prohibits witness or informant retaliation in the form of killing , attempting to kill , inflicting or threatening to inflict bodily injury , damaging or threatening to damage property , and conspiracies to do so .

"the elements of an offense under 18 u.s.c .

§1513 are ( 1 ) knowing engagement in conduct ; ( 2 ) either causing , or threatening to cause , bodily injury to another person ; and ( 3 ) the intent to retaliate for , inter alia , the attendance or testimony of a witness at an official proceeding. .

it also prohibits economic retaliation against federal witnesses , but only witnesses in court proceedings and only on criminal cases .

it does not reach economic retaliation against witnesses on the basis of information relating to the violations of supervised release , bail , parole , or probation conditions .

to satisfy the assault prong of §1513 , the government must prove that the defendant bodily injured another in retaliation for the victim's testimony or service as a federal informant .

the extent of the injuries need not be extensive , nor in the case of a threat even carried out .

in fact , in the case of a threat , all that is required is the intent to communicate a retaliatory threat ; it matters not that the defendant neither planned nor had the ability to carry out the threat .

as a general rule , the intent to retaliate need not have been the sole motivation for the attack .

section 1513 offenses are rico predicate offenses and consequently money laundering predicate offenses .

they are also violent offenses and therefore may result in the application of those statutes in which the commission of a violent crime is an element or sentencing factor .

those who aid and abet a §1513 offense are liable as principals and are punishable as if they committed the offense themselves .

an individual who knows another has committed a §1513 offense and nevertheless assists the offender in order to hinder his capture , trial or punishment is in turn punishable as an accessory after the fact .

and an individual who affirmatively conceals the commission of a §1513 by another is guilty of misprision .

if two or more persons conspire either to commit any offense against the united states or to defraud the united states , or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose , and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy , each shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

in addition to the basic federal crimes of obstruction of justice , federal law features a host of criminal statutes that proscribe various obstructions according to the obstructive means used , be it physical violence , bribery , property destruction , or deception .

thus , quite aside from the general obstruction provisions of §§1512 , 1513 , 1505 , and 1503 , several federal statutes outlaw use of threats or violence for the purpose of obstructing federal government activities .

section 1512 ( b ) outlaws witness tampering by corrupt persuasion .

several other federal statutes outlaw bribery in one form or another .

the main federal bribery statutes are 18 u.s.c .

201 , which prohibits bribes involving federal officials , employees , jurors and witnesses , and 18 u.s.c .

666 , which prohibits bribes involving the recipients of federal funding .

although it makes no mention of bribery , the honest services component of the mail and wire fraud statutes , 18 u.s.c .

1341 , 1343 , 1346 , in some circumstances may afford prosecutors of public corruption greater latitude and more severe penalties than §201 .

the hobbs act , 18 u.s.c .

1951 , condemns public officials who use their position for extortion .

a few other statutes , noted in the margin , outlaw bribery to obstruct specific activities .

other than subsection 1512 ( c ) , three federal statutes expressly outlaw the destruction of evidence in order to obstruct justice: 18 u.s.c .

1519 prohibits destruction of evidence in connection with federal investigation or bankruptcy proceedings ; 18 u.s.c .

1520 prohibits destruction of corporate audit records ; and 18 u.s.c .

2232 ( a ) prohibits the destruction of property to prevent the government from searching or seizing it .

none of the three are rico or money laundering predicate offenses .

there are no explicit statements of extraterritorial jurisdiction for any of them , but the courts are likely to conclude that overseas violation of their provisions is subject to prosecution in this country .

none of them feature an individual conspiracy component , but all of them are subject to general federal law governing conspiracy , principals , accessories after the fact , and misprision .

in addition to the obstruction of justice provisions of 18 u.s.c .

1503 and 1512 , four other general statutes outlaw obstructing the government's business by deception .

three involve perjury: 18 u.s.c .

1623 , which outlaws false swearing before federal courts and grand juries ; 18 u.s.c .

1621 , the older and more general prohibition that proscribes false swearing in federal official matters ( judicial , legislative , or administrative ) ; and 18 u.s.c .

1622 , which condemns subornation , that is , inducing another to commit perjury .

the fourth , 18 u.s.c .

1001 , proscribes material false statements concerning any matter within the jurisdiction of a federal executive branch agency , and to a somewhat more limited extent within the jurisdiction of the federal courts or a congressional entity .

none of the four are rico predicate offenses or money laundering predicate offenses .

the laws relating to aiding and abetting , accessories after the fact , misprision , and conspiracy , however , apply to all four .

sections 1621 and 1623 state that their prohibitions apply regardless of whether the perjurious conduct occurs overseas or within this country .

section 1001 has no such explicit declaration , but has been held to have extraterritorial application nonetheless .

congress enacted section 1623 to avoid in relation to judicial proceedings some of the common law technicalities embodied in the more comprehensive perjury provisions found in section 1621 and thus "to facilitate perjury prosecutions and thereby enhance the reliability of testimony before federal courts and grand juries. .

unlike section 1621 , section 1623 permits a conviction in the case of two mutually inconsistent declarations without requiring proof that one of them is false .

it recognizes a limited recantation defense .

it dispenses with the so - called two - witness rule .

and , it employs a "knowing" mens rea standard rather than the more demanding "willfully" standard used in section 1621 .

parsed into elements , section 1623 declares that: i. whoever ii .

a. under oath or b. in any i. declaration , ii .

certificate , iii .

verification , or iv .

statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under [section ]1746 of title 28 , united states code iii .

in any proceeding before or ancillary to a. any court or b. grand jury of the united states iv .

knowingly v. a. makes any false material declaration or b. makes or uses any other information , including any i. book , ii .

paper , iii .

document , iv .

record , v. recording , or vi .

other material , knowing the same to contain any false material declaration , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

in most cases , the courts abbreviate their description of the elements and state in one form or another that to prove perjury the government must establish that the defendant ( 1 ) knowingly made a ( 2 ) false ( 3 ) material declaration ( 4 ) under oath ( 5 ) in a proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of the united states .

the allegedly perjurious declaration must be presented in a "proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of the united states. .

an interview in an attorney's office in preparation for a judicial hearing cannot be considered such an ancillary proceeding , but the phrase "proceedings ancillary to" court or grand jury proceedings does cover proceedings to take depositions in connection with civil litigation , as well as a variety of pretrial proceedings in criminal cases , including habeas proceedings , bail hearings , venue hearings , or suppression hearings .

the supreme court's observation that a statement that is misleading but literally true cannot support a conviction under section 1621 because it is not false applies with equal force to perjury under section 1623 .

similarly , perjury cannot be the product of confusion , mistake , or faulty memory , but must be a statement that the defendant knows is false , although this requirement may be satisfied with evidence that the defendant was deliberately ignorant or willfully blind to the fact that the statement was false .

on the other hand , "[a] question that is truly ambiguous or which affirmatively misleads the testifier can never provide a basis for a finding of perjury , as it could never be said that one intended to answer such a question untruthfully. .

yet ambiguity will be of no avail if the defendant understands the question and answers falsely nevertheless .

materiality is perhaps the most nettlesome of perjury's elements .

it is usually said that a statement is material "if it has a natural tendency to influence , or is capable of influencing , the decision of the decisionmaking body to whom it is addressed. .

this definition is not easily applied when the precise nature of the underlying inquiry remains somewhat undefined such as in grand jury proceedings or in depositions at the discovery stage of a civil suit .

on the civil side , the lower federal courts appear divided between the view ( 1 ) that a statement in a deposition is material if a "truthful answer might reasonably be calculated to lead to the discovery of evidence admissible at the trial of the underlying suit" and ( 2 ) that a statement is material "if the topic of the statement is discoverable and the false statement itself had a tendency to affect the outcome of the underlying civil suit for which the deposition was taken. .

in the case of perjury before the grand jury , rather than articulate a single standard the courts have described several circumstances under which false testimony may be considered material .

in any event , a statement is no less material because it did not or could not divert the decision maker .

the courts seem to have had less difficulty dealing with a materiality issue characterized as the perjury trap doctrine .

the doctrine arises where a witness is called for the sole purpose of eliciting perjurious testimony from him .

under such circumstances it is said the tribunal has no valid purpose to which a perjurious statement could be considered material .

the doctrine poses no bar to prosecution in most cases , however , since the government is usually able to identify some valid reason for the grand jury's inquiries .

subsection 1623 ( c ) permits a perjury conviction simply on the basis of two necessarily inconsistent material declarations rather than a showing that one of the two statements is false .

conviction does require a showing , however , that the two statements were made under oath ; it is not enough to show that one was made under oath and the other was made in the form of an affidavit signed under penalty of perjury .

moreover , the statements must be so inherently contradictory that one of them of necessity must be false .

some years ago , the supreme court declined to reverse an earlier ruling that "[t]he general rule in prosecutions for perjury is that the uncorroborated oath of one witness is not enough to establish the falsity of the testimony of the accused set forth in the indictment. .

since the two witness rule rests on the common law rather than on a constitutional foundation , it may be abrogated by statute without offending constitutional principles .

subsection 1623 ( e ) permits a perjury conviction without compliance with this traditional two witness rule .

most of the other subsections of section 1623 are designed to overcome obstacles which the common law placed in the path of a successful perjury prosecution .

subsection 1623 ( d ) , in contrast , offers a defense unrecognized at common law .

the defense is stated in fairly straightforward terms , "[w]here in the same continuous court or grand jury proceeding in which a declaration is made , the person making the declaration admits such declaration to be false , such admission shall bar prosecution under this section if , at the time the admission is made , the declaration has not substantially affected the proceeding , or it has not become manifest that such falsity has been or will be exposed. .

although phrased in different terms , the courts seem to agree that repudiation of the false testimony must be specific and thorough .

there is some disagreement whether a recanting defendant must be denied the defense if both the substantial impact and manifest exposure conditions have been met or if the defense must be denied if either condition exists .

most courts have concluded that the presence of either condition dooms the defense .

early construction required that a defendant establish both that his false statement had not substantially affected the proceeding before his recantation and that it had not become manifest that his false statement would be exposed .

one more recent appellate case , however , decided that the defense should be available to a witness who could show a want of either an intervening adverse impact or of likely exposure of his false statement .

even without the operation of subsection 1623 ( d ) , relatively contemporaneous corrections of earlier statements may negate any inference that the witness is knowingly presenting false testimony and thus preclude conviction for perjury .

when congress passed section 1623 , it did not repeal section 1621 either explicitly or by implication ; where its proscriptions overlap with those of section 1623 , the government is free to choose under which it will prosecute .

since section 1623 frees prosecutors from many of the common law requirements of section 1621 , it is perhaps not surprising that they ordinarily elect to prosecute under section 1623 .

section 1623 does outlaw perjury under a wider range of circumstances than section 1621 ; it prohibits perjury before official proceedings generally — both judicial and nonjudicial .

separated into its elements , the section provides that: ( 1 ) i. whoever having taken an oath ii .

before a competent tribunal , officer , or person , iii .

in any case in which a law of the united states authorizes an oath to be administered , iv .

a. that he will i. testify , ii .

declare , iii .

depose , or iv , certify truly , or b. that any written i. testimony , ii .

declaration , iii .

deposition , or iv .

certificate by him subscribed , is true , v. willfully and contrary to such oath vi .

a. states or b. subscribes any material matter which he does not believe to be true ; or ( 2 ) i. whoever in any a. declaration , b. certificate , c. verification , or d. statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under [section ]1746 of title 28 , united states code , ii .

willfully subscribes as true iii .

any material matter iv .

which he does not believe to be true is guilty of perjury and shall , except as otherwise expressly provided by law , be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

this section is applicable whether the statement or subscription is made within or without the united states .

the courts generally favor an abbreviated encapsulation such as the one found in united states v. dunnigan : "a witness testifying under oath or affirmation violates this section if she gives false testimony concerning a material matter with the willful intent to provide false testimony , rather than as a result of confusion , mistake , or faulty memory. .

perjury is only that testimony which is false .

thus , testimony that is literally true , even if deceptively so , cannot be considered perjury for purposes of a prosecution under section 1621 .

moreover , section 1621 requires compliance with "the two witness rule" to establish that a statement is false .

under the rule , "the uncorroborated oath of one witness is not sufficient to establish the falsity of the testimony of the accused as set forth in the indictment as perjury. .

thus , conviction under section 1621 requires that the government "establish the falsity of the statement alleged to have been made by the defendant under oath , by the testimony of two independent witnesses or one witness and corroborating circumstances. .

if the rule is to be satisfied with corroborative evidence , the evidence must be trustworthy and support the account of the single witness upon which the perjury prosecution is based .

the test for materiality under section 1621 is whether the false statement "has a natural tendency to influence or [is] capable of influencing the decision - making body to which it [is] addressed. .

conviction under section 1621 requires not only that the defendant knew his statement was false ( "which he does not believe to be true" ) , but that his false statement is "willfully" presented .

there is but scant authority on precisely what "willful" means in this context .

the supreme court in dicta has indicated that willful perjury consists of " deliberate material falsification under oath. .

other courts have referred to it as acting with an "intent to deceive" or as acting "intentionally. .

although a contemporaneous correction of a false statement may demonstrate the absence of the necessary willful intent to commit perjury , the crime is completed when the false statement is presented to the tribunal ; without a statute such as that found in section 1623 , recantation is no defense , nor does it bar prosecution .

section 1622 outlaws procuring or inducing another to commit perjury: "whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury , and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both," 18 u.s.c .

1622 .

the crime consists of two elements — ( 1 ) an act of perjury committed by another ( 2 ) induced or procured by the defendant .

perjury under either section 1621 or section 1623 will support a conviction for subornation under section 1622 , but proof of the commission of an act of perjury is a necessary element of subornation .

although the authorities are exceptionally sparse , it appears that to suborn one must know that the induced statement is false and that at least to suborn under section 1621 one must also knowingly and willfully induce .

subornation is only infrequently prosecuted as such perhaps because of the ease with which it can now be prosecuted as an obstruction of justice under either 18 u.s.c .

1503 or 1512 , which unlike section 1622 do not insist upon suborner success as a prerequisite to prosecution .

the general false statement statute , 18 u.s.c .

1001 , outlaws false statements , concealment , or false documentation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any of the three branches of the federal government , although it limits application in the case of congress and the courts .

more specifically it states: i .

except as otherwise provided in this section , ii .

whoever , in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive , legislative , or judicial branch of the government of the united states , iii .

knowingly and willfully — iv .

a. falsifies , conceals , or covers up by any trick , scheme , or device a material fact ; b. makes any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or representation ; or c. makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or entry ; shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 5 years or , if the offense involves international or domestic terrorism ( as defined in section 2331 ) , imprisoned not more than 8 years , or both .

if the matter relates to an offense under chapter 109a [sexual abuse] , 109b [sex offender registration] , 110 [sexual exploitation] , or 117 [transportation for illicit sexual purposes] , or section 1591 [sex trafficking] , then the term of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be not more than 8 years .

the courts' description of the elements will sometimes be couched in terms of the form of deception at hand — false statement , concealment , or false documentation .

on other occasions the courts will simply treat concealment or false documentation as a form of false statement .

section 1001 also imposes a limitation upon an offense that involves matters within the jurisdiction of either the judicial or legislative branch: ( b ) subsection ( a ) does not apply to a party to a judicial proceeding , or that party's counsel , for statements , representations , writings or documents submitted by such party or counsel to a judge or magistrate in that proceeding .

 ( c ) with respect to any matter within the jurisdiction of the legislative branch , subsection ( a ) shall apply only to — ( 1 ) administrative matters , including a claim for payment , a matter related to the procurement of property or services , personnel or employment practices , or support services , or a document required by law , rule , or regulation to be submitted to the congress or any office or officer within the legislative branch ; or ( 2 ) any investigation or review , conducted pursuant to the authority of any committee , subcommittee , commission or office of the congress , consistent with applicable rules of the house or senate .

18 u.s.c .

1001 ( b ) , ( c ) .

the defendant must establish his right to the benefits of section 1001 ( b ) 's judicial limitation exception .

section 1001 ( c ) establishes additional elements for a false statement offense in a legislative context , which the government must establish .

a matter is within the jurisdiction of a federal entity when it involves a matter "confided to the authority of a federal agency or department ... a department or agency has jurisdiction , in this sense , when it has power to exercise authority in a particular situation .

understood in this way , the phrase 'within the jurisdiction' merely differentiates the official , authorized functions of an agency or department from matters peripheral to the business of that body. .

several courts have held that the phrase contemplates coverage of false statements made to state , local , or private entities but relating to matters that involve federal funds or regulations .

subsection 1001 ( b ) precludes application of prohibitions in section 1001 ( a ) to the statements , omissions , or documentation presented to the court by a party in judicial proceedings .

this includes statements of indigence filed by a defendant seeking the appoint of counsel , or by a defendant for a probation officer's presentence report , but not statements made by one on supervised release to a parole officer .

although the offense can only be committed "knowingly and willfully," the prosecution need not prove that the defendant knew that his conduct involved a "matter within the jurisdiction" of a federal entity nor that he intended to defraud a federal entity .

it does , however , require the government to show the defendant knew or elected not to know that the statement , omission , or documentation was false and that the defendant presented it with the intent to deceive .

the phrase "knowingly and willfully" refers to the circumstances under which the defendant made his statement , omitted a fact he was obliged to disclose , or included with his false documentation , that is , "that the defendant knew that his statement was false when he made it or — which amounts in law to the same thing — consciously disregarded or averted his eyes from the likely falsity. .

prosecution for a violation of section 1001 requires proof of materiality , as does conviction for perjury , and the standard is the same: the statement must have a "natural tendency to influence , or be capable of influencing the decisionmaking body to which it is addressed. .

there is no need to show that the decision maker was in fact diverted or influenced .

conviction for false statements or false documentation under section 1001 also requires that the statements or documentation be false , that they not be true .

and the same can be said of the response to a question that is so fundamentally ambiguous that the defendant's answer cannot be said to be knowingly false .

on the other hand , unlike the perjury provision of section 1623 , "there is no safe harbor for recantation or correction of a prior false statement that violates [section ]1001. .

prosecutions under subsection 1001 ( a ) ( 1 ) for concealment , rather than false statement or false documentation , must also prove the existence of duty or legal obligation not to conceal .

a number of federal statutes proscribe obstruction of specific types of investigations or proceedings in general terms .

their prohibitions may be breached by bribery , deception , violence , or threat ; although the limited case law suggests that most are more likely to be violated by corruption or deception than violence .

numbered among them are 18 u.s.c .

1511 that outlaws obstruction of state illegal gambling business investigations ; 18 u.s.c .

1516 that bans obstruction of a federal audit of an activity involving more than $100,000 in federal funds ; 18 u.s.c .

1517 that prohibits obstruction of the federal audit of a financial institution ; 18 u.s.c .

1518 that condemns obstruction of federal criminal investigation of possible health care offenses ; 18 u.s.c .

118 that proscribes obstructing federal protection of foreign diplomats and other dignitaries in this country and of personnel in federal facilities overseas ; and 18 u.s.c .

1521 that proscribes retaliating against federal judges , officers , or employees by subjecting their property to false liens .

the penalty for violating each of the sections other than §118 or §1521 is imprisonment for not more than five years .

section 1521 offenses are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years , and §118 offenses are punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year .

several of the human trafficking and sex trafficking statutes found in chapter 77 of title 18 of the united states code proscribe obstructing an investigation into the possible violation of their provisions .

in most instances , obstruction and the underlying offense carry the same penalty .

regardless of the offense for which an individual is convicted , his sentence may be enhanced as a consequence of any obstruction of justice for which he is responsible , if committed during the course of the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing for the offense of his conviction .

the enhancement may result in an increase in his term of imprisonment by as much as 4 years .

the enhancement is the product of the influence of §3c1.1 of the united states sentencing guidelines .

federal sentencing begins with , and is greatly influenced by , the calculation of the applicable sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines .

the guidelines assign every federal crime a base offense level to which they add levels for various aggravating factors .

obstruction of justice is one of those factors .

each of the final 43 offense levels is assigned to one of six sentencing ranges , depending on the extent of the defendant's past crime history .

for example , a final offense level of 15 means a sentencing range of from 18 to 24 months in prison for a first time offender ( criminal history category i ) and from 41 to 51 months for a defendant with a very extensive criminal record ( criminal history category vi ) .

two levels higher , at a final offense level of 17 , the range for first time offenders is 24 to 30 months ; and 51 to 63 months for the defendant with a very extensive prior record .

the impact of a 2-level increase spans from no impact at the lowest final offense levels to a difference of an additional 68 months at the highest levels .

section 3c1.1 instructs sentencing courts to add 2 offense levels in the case of an obstruction of justice: if ( 1 ) the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded , or attempted to obstruct or impede , the administration of justice with respect to the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instant offense of conviction , and ( 2 ) the obstructive conduct related to ( a ) the defendant's offense of conviction and any relevant conduct ; or ( bi ) a closely related offense , increase the offense level by 2 levels .

u.s.s.g .

§3c1.1 .

the accompanying commentary explains that the section "is not intended to punish a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional right. .

more specifically , a "defendant's denial of guilt ( other than a denial of guilt under oath that constitutes perjury ) , refusal to admit guilt or provide information to a probation officer , or refusal to enter a plea of guilty is not a basis for application of this provision. .

early on , the supreme court made it clear that an individual's sentence might be enhanced under u.s.s.g §3c1.1 , if he committed perjury during the course of his trial .

moreover , the examples provided elsewhere in the section's commentary and the cases applying the section confirm that it reaches perjurious statements in a number of judicial contexts and to false statements in a number of others .

the examples in the section's commentary cover conduct: ( b ) committing , suborning , or attempting to suborn perjury , including during the course of a civil proceeding if such perjury pertains to conduct that forms the basis of the offense of conviction ; ( f ) providing materially false information to a judge or magistrate ; ( g ) providing a materially false statement to a law enforcement officer that significantly obstructed or impeded the official investigation or prosecution of the instant offense ; ( h ) providing materially false information to a probation officer in respect to a presentence or other investigation for the court ; [and] ( i ) other conduct prohibited by obstruction of justice provisions under title 18 , united states code ( eg , 18 u.s.c .

§§1510 , 1511 ) .

the courts have concluded that an enhancement under the section is appropriate , for instance , when a defendant has ( 1 ) given preposterous or outrageous , perjurious testimony during his own trial ; ( 2 ) given perjurious testimony at his suppression hearing ; ( 3 ) given perjurious , exculpatory testimony at the separate trial of his girlfriend ; ( 4 ) made false statements in connection with a probation officer's bail report ; ( 5 ) made false statements to the court in an attempt to change his guilty plea ; ( 6 ) made false statements to federal investigators ; and ( 7 ) made false statements to state investigators relating to conduct for which the defendant was ultimately convicted .

when perjury provides the basis for an enhancement under the section , the court must find that the defendant willfully testified falsely with respect to a material matter .

when based upon a false statement not under oath , the statement must still be material , that is , it must "tend to influence or affect the issue under determination. .

even then , false identification at the time of arrest only warrants a sentencing enhancement under the section when the deception significantly hinders the investigation or prosecution .

the commentary accompanying the section also states that the enhancement may be warranted when the defendant threatens or otherwise tampers with a victim , witness , or juror ; submits false documentations ; destroys evidence ; flees ( in some cases ) ; or engages in any other conduct that constitutes an obstruction of justice under the criminal law provisions of title 18 of the united states code .

by definition , however , the enhancement is only available when the obstruction occurs "during the course of the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instance offense. .

