on july 11 , 2008 , in north carolina v. epa , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit vacated what was widely regarded as the bush administration's most significant environmental measure: the clean air interstate rule ( cair ) .

cair , promulgated by epa under the clean air act ( caa ) in may 2005 , established a regional cap - and - trade program for sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) and nitrogen oxide ( nox ) emissions from electric generating units ( egus ) in 28 eastern states and the district of columbia .

the basic purpose of the rule was to protect downwind states from pollution generated in other states located upwind .

subsequently , on december 23 , 2008 , the court modified its decision to allow cair to remain in effect while epa fashions a replacement rule .

for so 2 , the cair program reduces emission allowances in the affected upwind states 50% beginning in 2010 and 65% beginning in 2015 .

so 2 emissions cause acid precipitation , and so 2 is also among the pollutants that form fine particles ( pm 2.5 ) in the atmosphere .

reducing pm 2.5 concentrations , as cair would do , was estimated by epa to have significant health benefits , eliminating 13,000-22,000 premature deaths annually .

cair's nox cap reduces emissions in the affected states by similar percentages: a first phase in 2009 lowered the emissions cap by 53% and a second phase , in 2015 , is to achieve a 61% reduction compared to 2003 levels .

nox contributes to both pm 2.5 and to the formation of ground - level ozone .

ozone aggravates a variety of respiratory and cardiovascular conditions and causes as many as 2,300 premature deaths annually .

concentrations of the pollutant need to be reduced in most of the states east of the mississippi , according to epa .

from a policy standpoint , the court's decision seriously undermined epa's approach to clean air under the bush administration .

cair was the lynchpin that held together epa's strategy for attainment of the ozone and fine particulate national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) , for achieving reductions in mercury emissions from coal - fired powerplants , for addressing regional haze impacts from powerplants , and for responding to state petitions to control upwind sources of ozone and fine particulate pollution under section 126 of the clean air act .

as discussed in this report , the potential impact of vacating cair on communities attempting to achieve naaqs and the impact on mercury emissions would be substantial , and prompted some ( including epa , state environmental agencies , electric utilities , and environmental organizations ) to appeal the decision .

even though it provides less - than - adequate reductions to achieve full compliance with the naaqs , cair would have substantial benefits for the communities affected .

in 2005 , epa , in response to congressional requests , conducted a multi - pollutant regulatory analysis , including the estimated costs and benefits of cair , the clean air mercury rule ( camr ) , and the clean air visibility rule ( cavr ) .

although its analysis combined all three rules , the vast majority of the costs and benefits quantified were for cair .

table 1 summarizes the results of that analysis .

as indicated , the benefit - to - cost ratio ranged from 20 to 1 , to 27 to 1 .

the primary benefit identified was the avoidance of premature mortality , but 10 other categories of health impacts were also identified by the agency , including ( annually in 2020 ) the avoidance of 29,000 non - fatal heart attacks , 510,000 cases of respiratory symptoms , 360,000 cases of asthma exacerbation , 2 million work loss days , 430,000 school absence days , and 12 million minor restricted activity days .

the clean air act envisions a mix of state and federal authorities to reduce air pollution .

for those pollutants subject to naaqs , it established a partnership in which the federal government sets uniform national air quality standards and the states develop state implementation plans ( sips ) identifying the measures they will take to attain the standards .

in 1997 , when epa finalized new naaqs for both pm 2.5 and ozone , it set in motion the sip process under section 110 of the act .

most states already had sips demonstrating how they would attain less stringent ozone and pm standards , but the promulgation of the revised ozone naaqs and the new pm 2.5 naaqs meant that the sips of most states were no longer adequate to bring those states into attainment by the statutory deadlines .

under section 110 ( k ) ( 5 ) of the act , if epa finds a sip inadequate , it must require the affected state to submit a revised sip that includes sufficient measures to bring that state into compliance .

this is known as a "sip call. .

in the case of both the ozone and the pm 2.5 naaqs , the process of developing effective compliance strategies is complicated by the problem of transported air pollutants .

many states cannot attain the standards unless upwind states reduce their pollution .

the act recognizes this and requires that those upwind states control major sources of pollution that affect other states: under section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) , sips must include adequate provisions to prevent sources within a state from contributing significantly to nonattainment in downwind states .

finding that interstate transport of so 2 and nox contributes significantly to ozone and pm 2.5 nonattainment in the majority of eastern states , epa issued the clean air interstate rule ( cair ) in march 2005 to mitigate the problem .

cair was based on a series of determinations by epa with respect to pollution transport , cost - effective pollution control , and compliance feasibility .

these determinations were made within the state implementation plan process of sections 110 ( k ) ( 5 ) and 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the clean air act .

no fewer than 32 petitions for review of cair were consolidated in north carolina v. epa .

on july 11 , 2008 , the d.c .

circuit found several of the key challenges valid .

noting that epa regards cair as one integrated action , the court decided against voiding only the successfully challenged portions .

rather , it vacated the entire rule ( and its associated federal implementation plan ) and remanded it to epa .

with regard to north carolina's challenges , the court ruled that cair's emissions trading program for so 2 and nox violates caa section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) .

this provision addresses downwind states , such as north carolina , whose achievement of naaqs is interfered with by emission sources in upwind states .

it requires sips to — prohibit[] , consistent with the provisions of [caa title i , governing stationary sources of emissions] , any source or other type of emissions activity within the state from emitting any air pollutants in amounts which will ... contribute significantly to nonattainment in , or interference with maintenance by , any other state with respect to any [naaqs] .

the court found the cair trading program unlawful in assuring only that no entire region will "contribute significantly," while section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) requires that each state ' s sources not "contribute significantly. .

 ( for similar reasons , the court noted that the nox sip call's emissions trading program might have been judicially invalidated , had this argument been raised in the case challenging the program. ) .

the court also found unacceptable that cair attributed no significance to the "interference with maintenance" prong of section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) independent of the "contribute significantly to nonattainment" prong .

as cair would have it , only states that satisfy the nonattainment prong can also satisfy the maintenance prong , rendering the latter a nullity .

north carolina's final successful argument was that cair's 2015 deadline for upwind states to eliminate their "significant contribution" to downwind nonattainment again ignores section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) .

that provision requires compliance "consistent with ... [title i]," which imposes compliance deadlines for downwind states in 2010 .

finally , the court elected not to pass judgment on the lawfulness of the nox compliance supplement pool ( 200,000 extra allowances as a reward for early reductions ) , though suggesting that epa would need to revise it on remand .

as to the challenges by electric utility companies , the court agreed first that epa had improperly set states' budgets for so 2 and nox in the cair emissions trading program .

for example , in basing the budgets on the number of allowances that a state's egus receive under the caa's acid rain program ( title iv ) , the budgets fail to track the requirements of section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) above .

second , the court found epa's use of adjustment factors that gave smaller budgets to states with mostly natural - gas - or oil - fired egus to be inconsistent with section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) as well , and thus arbitrary and capricious .

third , the court agreed with the utilities that epa's effort to reconcile cair's regulation of so 2 with the existing program for trading so 2 allowances under title iv was unlawful .

the court found nothing in section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) or other law giving epa authority to , as cair proposed , remove some title iv allowances created by cair from the title iv market .

fourth , the court approved minnesota power's argument that epa had overstated the state's downwind contribution to pm 2.5 ( thereby pushing the state over the threshold for inclusion in cair ) .

the argument , said the court , requires a response from epa on remand .

north carolina v. epa is an immersion in regulatory program detail involving little in the way of broad legal principles .

the court simply juxtaposed what the caa ( chiefly , section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) ) requires and what cair said , and in several key respects found the latter deficient .

nor did the court feel obliged to defer to epa's views , possibly because it saw the caa ( chiefly , section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( i ) ( i ) ) as speaking unambiguously to many of the issues raised by petitioners .

in response to the court's decision , epa requested reconsideration .

alternatively , epa requested that the cair rule be allowed to continue in effect while the agency developed a replacement program that satisfied the court's july 2008 decision .

on december 23 , 2008 , the court adopted the latter , leave - the - rule - in - effect course , noting that vacating the old rule would defeat protection of the environmental values that the rule was designed to preserve .

the court did not impose a specific deadline on epa's development of the replacement rule .

but it did say that it was not granting an indefinite stay of its july 2008 decision — that in the event epa does not modify cair consistently with that decision , petitioners may sue again .

the agency has , since then , begun development of a clean air transport rule to replace cair .

the replacement rule was proposed in july 2010 , and epa has indicated that it will finalize the rule by summer 2011 .

on july 6 , 2010 , epa proposed a replacement for cair , the clean air transport rule .

the transport rule would leave the cair phase 1 limits in place and would set new limits replacing cair's second phase in 2012 and 2014 , up to three years earlier than cair would have .

the proposed transport rule would build on the reductions already achieved by the cair phase i rules .

it would establish a second and third phase of reductions in 2012 and 2014 , with particular emphasis on so 2 — emissions of which would decline to 3.8 million tons ( 62% below 2005 levels ) in 2014 .

the proposed rule would cover 31 eastern , midwestern , and southern states and the district of columbia , adding three new states ( oklahoma , kansas , and nebraska ) to the 28 covered by cair .

the rule would allow unlimited trading of allowances within individual states , but it would limit interstate trading in order to comply with the d.c .

circuit's ruling .

in order to insure that the rule is implemented quickly , epa proposed a federal implementation plan ( fip ) for each of the states: the fip specifies emission budgets for each state based on controlling emissions from electric power plants .

states may develop their own state implementation plans and choose to control other types of sources if they wish , but the federal plan will take effect until the state acts to replace it .

the proposed transport rule responds to the court's decisions in four areas .

first , the methodology used in the proposal to measure each state's significant contribution to non - attainment in another state uses state - specific data to emphasize air quality considerations , along with consideration of cost impacts .

second , the state budgets for so 2 and nox ( both annual and seasonal ) are linked directly to the data measurements of that state's significant contribution to non - attainment downwind and interference with maintenance of downwind state attainment .

third , the proposed compliance deadlines are coordinated with the caa's compliance deadlines for the appropriate naaqs .

fourth , and perhaps most important , the proposal outlines a "preferred option" to allow affected entities to use intrastate trading and limited interstate trading in their compliance strategies , beginning in 2014 .

this last response is an attempt by epa to preserve at least some of the compliance flexibility and cost savings of emissions trading in the transport rule while addressing the concerns of the court .

under the limited interstate trading option , epa would conduct an air quality assessment of a state's emissions level at the end of each year .

if a state's emissions were below its budget , epa would do nothing as the state would be considered in compliance .

if a state's emissions were above the budget because of substantial interstate buying of emission reductions by some of its entities , then epa would investigate which entities within the state were responsible for the overage , and require those affected entities to surrender sufficient credits to offset the overage .

apparently , epa is not sure this limited approach to interstate trading will satisfy the court and has included two alternative approaches in its proposed rule that would not allow any interstate trading .

epa expects to finalize the rule in the summer of 2011 .

the agency also stated an "ongoing commitment" to consider upwind contributions of pollution to nonattainment when implementing any future naaqs revisions .

because the agency is near finalizing more stringent ambient air quality standards for ozone ( currently expected by the end of july 2011 ) , and pm 2.5 ( expected to be proposed in 2011 , as well ) , it stated its intention to propose another transport rule in the summer of 2011 to address any additional emission reductions needed to meet those new standards .

the north carolina v. epa decision left epa's strategy for achieving attainment of the ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs in serious disarray .

cair was the lynchpin that held together epa's strategy for attainment of the ozone and fine particulate naaqs , for achieving reductions in mercury emissions from coal - fired powerplants , for addressing regional haze impacts from powerplants , and for responding to state petitions under section 126 of the clean air act with respect to the ozone and fine particulate naaqs .

the d.c .

circuit , on epa's motion , reversed its decision to vacate cair while epa is developing a replacement rule .

the court , however , left the substantive requirements of its july 2008 decision fully intact .

that decision strongly suggests that there is no simple "fix" that would make cair acceptable to the court .

this left epa with three clear options: ( 1 ) starting over with a new strategy to mitigate transported air pollutants based on the decision ; ( 2 ) allowing the states to sort out the issue through section 126 petitions ; or ( 3 ) seeking new legislation providing epa with the statutory authority to either implement cair in some form , or an alternative .

epa is proceeding with the first of these options and expects to propose a new clean air transport rule in april 2010 .

for congress , the decision raises several issues: should congress consider providing epa with the authority to implement cair or other cost - based , market - oriented approaches to address naaqs ? .

should congress consider multi - pollutant legislation as a supplement or substitute for the current regulatory regime , at least for electric generating units ? .

should congress consider a more comprehensive revision to the clean air act to address not only ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs non - attainment , but also mercury emissions from coal - fired powerplants , and emerging environmental issues such as climate change ? .

