the principal justification behind presidential public financing has been to reduce the need for private money in politics .

public financing proponents argue that the program has increased competition in presidential elections by permitting those without personal wealth or substantial private fundraising resources to seek the office .

public financing therefore relieves candidates from at least some of the burdens of time - consuming private fundraising .

finally , public financing is attractive to some because it can encourage candidates to limit their campaign spending in exchange for public subsidies .

nonetheless , even those who support the presidential public financing program generally agree that it needs to be updated .

except for increasing the checkoff amount in 1993 , congress has essentially left the program unchanged since its enactment in 1971 , and substantial expansion in 1974 .

many of the concerns surrounding public financing highlight financial competitiveness among candidates .

as this report discusses , publicly financed candidates must adhere to spending limits , unlike their privately financed opponents .

those limits , however , are increasingly regarded as too low to permit effective campaigning .

since 2000 , some major candidates have chosen to forgo public financing during the primary campaign .

the 2008 campaign cycle was regarded as perhaps the final one in which the program , as it currently stands , would remain a viable option for the most competitive candidates .

as one scholar noted , "by 2008 , it was clear that the public financing system , with its relatively paltry spending limits , was a luxury no serious candidate could afford , at least in the primary season. .

nonetheless , and despite that sentiment , several candidates chose to participate in public financing during the 2008 election cycle .

the republican nominee , senator john mccain , initially applied for public funds in the primary , but later withdrew from the system .

senator mccain did , however , receive public funds for the general election .

the democratic nominee , senator barack obama , announced in june 2008 that he would not participate in public financing for the general election ; he also did not accept public funds during the primary .

senator obama was the first major - party nominee since the program's inception to decline public financing entirely .

in 2012 , no major candidate accepted public funds .

although the democratic and republican national conventions received a total of approximately $36.5 million in public funds , the three candidates who chose to participate received a total of approximately $1.4 million .

president obama again declined public funding , as did republican nominee mitt romney .

although much of the recent debate over public financing has focused on how to save the system , some suggest that congress should end the program .

for those who oppose presidential public financing , the declining taxpayer participation rate ( discussed later in this report ) provides evidence that the program lacks public support .

opponents also contend that the program has failed to improve competition .

some also object in principle to government - funded campaign subsidies , question whether truly competitive candidates need public financing , or both .

despite calls for publicly financed presidential campaigns early in the 20 th century , congress did not actively consider the idea until the 1950s .

in 1966 , congress first enacted legislation authorizing taxpayer support for presidential and vice - presidential candidates and political parties .

however , legislation enacted the following year essentially terminated the original program before it took effect .

the current presidential public financing system was established in the 1971 revenue act , which permitted individual taxpayers ( except nonresident aliens ) to designate $1 ( $2 for married couples filing jointly ) to the pecf .

amounts in the pecf are diverted from the treasury's general fund for use by qualified presidential candidates ( or party nominating conventions ) .

although congress enacted the program in 1971 , due to objections from president richard nixon , the statute called for a delay in beginning checkoff designations .

candidates did not begin receiving funds until the 1976 election cycle .

the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , enacted in 1971 and amended throughout the 1970s , expanded the scope of the public financing program and set various criteria for participation .

in particular , the 1974 feca amendments extended public financing , originally reserved only for general - election candidates , to presidential primaries and nominating conventions .

the 1974 amendments also established the fec and charged the agency with certifying eligible candidates , authorizing payments from the pecf , and conducting audits related to public financing .

despite relatively minor changes , the presidential public financing program has essentially remained unchanged since the 1974 feca amendments .

congress most recently altered the program in 1993 , when it tripled the checkoff designation from $1 to $3 for individuals and from $2 to $6 for married couples filing jointly .

the 2002 bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) , the most recent major enacted change to the nation's campaign finance laws , did not affect public financing .

participation in the public financing program can be considered on two fronts: ( 1 ) taxpayer participation ; and ( 2 ) candidate participation in the program .

this section discusses both .

the amount of money in the pecf depends on taxpayer designations and candidate use .

as table 4 and figure 3 show , and as would be expected , the balance in the fund typically builds during off years and then drops sharply during presidential election years .

for the past several years , as taxpayer designations have declined and campaigns have become more expensive , there has been widespread concern that the amount of money available in the fund — and spending limits for participants — were too low to make the program attractive to candidates .

in an effort to avoid a projected shortfall in the pecf , in 1993 congress increased the checkoff amount from $1 ( or $2 for married couples filing jointly ) to $3 ( or $6 ) .

that change took effect for 1993 tax returns .

increasing the checkoff amount did infuse additional money into the pecf , but the fund has nonetheless struggled with shortfalls for primary matching funds .

additional discussion appears below .

although fund balances were sufficient to pay the convention grants and general - election grants , shortfalls in primary matching funds occurred in 1996 and 2000 .

a shortfall also occurred briefly in 2004 , but major shortfalls were avoided , as eventual nominees george w. bush and john kerry , among others , declined to participate in public financing during the primary .

shortfalls also occurred in the spring of 2008 .

the larger issue during 2008 , however , was the fec's inability to certify matching - fund payments after the agency lost its policymaking quorum .

eligible candidates received matching funds after the quorum was restored .

in the absence of broad candidate participation in 2012 , shortfalls did not occur .

various policy options exist for updating the public financing system .

some of those options are contained in recent legislation .

others discussed below present alternatives for addressing concerns surrounding presidential public financing , but are not components of recent legislation .

the following sections discuss possibilities for increasing the amount of money available in the pecf and options for increasing the program's attractiveness to candidates .

taxpayer participation is also discussed .

none of the policy options discussed in this report and elsewhere is likely to be considered in isolation , as the public financing program has always contained a combination of benefits and requirements .

for those who are either philosophically opposed to public financing or who view the system as unnecessary , curtailing or repealing public financing could be desirable .

whether congress chose to pursue those approaches or others , repealing or curtailing public financing could be a straightforward matter of time - limiting or striking the relevant sections of law , as opposed to considering various options and amending relevant law to change the program .

the preceding section on reconsidering funding priorities explains that repealing convention funding could preserve remaining amounts for primary matching funds and general - election grants .

this option could also provide a financial boost to the pecf overall without allocating additional funds to the program .

in 2012 , convention grants accounted for approximately $36.5 million of the pecf's obligations .

that same amount , if not obligated for conventions , could reduce the threat of shortfalls for matching funds or , if necessary in the future , general - election grants .

on the other hand , those concerned about the role of private funds in convention financing could object to repealing public funds .

for those who object to public financing , repealing the program could provide a revenue source for other purposes .

as of this writing , approximately $271 million is available in the pecf .

repealing the program would also remove taxpayer funding from presidential elections , a role that some lawmakers and others believe private contributions should fulfill .

on the other hand , repealing public financing completely would leave presidential candidates entirely beholden either to self - financing or to private contributions .

even strong candidates may have difficulty raising enough funds to be competitive or may be uncomfortable with the notion that their candidacies are beholden to donors .

for those who believe that candidates should be able to financially support their own campaigns or garner private contributions to do so , ending public financing would likely be acceptable .

however , for those who believe that private contributions or personal wealth should not automatically include or exclude otherwise qualified presidential candidates , public financing remains an important resource .

in addition , if public financing and its required spending limits were no longer options , the pace of private campaign fundraising , and unlimited spending , are likely to increase , as candidates are constantly on guard for the next election and potentially high - spending opponents .

warnings about the public financing system's demise are not unique to the present day .

even at its peak , the taxpayer - participation rate has never exceeded 29% .

although fund balances were sufficient to meet candidate needs throughout the late - 1970s and 1980s , by the early 1990s the system began to show strain .

tripling the checkoff amount in 1993 provided a significant financial boost , although checkoff designations have generally continued to decline .

even with the larger checkoff amount , shortfalls have occurred at least briefly during the primary matching - funds phase of the program since the 1996 election cycle .

overall , almost from the beginning , the program has faced obstacles , even as most presidential candidates have participated in public financing .

the 2008 campaign cycle did , however , show evidence of unique challenges to the system .

although several candidates chose to participate in public financing during the primaries , those candidates who continued to actively pursue their parties' nominations into the spring and summer of 2008 chose to opt out of primary public financing .

some candidates , in just a few months ( or less ) , raised more through private contributions than the entire primary spending limit for publicly financed candidates .

by 2012 , no major candidate chose to participate .

some major candidates could still choose to participate in public financing , but the threat of major candidates not participating is likely to make the current program less viable in the future , as candidates will potentially feel increasingly compelled to forgo the system to be competitive .

the current system also does not provide additional resources to counter spending from outside groups , such as pacs and 501 ( c ) organizations .

the rise of "super pacs" devoted to particular candidates may also provide additional financial resources — although these funds typically may not be coordinated with candidates .

for some observers , these challenges and a possible resurgence in small donors suggest that public financing is unnecessary and should either be allowed to fade away or should be repealed outright .

others , however , contend that the program has provided vital assistance to high - quality candidates who are nonetheless unable to raise large sums of private contributions , or who choose not to do so .

any policy choice that maintains the public financing system with expanded benefits is likely to be expensive .

on the other hand , proponents argue that the increased cost is a worthy investment in presidential campaigns .

precise costs would depend on funding sources , program elements , and candidate participation .

if congress chooses to maintain presidential public financing , it could be useful to consider what goals that system should pursue and how .

the existing model of the checkoff designations appears to be either poorly understood by the taxpayers , unpopular with the taxpayers , or both .

if that model is to be maintained , a commitment to educational outreach , and perhaps basic research about public opinion of , and knowledge about , presidential public financing could be useful .

perhaps more fundamentally , if congress chooses to reform the program , doing so will require consensus among lawmakers about one of the most complex and contentious areas of campaign finance policy .

