agricultural conservation technical assistance has taken on a number of dimensions over its long and continuously evolving history .

congress continues to take interest in conservation technical assistance given its complexities and impact on the distribution of conservation financial assistance to producers .

frequently , technical assistance for agriculture is discussed in the context of omnibus farm legislation ( referred to as farm bills ) , although most technical assistance is discretionary and funded through the annual agricultural appropriations bill rather than mandatory spending authorized in the farm bill .

questions concerning the current and future capacity of the technical assistance system are highlighted by a perceived lack of boundaries and understanding of what technical assistance is and is not .

one challenge for congress lies in finding an acceptable balance between how much technical assistance capacity currently exists and how much is needed to meet demand .

in the search for this balance many policy questions arise regarding what technical assistance is and does , especially in the areas of funding and implementation .

this report does not attempt to directly answer these questions , but rather provides a framework for the debate .

this report describes the past progressions that made conservation technical assistance what it is today , and also poses questions on where it might be headed in the future .

throughout this report , conservation technical assistance refers to conservation as applied to activities on or affecting agricultural lands .

in the most general terms , technical assistance is a technical service .

it is a basic service that provides conservation knowledge to producers and landowners .

it includes information , technical expertise ( eg , engineering , biological , etc .

 ) , and a delivery system for assisting landowners and users to conserve and use natural resources .

in broader terms it involves outreach , education , and training in practices and technological advances that create compatibility between production and the land .

perceptions of technical assistance vary by region , land use type , accessibility , and individual stewardship .

technical assistance is considered by some to be science - based and therefore subject to the continuous progression of advances in the field .

by this definition , inflexibility and static change is undesirable .

others view conservation technical assistance as limited to preparing a conservation plan .

the scientific underpinnings add to the stability of the plan ; however , without additional follow - through this definition remains narrow , implying that technical assistance is just a plan , and nothing more .

increasingly , this service is not only provided through the federal government by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , but also by other public and private experts .

nrcs is the current federal provider of technical assistance for agriculture conservation .

the statutory authority to provide conservation technical assistance is derived from the soil conservation and domestic allotment act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-46 ; 16 u.s.c .

§590 et seq. ) .

nrcs provides technical assistance at the request of the landowner to conserve and improve natural resources .

it includes technical expertise combined with knowledge of local conditions and is provided through a network of federal staff located throughout the united states .

although the 1935 act provided authority for technical assistance it was not until an amendment under the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110-246 ) that conservation technical assistance was defined in statute .

through this amendment , technical assistance is currently defined by law as: " ( 2 ) technical assistance. — " ( a ) in general. — the term 'technical assistance' means technical expertise , information , and tools necessary for the conservation of natural resources on land active in agricultural , forestry , or related uses .

" ( b ) inclusions. — the term 'technical assistance' includes — " ( i ) technical services provided directly to farmers , ranchers , and other eligible entities , such as conservation planning , technical consultation , and assistance with design and implementation of conservation practices ; and " ( ii ) technical infrastructure , including activities , processes , tools , and agency functions needed to support delivery of technical services , such as technical standards , resource inventories , training , data , technology , monitoring , and effects analyses. .

technical assistance is funded through virtually every usda mandatory and discretionary conservation program .

most of the funding for technical assistance is provided through discretionary conservation programs .

discretionary programs are permanently authorized and receive funding through the annual appropriations process .

mandatory funding for certain conservation programs is currently authorized primarily under the 2008 farm bill , and provided through the usda commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

funding for mandatory conservation programs is provided at the level authorized in law unless limited to a smaller amount during the appropriations process .

mandatory funding for conservation technical assistance often supports financial assistance to producers who provide specified forms of conservation .

authorizing legislation for mandatory programs does not set specific spending levels for technical assistance .

funding allocated to technical assistance in mandatory programs is determined by the administration , not through appropriation or authorization .

the current conservation technical assistance network includes more than just the federal usda component .

state and local governments , for - profit businesses , non - profit organizations , universities , and other entities expand the capacity to deliver technical assistance beyond the federal government's abilities .

locally led conservation districts are one of the largest parts of this network .

over 3,000 conservation districts , authorized by the states and administered at the county level , coordinate conservation and natural resource interests among private landowners .

these districts traditionally work closely with federal employees in local and county field offices as well as with local officials to provide assistance to private landowners and managers .

the conservation district network adds capacity to the federal network providing technical assistance .

understanding how conservation technical assistance works and is funded addresses only a portion of the misconceptions and questions about this topic .

as congress assesses the current need and demand for technical assistance , many questions remain .

a more recent means of addressing the capacity to meet technical assistance demand is through third party providers .

the confusion surrounding two terms — technical assistance and administrative support — is also discussed , as well as the current impact of congressional directives on technical assistance and the administration's technical assistance streamlining initiative .

technical assistance varies in its activity , implementation , and funding across conservation programs .

when conservation programs received a large increase in funding in the 2002 farm bill , some questioned whether the traditional technical assistance infrastructure could meet the increase in demand that would accompany additional conservation funding .

now , as the 2008 farm bill is implemented and the 2012 farm bill is debated , an evaluation of this capacity will likely influence how technical assistance will look in the future .

capacity refers to the ability to serve the needs of customers in a timely manner .

in the case of technical assistance , customers include private landowners , tribes , state and local governments , and cooperative partners .

multiple factors contribute to the capacity to provide technical assistance: human capital , technology , mission goals , and funding .

additional questions about this capacity are raised during this discussion , and though the availability of data somewhat limits answering these questions , they are intended to shape and inform future discussions on technical assistance .

currently nrcs employs roughly 11,800 full - and part - time employees .

most employees — approximately 11,400 — are located in state , area , county , or regional technology service offices .

according to nrcs , 82% of its offices directly provide financial and technical assistance service .

this network of local field and state offices has been used to provide conservation technical assistance for decades .

a traditional approach to expanding the capacity to provide technical assistance had been to draw on the capabilities of partnering organizations , such as local soil and water conservation districts .

increasingly private , for - profit firms are playing an active role in providing technical assistance .

other organizations at state levels , such as state departments of natural resources and wildlife , water districts , and environmental and land management interests contribute to the overall network of technical assistance providers .

section 2701 of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) expanded the human capital capacity that provides conservation technical assistance with the authorization of third party providers , referred to by nrcs as technical service providers ( tsps ) , described earlier .

whether the program may expand in the future will likely be important in any discussion about how much additional capacity might be available .

in 1985 , scs employed roughly 13,900 full - and part - time employees .

in 2009 , its successor agency , nrcs , had approximately 11,800 full - and part - time employees .

considering the advances in technology , expansion of mission , and increases in funding , if mandatory conservation programs were fully funded and provided all authorized financial assistance , would there be enough technical assistance capacity currently available to implement them properly ? .

certified third party providers have expanded the pool of available technical assistance to private landowners .

how much additional capacity has been provided by third parties and how much additional capacity could they provide ? .

what additional technical services could be provided ? .

in 2004 , over 2,100 entities were certified as tsps .

in 2009 , the number had fallen below 1,200 .

what has caused this reduction in tsp participation and is this an issue that congress should address ? .

if increased capacity is sought using tsps , related issues are the location and availability of providers .

in some cases , third party providers are not available locally .

what are the practical limits of the tsp option given the potential limits on availability ? .

is the cost of certification too high , causing technical providers to not apply , or is the reimbursable fee schedule too low , discouraging potential tsps from participating ? .

the aces program is intended to support the technical assistance capacity for farm bill conservation programs by utilizing qualified retired individuals .

with many technical assistance organizations , both public and private , experiencing high levels of retirement , does the aces program provide adequate technical capacity to fill the gap created by retirement ? .

how has the loss of technical knowledge due to retirement affected the capacity to provide technical assistance , and is this trend expected to continue ? .

are there other replenishing mechanisms to help fill the need for technical personnel ? .

with a growing demand on resources and time , organizations look to more efficient ways to deliver service by streamlining and reorganizing business processes .

historically , local conservation districts provided a local entity through which conservation technical assistance could be delivered .

different landscapes and limited resources do not allow for multiple specialists to be on hand for each conservation plan or technical consultation .

as local soil conservationists ( employees of nrcs ) were placed throughout the country , usually at the county level in conservation district offices , materials and handbooks were developed to provide guidance across disciplines .

this guidance , known as the field office technical guide , contains technical information about the conservation of soil , water , air , and related plant and animal resources tailored to each county .

these guides represent the collective knowledge of technical assistance .

specialists in areas such as engineering , agronomy , and rangeland management are available at the state or regional level for specific consultation .

the field office technical guide remains the primary source of localized information on conservation technical assistance and is available online for every county .

in addition to the field office technical guide , technology has helped provide technical assistance to more producers in many other ways .

how technological advances get put into practice on lands is another function of technical assistance .

technology transfer and education have historically been a service of nrcs , local conservation districts , and partnering organizations , most notably usda extension service .

nrcs has developed a science and technology consortium to acquire , develop , and transfer technology .

the consortium , consisting of nrcs technology specialists and cooperating scientists , communicates within nrcs and with external partners , including colleges , universities , non - government organizations , and the private sector to transfer technological advances into practical applications .

the number of producer organizations with interest in conservation technology is growing , with many groups organizing relevant management practice and applications .

the iowa soybean association , for example , has a program called the on - farm network that assists farmers in organizing and conducting on - farm research about nutrient use in order to document changes in the efficiency of nitrogen use on crops .

the goal is to reduce nitrogen applications for both positive environmental effects and reduced input costs .

the beneficial management practices resulting from this on - farm research are then presented to other association members .

conservation innovation grants ( cig ) within eqip awards grants to stimulate innovative approaches in environmental enhancement and protection , in conjunction with agricultural production .

following the completion of these grants , the results are intended to provide a return on federal investment , as findings are expected to be incorporated into the nrcs consortium of technical tools available .

technical assistance historically has been based on science - based principles and application of proven techniques .

conservation innovation grants have drawn support since the initial awards in 2004 .

how has the technology transferred from these individual projects been incorporated into the national technical assistance toolbox ? .

has this helped or hindered producer application of new technology through federal programs ? .

producer organizations have had mixed success with their own conservation technology initiatives .

what , if any , solutions are available to promote or expand the private sector interest in supporting technology transfer within existing producer organizations ? .

over $300 million was provided to upgrade existing technology and streamline the commodity credit corporation's ( ccc's ) program delivery business processes .

how will this effort improve the delivery of conservation programs ? .

how will this system interact with the nrcs program delivery system ? .

is there overlap or duplication with the nrcs streamlining initiative ? .

nrcs , formerly scs , was authorized in the soil conservation and domestic allotment act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-46 , 49 stat .

163 ) .

this legislation gave scs responsibility for soil erosion prevention , surveys , and investigations .

the 2008 farm bill amended the 1935 act to include a broader definition of technical assistance .

nrcs continues to address new and expanding resource concerns that require additional technical capacity .

questions have been raised about whether these expanded responsibilities should be concentrated or other responsibilities should be removed .

one suggested solution to expanding technical capabilities and meeting the need of additional technical assistance is to reduce or remove the administrative support functions associated with conservation programs .

for this suggestion , administrative functions are limited to distributing financial assistance in contractual agreements to producers .

some have suggested that these functions be moved to fsa or competitively contracted to the private sector .

reception to this suggestion varies .

in january 2009 , nrcs formally initiated the conservation delivery streamlining initiative .

the purpose of this initiative is to define and implement a more effective , efficient , and sustainable business model for delivering conservation assistance .

no cost saving estimates were provided based on this initiative ; however , the agency defines success as having technical field staffs spend as much as 75% of their time in the field with customers , and over 80% of the time / tasks currently spent by technical staff on administrative or clerical financial assistance tasks eliminated , automated , or reassigned to other staff .

as additional resource concerns require additional technical assistance , will the technical capacity need to be expanded as well ? .

new resource concerns such as nutrient management , animal waste , air quality , climate change , and energy are placing increased demands on technical assistance .

in what capacity should the current technical assistance system ( federal capacity , partnerships , technical service providers ) expand to meet this need ? .

upon enactment of the soil and water resources conservation act ( rca , p.l .

95-192 ) in 1977 , usda was directed to develop a national soil and water conservation program and to periodically assess the condition of the nation's soil , water , and other natural resources .

under rca , reports guide the department's soil and water conservation priorities .

authority under the rca was extended in the 2008 farm bill to 2018 .

has the required reporting mechanism of rca better organized usda's natural resources activities ? .

would additional reporting measures for technical assistance be helpful for congress , and if so , should they be tied to changes in spending on technical assistance ? .

discussion continues about administrative support tasks and their impact on technical assistance .

congress has historically delegated responsibility for the division of labor and tasks between agencies to the secretary of agriculture .

should congress define this role instead of the secretary ? .

what benefits are experienced by producers having one agency fully control conservation programs ? .

would a reduced administrative burden increase the efficiency of technical assistance ? .

should congress authorize separate accounts to fund both technical assistance and administrative support , or should the two be combined and titled differently ? .

in 2009 , nrcs initiated a conservation delivery streamlining initiative designed to implement a more effective and efficient method of delivering technical assistance .

what actions is nrcs undertaking as part of its streamlining initiative to simplify conservation delivery ? .

are there particular areas or regions that have an overly complex system of delivering conservation ? .

how will this system interact with fsa's program delivery system ? .

is there overlap or duplication with fsa's modernization project ? .

congress continues to discuss funding for technical assistance .

several interests would like to see funding increased ; however , given current federal budget constraints this action seems unlikely in future appropriation acts .

discretionary funding for technical assistance still provides the majority of funding for conservation technical assistance ; however , funding for farm bill programs continues to increase , closing the gap between the two sources .

section 2502 of the 2008 farm bill allows certain technical assistance activities involving the development of plans to be considered an eligible practice under eqip and paid for with financial assistance .

these conservation activity plans , or caps , are now performed primarily by tsps .

have caps performed by tsps freed up nrcs staff time for other technical assistance activities ? .

do the additional administrative measures to write cap contracts offset time savings devoted to technical assistance ? .

does the expansion of financial assistance funding for technical assistance contracts reduce the backlog for technical assistance ? .

if caps prove successful , could the contracting of technical assistance work using financial assistance funding be extended into other areas or programs ? .

what other areas would seem most appropriate ? .

technical assistance is increasingly being offered for a fee in the private sector .

the fy2011 president's budget proposal included proposed legislation to charge a user fee for conservation plans what technical assistance costs , if any , are producers willing to cover financially without government compensation ? .

are more producers willing to cover these costs to meet regulation requirements ( nutrient management ) or to bypass a slow response and possible limited resources on the part of the federal government ? .

the debate regarding technical assistance funding for conservation under the section 11 cap ( 15 u.s.c .

714i ) in the commodity credit corporation charter act continues .

the arra provision ( sec .

103 ) that provides technical assistance under title ii to be funded through ccc expired september 30 , 2010 .

should this authority be extended ? .

will the limitations of the cap continue to affect other agencies funded through the ccc ? .

if additional legislative changes are made to the section 11 cap , what effect would this have on conservation technical assistance ? .

appendix a .

historical context the complexities of technical assistance emerged through incremental policy changes over time .

when the federal agriculture conservation effort was limited primarily to soil erosion control and water supply , technical assistance was limited in the number of resource concerns addressed as well as funding .

technical assistance has expanded in both scope and funding recently , and has been brought to the forefront of the debate for both implementation and funding levels .

how this process evolved is discussed below .

federal conservation assistance not until the 1930s and the occurrence of the dust bowl did soil conservation become a national priority .

on august 25 , 1933 , through the use of public works program funding , the department of the interior ( doi ) created the soil erosion service .

in march 1935 , the president ordered soil erosion service moved to the usda .

the severity of soil erosion at the time helped gain congressional support for the passage of the soil conservation and domestic allotment act ( p.l .

74-46 , 49 stat .

163 ) in april 1935 , establishing the soil conservation service ( scs ) within the usda .

the scs was established for the purpose of providing "permanently for the control and prevention of soil erosion and thereby to preserve natural resources , control floods , prevent impairment of reservoirs , and maintain the navigability of rivers and harbors , protect public health , public lands and relieve unemployment. .

following the enactment of the 1935 legislation creating the scs , most of the services provided to landowners were through demonstration projects .

agreements ( usually five years in length ) were entered into with landowners who agreed to contribute access to their land , labor , and some resources in exchange for following a conservation plan .

the scs provided technical assistance , materials , labor ( using the civilian conservation corps and emergency conservation work camps ) .

the overlapping mission with other federal and state agencies ( the extension service and land grant universities in particular ) and limited landowner buy - in forced the usda to look toward more localized entities to carry out these demonstrations .

this brought about the establishment of the soil conservation districts .

model state legislation to create and operate districts was presented to state governors in february 1937 by president franklin d. roosevelt , who encouraged adoption .

this level of interest directly from the president highlights the significant level of political support for soil conservation during this time .

in 1937 , twenty - two states passed legislation creating districts .

following the creation of these districts , scs increasingly concentrated on providing technical assistance to farmers through these new local entities .

the current role of conservation districts is discussed in the " outlook for technical assistance " section , above .

expansion of technical assistance the scs mission has expanded beyond soil erosion and conservation assistance through multiple legislative and administrative mandates .

the focus of conservation technical assistance has shifted with changes in national priorities .

technical assistance has fluctuated between addressing a limited number of resources and most or all natural resources on agricultural lands .

small watershed programs ( p.l .

83-566 ) the addition of water resources as a technical assistance responsibility added to the scope of scs functions .

the enactment of the flood control act of 1936 ( p.l .

74-738 ) authorized scs to measure , study , and plan run - off and erosion prevention activities in selected watersheds through technical assistance .

the flood control act of 1944 ( p.l .

78-534 ) and the watershed protection and flood prevention act of 1954 ( p.l .

83-566 ) expanded the watershed program to include not only the traditional planning function created in the 1936 act but also added financial assistance funding for projects .

these projects involved a holistic approach to watershed planning and included a multi - disciplinary team consisting of a wide range of technical experts ( eg , geologists , hydrologists , engineers , economists , etc. ) .

scs provided this technical assistance and federal support through a coordination role .

local communities were expected to provide land rights and maintenance responsibility upon project completion .

projects were intended to treat the whole watershed , thereby providing benefits beyond flood control and prevention , including drainage , recreation , municipal and industrial water supply , fish and wildlife enhancement , irrigation , and water quality protection .

compliance provisions in the 1985 farm bill ( p.l .

99-198 ) dramatically changed technical assistance functions and responsibilities .

it authorized conservation compliance ( commonly referred to as sodbuster ) and wetlands compliance ( commonly referred to as swampbuster ) regulations , transforming many technical assistance functions that scs historically performed by requiring enforcement of conservation under certain circumstances .

sodbuster prohibits participation in numerous specified usda programs when annually tilled commodity crops are produced on highly erodible land ( hel ) without adequate erosion protection .

swampbuster provisions prohibit participation in numerous specified usda programs when annually tilled commodity crops are produced , or land is drained to make production possible , on certified wetlands .

scs had , and nrcs ( successor to scs ) continues to have , primary responsibility for providing technical assistance for determining whether land should be classified as highly erodible or a wetland .

this task of certifying and determining cropland across the country required time and shifted resources away from the whole - farm planning approach to a narrower focus on soil erosion .

whereas the conservation technical assistance movement had begun with the dust bowl and soil erosion , over time it had broadened and expanded to include other resource concerns .

with the emergence of conservation compliance much of the focus had moved back to an old issue , soil erosion ( and a new one , wetlands ) .

new name , expanded responsibilities the 1990s brought about a new trend in technical assistance , linking financial incentives to technical assistance in many new ways .

traditionally , technical assistance provides the planning , design , and technical consultation functions , while financial assistance offers monetary support for implementation capacity .

in 1994 , national priorities changed and the soil conservation service was reorganized by congress as part of an overall reorganization of usda .

its name was changed to reflect its expanded responsibilities ; the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) .

also , nrcs assumed additional responsibilities for administration and leadership of some conservation programs from fsa .

one such program was the wetlands reserve program ( wrp ) , which expanded technical assistance responsibility into easement management .

authorized in the 1990 farm bill , the wrp purchases long - term or permanent easements and funds restoration on wetlands .

following the 1996 farm bill , nrcs became responsible for administering the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) , a combination of several financial assistance programs .

following the 2002 farm bill , nrcs became responsible for not only technical assistance and the administration of many conservation programs , but also for making payments on contractual agreements .

along with this additional increase in responsibility and an expanding list of natural resource concerns came a significant increase in funding authority .

appendix b .

reimbursements between nrcs & fsa two conservation programs directly involve both fsa and nrcs — the conservation reserve program ( crp ) and the grassland reserve program ( grp ) .

to better define each agency's role in program implementation , an moa or mou is signed , usually following each farm bill .

the memorandum is typically valid until the program expires , there is congressional action on the program , or there is a major administrative change to the program .

the following outlines each agency's role in implementing crp and grp as defined by the respective moa and mou .

conservation reserve program ( crp ) in the case of crp , fsa retains leadership control over the program and has responsibility for overall implementation .

these activities include but are not limited to program policy development , signup establishment , application approval , contract administration , county rate determinations , and program payments .

nrcs provides technical assistance , either directly or through tsps , and ensures that all work is performed in accordance with technical standards .

fsa reimburses nrcs on a monthly basis based on the nrcs cost of program model ( described above ) and the amount of work performed .

these costs include activities related to new general and continuous enrollments , re - enrollments and extensions for general signup , and re - enrollments for continuous signup .

according to the moa , activities may include determining program eligibility for continuous crp , conservation reserve enhancement program ( crep ) , and the farmable wetland program ( fwp ) ; conservation planning ; conservation practice design system implementation and certification of 10% of all practice ; or providing policy and program support .

during fy2009 , nrcs was reimbursed for approximately $56 million for technical assistance provided to crp activities .

changes in the 2008 farm bill to fwp are expected to increase technical assistance costs because constructed wetlands are considerably more expensive than other conservation practices .

this , in addition to the general signup ( number 39 ) in fy2010 and another possible signup in fy2011 , could increase the amount of technical assistance from nrcs and increase reimbursements from fsa .

grassland reserve program ( grp ) the grassland reserve program ( grp ) is different from crp in that functions of the program are not split along financial and technical assistance lines .

fsa has lead responsibility for rental contract administration , and nrcs has lead responsibility on technical assistance issues and easement administration .

an mou is signed by both nrcs and fsa describing these functions in detail .

generally , responsibilities include fsa — accepting applications ; issuing payments ; assessing penalties and liquidated damages as applicable ; accepting , modifying , and terminating rental contracts ; landowner eligibility determinations on easement and rental contracts ; acreage determination on rental contracts ; maintaining grp records and reports and enforcement of violations on rental contracts .

nrcs — accepting applications ; providing technical assistance to the participant ; evaluating and ranking applications for rental contracts and easements ; ensuring conservation treatment is in accordance to program requirements ; ranking and selecting applications for funding ; providing payment documentation to fsa ; and establishing quality assurance and control procedures to monitor land enrolled in easements or rental contracts .

grp operates under a continuous sign up and both fsa and nrcs develop the state ranking criteria to select eligible projects .

nrcs supplies the technical assistance for developing a grazing management plan and any technical assistance following the producer signing a contract or easement .

under the mou , nrcs reimburses fsa for administrative costs incurred with implementing grp .

these costs are based on historic workload data and the number of applications and contracts provided by fsa .

