the developmental disabilities assistance and bill of rights act ( dd act ) provides federal financial assistance to states and public and nonprofit agencies to support community - based delivery of services to persons with developmental disabilities ( dd ) .

the aim of the programs established by the dd act is to help persons with dd maximize their work potential , facilitate their ability to live independently , and foster their integration into the community .

the protection of the legal rights of individuals with dd is another major objective of the dd act .

current law encourages coordination and collaboration among the state councils on developmental disabilities ( scdds ) , various independent living centers , and its state protection and advocacy ( p&a ) programs to support the legal rights of individuals with dd .

although the dd act does not provide direct services , its programs are intended to plan and better coordinate the delivery of services and to advocate on behalf of individuals with dd .

the administration on developmental disabilities ( add ) , part of the administration for children and families ( acf ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is the federal agency that oversees all dd act programs .

the dd act was originally title i of the mental retardation facilities and community mental health centers construction act of 1963 ( p.l .

88-164 ) .

it was renamed the developmental disabilities assistance and bill of rights act by p.l .

95-602 in 1978 , and was completely reorganized by p.l .

98-527 in 1984 .

congress last reauthorized the dd act ( p.l .

106-402 ) in 2000 .

authorizations of appropriations for the dd act programs expired at the end of fy2007 , although congress has continued to provide appropriations for the programs .

legislation to reauthorize the dd act has not been introduced in the 111 th congress .

based on data from the u.s. census bureau , there are an estimated 4.6 million individuals with developmental disabilities in the united states .

although the term "developmental disability" originally specified disabling conditions such as mental retardation and cerebral palsy , the current definition is based on functional limitations that manifest prior to adulthood .

section 102 ( 8 ) ( a ) of the dd act defines "developmental disabilities" as "a severe , chronic disability of an individual that ( i ) is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments ; ( ii ) is manifested before the individual attains age 22 ; ( iii ) is likely to continue indefinitely ; ( iv ) results in substantial functional limitations in 3 or more of the following areas of major life activity: ( i ) self - care .

 ( ii ) receptive and expressive language .

 ( iii ) learning .

 ( iv ) mobility .

 ( v ) self - direction .

 ( vi ) capacity for independent living .

 ( vii ) economic self - sufficiency ; and ( v ) reflects the individual's need for a combination and sequence of special , interdisciplinary , or generic services , individualized supports , or other forms of assistance that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated. .

the dd act also specifies that "an individual from birth to age 9 , inclusive , who has a substantial developmental delay or specific congenital or acquired condition , may be considered to have a developmental disability without meeting 3 or more of the criteria described ... if the individual , without services and supports , has a high probability of meeting those criteria later in life. .

without appropriate services and supports , the choices open to some people with dd , including where they live , work , and play , may be minimal .

many may be isolated rather than fully integrated and included in the mainstream of society .

others may require individually planned and coordinated services and supports ( eg , housing , employment , education , civil and human rights protection , health care ) from many providers in order to live in the community .

this report describes the major programs authorized under title i of the dd act .

federal funds for these programs are used to help state governments , local communities , and private sector organizations provide health care services , educational opportunities , p&a , and employment training to persons with developmental disabilities .

a list of p&a programs and their respective administering agencies is provided in table 1 .

a funding history for each of these programs is included in table 2 .

table a - 1 and table a - 2 in appendix a detail allotments for scdds and for p&a programs , respectively , by state and u.s. territory .

appendix c lists the full names of the acronyms used in this report .

in fy2002 , the following amounts were allocated for dd act programs: $66.9 million for the scdds , $31.9 million for p&a programs , $24.0 million for the ucedds , $11.7 million for pns , and $800,000 each for the new scholarships and staff development curriculum grants .

although authorization for the staff development curriculum lapsed after fy2003 , the act authorized such sums as may be necessary for the other dd programs through fy2007 , including a separate family support program that came into existence in fy2003 .

known as family support 360 , this program only received funding in fy2003 ( for planning ) and fy2004 ( for implementation ) .

since fy2005 , add has funded the family support program using monies appropriated for pns .

congress appropriated $168.4 million for dd act programs for fy2010 .

table 2 shows the recent history of total funding allocations for the programs authorized by the dd act .

total allocations for all the dd act's programs have increased from $134.5 million in fy2002 to $168.4 for fy2010 .

table a - 1 and table a - 2 in appendix a provide fy2002-fy2011 funding allotments for the scdds and for p&a programs , respectively , by state and territory .

although fy2011 appropriations have not yet been finalized , estimates are provided .

in accordance with accountability requirements of the dd act , as well as those of the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 and the program assessment rating tool ( part ) , the developmental disabilities program independent evaluation ( ddpie ) project has been developed to assess the overall effectiveness of the dd act programs .

the ddpie project was divided into two phases .

phase one of the ddpie involved ( 1 ) the development of evaluation tools , and ( 2 ) the implementation of a pilot study to test the accuracy , feasibility , and utility of the evaluation tools .

phase one included an advisory panel of relevant stakeholders , such as individuals with dd ; families of individuals with dd ; other consumers ; advocates ; researchers ; and representatives from various dd networks to provide input and review draft materials .

a working group of dd program representatives from scdds , p&a programs , and ucedds was established to incorporate dd program input ; address concerns , such as potential duplication of data collection ; and facilitate collaboration between dd program components in the development and piloting of evaluation tools .

in the 111 th congress , the house has passed h.r .

911 , the stop child abuse in residential programs for teens act of 2009 .

similar legislation ( h.r .

6358 ) also passed the house during the 110 th congress .

h.r .

911 requires standards and enforcement provisions to prevent child abuse and neglect in public and private residential programs that serve children with emotional , behavioral , or mental health problems or disorders ; or problems with alcohol or substance abuse .

among other provisions , h.r .

911 would direct the assistant secretary of children and families in hhs to ( 1 ) implement an ongoing review process for investigating and evaluating reports of child abuse and neglect at covered programs ; ( 2 ) establish public websites with information about each covered program , as well as a national toll - free telephone hotline to receive complaints ; ( 3 ) establish civil penalties for violations of standards ; and ( 4 ) establish a process to ensure that complaints received by the hotline are promptly reviewed by persons with appropriate expertise .

h.r .

911 would require the assistant secretary to develop a process to immediately notify the state , appropriate law enforcement , and appropriate p&a system of any credible complaint of child abuse and neglect at a covered residential program .

should reauthorization of the dd act be considered in the 111 th congress , advocates have identified a need to address expanded funding for the ucedds to meet the needs of individuals with dd and their families across the lifespan .

there are indications that individuals with dd are now living longer .

also , there is increased recognition and appreciation of the impact of early life experiences on later life .

therefore , clinicians , families , and people with disabilities are increasingly recognizing the importance of long term planning for individuals with developmental disabilities who are living beyond childhood .

the need to address the transition from pediatric health care services to adult care services for youth with chronic health conditions or disabilities was also identified in the 2007 institute of medicine report on the future of disability in america .

the national association of councils on developmental disabilities recommended reauthorization of the dd act ; increased funding for scdds ; provisions that would address community - based employment of individuals with dd ; and the appointment of executive branch officials who have knowledge of dd as priorities for the incoming administration .

as of the date of this crs report , no bills to reauthorize the developmental disabilities act have been introduced in the 111 th congress .

appendix a. allotments for state councils on developmental disabilities and protection and advocacy programs , fy2002 - fy2011 ( est. ) .

appendix b .

current projects of national significance ( pns ) appendix c. acronym glossar .

