for the federal government , capital investments include development and acquisition of major capital assets , such as equipment ( eg , hardware for weapons systems , satellites , and information technology ( it ) ) ; structures ( eg , the capitol visitor center ) ; intellectual property ( eg , software ) ; and combinations thereof .

a capital investment can play a critical role , therefore , in the accomplishment of agency missions and the success of public policies .

congress has often taken a strong interest in the performance , cost , and schedule of major capital investments .

in addition , congress has taken a strong interest in establishing and maintaining accountability mechanisms to ensure that the president , office of management and budget ( omb ) , and agencies fulfill statutory duties , accomplish prescribed public policy goals , report transparently and fully , and act as careful stewards of public resources .

earned value management ( evm ) , which is the subject of this report , is a management technique that provides metrics to help inform assessments of whether a capital investment is "on track" from three perspectives: planned cost , time schedule , and functionality ( the latter concept often referred to as "performance," "technical performance," "capability," "scope of work," or "planned value" ) .

using these three perspectives , evm compares the planned cost , schedule , and functionality against an ( ideally ) accurate measurement of what is actually happening .

frequently , evm metrics serve to raise potential issues that require further investigation or study , rather than provide the full picture of a project's progress and status .

evm may be of increasing salience in executive branch practices and , implicitly or explicitly , in presentations to congress .

evm might also be used as an oversight tool for congress .

this report provides an overview of evm terminology and concepts by using a hypothetical example and illustrating a few potential oversight issues .

to place evm in context , however , it is necessary to discuss first the risks associated with major capital investments , how capital investments are often evaluated and monitored throughout their life cycles , and how evm appears to be increasingly adopted by executive branch agencies .

after providing the hypothetical evm example and some related caveats , the report concludes with potential oversight questions for congress regarding evm .

major capital investments give rise to many actual or potential issues for congress .

issues that are potentially related to evm are a significant subset of this larger picture .

with the increasing emergence of evm as a tool for gauging the status and progress of major capital investments , potential congressional oversight issues appear likely to continue emerging , as well .

this report culminates with a sampling of potential oversight questions for congress that draw on the report and other resources , as noted .

in light of what appears to be more widespread adoption of evm practices for major capital investments by executive agencies and their contractors , what might be the advantages , disadvantages , costs , and benefits of legislatively requiring more formal , periodic , and publicly accessible agency reporting of evm metrics for some , most , or all major capital investments ? .

to what extent might recent congressional efforts to increase budget and financial transparency — for example , the establishment of a searchable website for federal contracts and grants required by the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ; p.l .

109-282 ; 120 stat .

1186 ) — be viewed as an illustration of what could be done with evm information ? .

what would be the advantages and disadvantages ? .

the usefulness of evm metrics depends upon the quality and reliability of the cost , schedule , and functionality data that underlie both a project's baseline plan and its reports on work performed .

given concerns that have been raised about the quality of agency capital investment business cases that are used to justify budget requests , as well as concerns that have been raised about the quality of agency project management , what might be options for congress to cause omb and agencies to improve any deficiencies in the underlying analyses and data that support capital investment decision making and reporting ? .

what might be the advantages and disadvantages of requiring independent , publicly accessible assessments — including verification and validation , as appropriate — of the underlying quality of evm data , including cost estimates and assessments of the functionality that is delivered in comparison with what was planned ? .

what might be the advantages and disadvantages of requiring independent , publicly accessible assessments of the capacity of agencies to manage the capital planning and investment control ( cpic ) process ( eg , agency capacity to research , formulate , plan , propose , develop , report on , operate , and evaluate major capital investments ) , which is arguably more fundamental as a driver of evm data quality ? .

would assessments of key capabilities be amenable to systematic oversight through the use of "scorecards," similar to those used under the bush administration's president's management agenda , albeit with transparency outside the executive branch and independent validation ? .

to the extent that omb currently identifies gaps in agency capabilities , to what extent do annual budget requests ( submitted to congress by the president ) and performance plans ( produced by agencies under the government performance and results act of 1993 , or gpra ; p.l .

103-62 ) address the gaps ? .

processes that support the capital investment process — including development of capital investment business cases , project management , evm , contract oversight , management auditing , and evaluation — depend for success , in large part , upon adequate staff and skill resources in agencies .

have agencies allocated sufficient staff and financial resources to successfully undertake major capital investments ? .

how might such judgments be made ? .

also , do agencies have sufficient ability to recruit , retain , and train personnel in disciplines including project management , risk management , contract management and oversight , information technology , and program evaluation ? .

if so , what are their track records in recruiting , retaining , training , and allocating staff in sufficient number and competency in the management and oversight of major capital investments ? .

if not , what could be done ? .

what might be the advantages , disadvantages , costs , and benefits of applying evm - related requirements to major capital investments , as appropriate , pursued by agencies in the legislative and judicial branches ? .

