economic activity and people are increasingly concentrated in the coastal zone , as are important and often fragile natural resources .

one way to address the resulting conflicts is through coordinated planning that attempts to foster wise development while protecting natural resources .

in recent decades , pressures for both preservation and development have grown more intense at many locations , as people continue to migrate to coastal areas to take advantage of economic opportunities , to retire , and to pursue recreational interests ; as economic activities continue to concentrate in coastal locations ; and as coastal natural resources , such as estuaries , beach systems , and wetlands , are threatened by the magnitude and location of these changes .

views about how the coastal zone might be managed are also shaped by recent events , such as hurricane katrina and other natural disasters ; by new information , such as knowledge about the so - called "dead zones" where biological activity ceases during a portion of the year ; and by current trends , such as the health of the economy and rising energy prices ; as well as by views about the appropriate role for the federal government in land use planning , including uses and activities on non - federal lands .

the coastal zone management act ( czma , p.l .

92-532 , 16 u.s.c .

1451-1464 ) was enacted in 1972 , at a time when congress was considering options to respond to widespread public concern about estuarine and oceanfront degradation .

at the same time , it was also considering general national land use planning legislation to foster state ( and local ) planning capacity and coordination ; bills were reported by senate committees in 1970 and 1972 and passed the senate in 1972 ( s. 632 in the 92 nd congress ) , but not enacted .

many in congress concluded that the challenges that national land use planning legislation was intended to address were most concentrated in coastal areas and needed immediate attention .

the result was the czma , enacted with a promise by some congressional leaders to continue to pursue national land use legislation .

these leaders stated that they intended to fold coastal management into this more encompassing legislation at a later date .

comprehensive land use planning legislation was never enacted , and congress has not ventured beyond the czma with this approach to resource planning and management .

nevertheless , since 1972 , many of the trends that called congressional attention to a need for this legislation have continued to grow .

a review of the enacted reauthorization legislation , briefly summarized in appendix b , shows that the underlying approaches of the program have changed little , even though the topics addressed through the programs have evolved .

as noted above , the approaches have remained voluntary ( with the notable exception of the section 6217 program to address nonpoint source water pollution , discussed below , which was not enacted as an amendment to the czma ) , and participants continue to have wide latitude in what issues they choose to emphasize when implementing their programs .

the major provisions in current law are briefly summarized below .

appendix a contains a summary of the contents of every provision in the czma .

since the czma was last reauthorized in 1996 , interest in policies and programs that address coastal topics has grown , bringing additional attention to some elements of coastal management efforts .

coastal ( and ocean ) topics have been elevated among policy makers through the work of two recent national commissions .

one of these commissions , the pew oceans commission , was established in april 2000 and released its final report , america ' s living oceans: charting a course for sea change , on june 4 , 2003 .

this report included 26 recommendations within six categories , and two of those categories — titled "preserving our coasts" and "cleaning coastal waters" — deal with topics addressed in coastal management efforts .

the second commission , the u.s. commission on ocean policy , was created by legislation enacted in 2000 ( p.l .

106-256 ) .

this commission issued its final report , an ocean blueprint for the 21 st century , in september 2004 .

the commission made 212 recommendations , including 13 "critical actions. .

many of these recommendations have a coastal component .

in september 2006 , noaa and the coastal states organization ( cso ) , a group that represents participants in the federal coastal zone management program , released a report titled discussion paper: current and future challenges for coastal management .

this report is more focused on coastal topics , but draws on the work of the two commissions , among other sources , according to the authors .

it identifies 28 topics , and for each topic , provides a brief introduction and identifies some key questions and possible approaches .

topics identified as specific challenges for coastal management include: governance issues ( federal coordination , interstate and regional collaboration , local government involvement , and non - governmental organizations and the private sector partnerships ) ; resource and management issues ( habitat conservation and restoration , nonpoint source pollution , ocean resources management , coastal hazards , promoting economic growth and sustainable development , public access , climate change , marine commerce and transportation , invasive species , and knowledge and understanding ) ; and decision support ( resource assessments , science to support management , and providing tools and technologies ) .

the public also has become more aware of coastal issues , informed by widespread press coverage of specific events like hurricane katrina , and more general trends , such as the reported increased frequency of hurricane formation , sea level rise , fishery stock declines , and expanding areas of so - called dead zones associated with hypoxia .

each of the issues discussed below may be largely viewed by the public and congress as a free - standing topic , but several themes connect them , including where they occur , the effectiveness of existing programs and policies in addressing them , and a limited ability to deal with their interrelated characteristics .

a growing recognition of these themes could prompt policy makers to devote more attention to coastal management issues , especially if specific events trigger greater attention and interest .

the topics discussed below are selected issues that are currently receiving attention .

this is by no means a complete list of issues , which continue to evolve nationally , and the importance of each issue may be viewed differently from place to place .

the discussion below centers on how coastal zone management efforts currently recognize and try to address each issue , and what changes in policy have been proposed to enhance those efforts .

for some of these topics , coastal management could be a central or critical policy response , while for others , it could be one of multiple components in how the topic is addressed .

these issues are addressed in some of the more than two dozen reauthorization proposals that have been introduced since the czma authorization expired in 1999 .

none of these legislative proposals has been enacted .

most of these proposals would have made modest rather than major changes to the current law .

they all would have increased funding levels for at least some components of the coastal management effort , and many would have made adjustments to the purposes of coastal management .

participants use their coastal zone management programs to coordinate many topics and activities that are also addressed by other federal laws and programs .

some of these topics and activities also might appear in czma reauthorization legislation .

the reauthorization might directly recognize a topic ; making it a consideration for coastal program participants , or it might indirectly recognize the topic by calling for coordination or recognition in participant programs .

the programs discussed below are all limited to implementation in coastal locations , and are therefore among those most directly related to aspects of coastal management .

each program addresses topics that can be central to coastal management efforts in some , but not all , locations .

in addition to the programs below , many other federal programs are not limited to coastal areas but can have substantial effects on coastal areas .

such programs include many infrastructure development programs for highways , water and sewer facilities , shoreline protection , and the like ; financial subsidies such as numerous loan and grant programs and provisions in the federal tax code for mortgage interest deductions and the availability of federal flood insurance ; and disaster relief efforts .

since the federal coastal management program addresses the often conflicting pressures of resource protection and economic development , some may view it as a model for possible application in other places — rapidly urbanizing areas , or segments of waterfront areas along rivers and lakes — where similar conflicting pressures are concentrated .

the qualities of such a model may become clearer when one looks at some of the strengths and weaknesses that the many czma observers have identified .

as some of these observations are based , in part , on value judgments , what may be regarded as a strength by one person may be a weakness to another .

an example of divergent views is the debate over whether it is a strength or a weakness of the federal program to have permitted great variability in how the program is administered from participant to participant .

in looking at czma as a model , the context of each participant's program is important .

this context reflects its traditions of governance , such as the laws and programs that are available to apply to the coastal management effort ; already - established approaches to managing natural resources and guiding development ; the role of the state level in planning and managing land use ; and the relation between state and local levels of government to administer programs .

in reviewing the two lists below , it is also important to remember that different aspects of the program or different topics that the program addresses may be important to different people .

each of the listed strengths and weaknesses could be explored further for comparative purposes , but just listing them points out what makes the czma and participant programs unique .

some of the strengths of the czma approach identified by coastal management observers are: it provides a framework for coastal planning that has considerable latitude so that each participant can address its individual needs .

it measures progress in the context of each participant's capabilities rather than using one standard by which all participants are evaluated .

it allows participants to develop and expand its capacity for planning and management as it considers all activities occurring in or affecting a geographic area defined by the participant .

it includes , as an integral component , a system of participant - designated protected research and education sites that provide opportunities to engage in comparative research projects and to educate the public about the value of coastal resources .

it provides federal funding to encourage activities that participants might otherwise not initiate .

it provides a procedure that allows participants to effectively oppose federal actions that are viewed as incompatible with their goals .

congress has periodically updated the federal law and participants have updated their plans to reflect changing concerns about the coast .

some of the weaknesses of the czma approach identified by coastal management observers are: it is a voluntary program that has almost no regulatory leverage on a participant's actions .

participants can do too many alternative things and have a very wide range of levels of effort , and still be considered to be successfully implementing their program .

overall funding is inadequate to pay for doing all or even a portion of "the right things" that every participant should be doing where there is a federal interest in coasts .

some of the participants use their programs to accommodate coastal development , and do not do enough to protect natural resources and the environment .

after more than 30 years of effort and numerous studies , the magnitude or dimensions of the impact that the federal program or any of the participants' programs have had on either the rate and pattern of coastal development , or on protection of important coastal resources , is still uncertain .

appendix a .

provisions in the coastal zone management act , as amended section 302 lists 13 congressional findings about the national interest in the condition and changing circumstances of the coastal zone .

section 303 states the declaration of policy .

it identifies as the purposes of the act "to preserve , protect , develop , and where ever possible , to restore or enhance" resources of the coastal zone ; to assist states in implementing management plans for at least 11 listed purposes ; to encourage special area management plans to improve predictable decision - making ; to encourage intergovernmental cooperation ; to encourage intergovernmental sharing of information ; and to respond to changing circumstances affecting coastal environments .

section 304 lists 19 definitions , including "coastal zone," "coastal resources of national significance," and "special area management plan. .

section 305 authorizes participants to submit their management program to the secretary of commerce for approval .

section 306 authorizes grants to participants to implement approved programs .

nine program elements are specified for plans , and the participant must meet specified requirements .

procedures are specified for modifying or amending programs .

section 306a establishes the coastal resources improvement program , which provides grants to participants to preserve or restore resources that meet certain qualifications , redevelop urban waterfronts , provide access to coastal areas , and provide a process to develop aquaculture facilities .

section 307 authorizes the federal consistency provisions , which requires that each participant be given the opportunity to certify that all federal actions in or affecting its defined coastal zone be consistent with its federally approved coastal management program .

it also includes provisions for coordination and cooperation .

section 308 establishes a coastal zone management fund to make loans to address regional issues , demonstration projects , respond to emergencies and disasters , recognize excellence ( see section 314 ) , and applying the public trust doctrine .

section 309 establishes coastal zone enhancement grants for nine specified purposes , including protecting and enhancing wetlands ; addressing hazards ; improving coastal access ; reducing marine debris ; developing procedures to address the secondary effects of coastal development ; working with special area management plans ; planning for ocean resources ; and facilitating energy - related activities and aquaculture facilities .

section 310 authorizes the secretary of commerce to provide technical assistance and research results to participants to support their coastal management efforts .

section 311 requires 30 days notice for public hearings .

section 312 requires noaa to periodically review and evaluate every participant's performance in implementing its program , and permits the withholding or withdrawal of financial assistance if a recipient is "failing to adhere" to its program .

section 313 specifies the maintenance of record by participants and grants federal access to those records .

section 314 establishes the annual walter b. jones awards for excellence in coastal zone management , specifies who is eligible , and identifies the types of awards .

section 315 authorizes the national estuarine research reserve system .

participants nominate sites to be protected by participants and used as research and education centers .

the system goal is to designate sites in every biogeographical coastal region so that comparative research projects can be conducted .

section 316 requires the secretary of commerce to prepare a biennial report for congress .

reports are: to contain 12 specified elements that generally encompass the activities of the federal office in implementing the program ; to lay out the status and accomplishments of participants' programs ; and to make any recommendations for additional legislation .

section 317 requires the secretary to prepare and issue rules and regulations .

in addition , it authorizes the establishment of a national coastal resources research and development institute in oregon .

section 318 authorizes appropriations through fy1999 .

section 319 spells out the appeals process and schedule for consistency determinations made under section 307 .

appendix b. reauthorization legislation 1975 ( p.l .

93-612 ) .

limited amendments in free - standing legislation ; set limits on upper and lower size of grants to participants , and increased some authorized funding levels .

1976 ( p.l .

94-370 ) .

extensive amendments in free - standing legislation that restated and amended large portions of the czma ; added energy development as a major topic ; created a new coastal energy impact program and a new interstate grant programs ; and reauthorized appropriations for most program elements through fy1980 .

1978 ( p.l .

95-372 ) .

limited amendments placed in title v of amendments to the outer continental shelf lands act .

amended many of the energy provisions added in 1976 , especially the coastal energy impact program .

1980 ( p.l .

96-464 ) .

extensive amendments in free - standing legislation restated much of the law .

added a new grant category under section 306a ; amended sections authorizing the coastal energy impact program , the interstate grants program , the biennial report , reviews of performance and penalties for nonperformance , and added a complex structure by which congress could disallow a proposed rule ( the latter was subsequently deleted ) .

authorized appropriations through fy1985 .

1986 ( p.l .

99-626 ) .

limited amendments placed in section 7 of the recreational boating safety act of 1986 required participants to return any unobligated funds , which the secretary is to reobligate to other participants through the same grant .

1986 ( p.l .

99-272 ) .

limited amendments placed in section 6044 of the deficit reduction amendments of 1985 , replaced the estuarine sanctuary program with the estuarine research reserve system and added considerable detail without changing the basic elements of this program .

1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) .

extensive amendments placed in subtitle c of title vi of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 reauthorizing the czma through fy1995 .

it made changes to the findings sections , the basic management grants program , and the consistency provisions .

it replaced the interstate grants with enhancement grants , amended provisions regarding estuarine research reserves , and established the walter jones awards .

also , section 6217 established the coastal nonpoint source pollution program .

1996 ( p.l .

104-150 ) .

limited amendments in free - standing legislation that eliminated grants to assist states in preparing plans , authorized appropriations through fy1999 and made other funding changes , and stated some deadlines for secretarial actions when consistency determinations have been appealed to that level .

appendix c. information about each participan .

