the runaway and homeless youth act ( rhya ) was enacted in 1974 as title iii of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( p.l .

93-415 ) .

rhya authorizes funding for grant programs that provide direct services to youth — the basic center program ( bcp ) , transitional living program ( tlp ) , and street outreach program ( sop ) — and related training , research , and other activities .

these programs and activities are administered by the family and youth services bureau in the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) administration for children and families .

the basic center program provides temporary shelter , counseling , and after care services to runaway and homeless youth under age 18 and their families , while the transitional living program is targeted to older youth ages 16 to 21 .

youth who use the tlp receive longer - term housing with supportive services .

the street outreach program provides education , treatment , counseling , and referrals for runaway , homeless , and street youth who have been subjected to or are at risk of being subjected to sexual abuse and exploitation .

rhya has been reauthorized approximately every five years since the 1970s .

most recently , in the second session of the 110 th congress , the president signed into law the reconnecting homeless youth act ( p.l .

110-378 ) to extend existing programs and authorize new activities under rhya for fy2009 through fy2013 .

p.l .

110-378 represents a compromise between provisions that were included in two bills — h.r .

5524 and s. 2982 — to reauthorize rhya .

on march 4 , 2008 , representative john yarmuth introduced h.r .

5524 , the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 .

the bill was referred to the house education and labor committee , but was not taken up by the committee .

on june 9 , 2008 , the house approved the bill by voice vote under suspension of the rules .

the version of the bill that was passed contained most of the same provisions as the original version .

on may 6 , 2008 , senator patrick leahy introduced s. 2982 , the runaway and homeless youth protection act .

on may 22 , 2008 , the senate judiciary committee passed s. 2982 , which included an amendment that substituted the introduced version with a similar version of the bill .

on september 25 , 2008 , s. 2982 was approved by the senate .

the senate - passed version is different from the version that passed the judiciary committee and includes many of the same provisions as those in h.r .

5524 .

the house approved s. 2982 on september 26 , 2008 , and the president signed it into law as p.l .

110-378 on october 8 , 2008 .

this report first provides a broad overview of p.l .

110-378 , followed by a more detailed summary of the law's provisions .

the second section discusses the issues that were raised during hearings in the 110 th congress about runaway and homeless youth , and the provisions in p.l .

110-378 that , in part , address these issues .

table a - 1 at the end of the report provides a side - by - side comparison of p.l .

110-378 with prior law , current regulation , and h.r .

5524 .

as shown in the table , notable differences include funding authorization levels , the authorization for a national homeless youth awareness campaign ( as proposed by h.r .

5524 ) , length of stay at rhya - funded programs , and the definitions of runaway youth and homeless youth .

the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-378 ) reauthorizes programs for runaway and homeless youth , expands congressional oversight of these programs , and establishes new activities .

the major provisions of the law relate to funding for the basic center program , transitional living program , and street outreach program ; requirements for grantees that receive bcp and tlp grants ; and accountability of programs and activities authorized under rhya .

funding .

p.l .

110-378 authorizes fy2009 appropriation levels for the bcp , tlp , and related activities that exceed the levels authorized for fy2004 by $35 million ( these are the only recent years for which congress has specified authorized appropriation levels ) .

the law also increases the authorized annual minimum levels of bcp funding available for states and territories .

it further requires hhs to reallocate unused bcp funds from one state to another .

the amount allocated to states for fy2009 and fy2010 may not be lower than the amount appropriated to the states in fy2008 .

requirements .

p.l .

110-378 allows youth to remain in a program funded under the bcp and tlp longer they were able to under the prior law , although the law imposes additional criteria for youth who stay longer at tlp - funded programs .

the law also changes the definition of "homeless youth" to permit youth older than age 18 and 22 to stay at bcp - and tlp - funded programs , respectively , but only under certain circumstances .

another change made by the law specifies that in funding grants for research and other projects related to runaway and homeless youth , hhs is to give priority to applicants that serve diverse youth and represent diverse geographic regions of the u.s. ( the term "diverse" is not defined. ) .

other requirements pertain to bcp and tlp plans submitted by grant applicants .

accountability .

p.l .

110-378 requires hhs to promulgate regulations that specify performance standards for public and non - profit entities that receive bcp , tlp , and sop grants .

the law further requires hhs to periodically submit to congress an incidence and prevalence study of runaway and homeless youth ages 13 to 26 , as well as the characteristics of a representative sample of these youth .

hhs must consult with the u.s. interagency council on homelessness in developing the study .

the law also directs the government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate the process by which organizations apply for bcp , tlp , and sop , including hhs's response to these applicants .

gao is to submit a report on its findings to congress .

the discussion below provides more details of these provisions .

p.l .

110-378 changes program requirements related to ( 1 ) the length of time that youth are eligible to stay in basic center program and transitional living program facilities ; ( 2 ) the definition of homeless youth and runaway youth ; ( 3 ) bcp and tlp plans submitted by applicants ; and ( 4 ) applicants that are to be prioritized under the street outreach program .

the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 includes provisions that seek to improve accountability of programs and activities authorized by rhya , including requiring hhs to establish performance standards for bcp , tlp , and sop grantees ; directing gao to evaluate the process by which grants are awarded under the three programs ; and requiring hhs to periodically submit a report to congress that contains estimates of runaway and homeless youth and certain characteristics of the population .

during the 110 th congress , the house and senate conducted hearings on the challenges facing runaway and homeless youth and the federally funded services to assist the population .

the issues raised included inadequate levels of funding for rhya grantees , limited information about the outcomes of runaway and homeless youth , and the need for greater education and workforce opportunities for these youth .

the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 incorporates provisions that , in part , address the three issues .

at a hearing conducted by the senate judiciary committee on april 29 , 2008 , service providers and advocates for runaway and homeless youth raised concerns that funds appropriated under rhya have not been adjusted for increases in the cost of living .

a provider in vermont explained that his rhya - funded programs have been level - funded since 1994 , while costs have risen significantly .

these same concerns were highlighted at a july 24 , 2007 , hearing on runaway , homeless , and missing children , conducted by the house education and labor committee subcommittee on healthy families and communities .

further , the government accountability office described in its february 2008 report on disconnected youth that funding has remained stagnant for federal youth programs , including those funded by rhya .

the report states: "while overall transitional living program funding increased in fy2002 to support a greater number of programs , the amount available to individual local programs — capped at $200,000 — has not changed since 1992 .

one [runaway and homeless] program director explained that considering increases in the cost of operation , this amount funds only part of one staff rather than three as in previous years. .

an analysis of per grantee award amounts from fy2004 through fy2007 indicates that bcp and tlp funding has remained stable or has declined slightly .

for example , $44.4 million in bcp funds was awarded to 345 grantees for fy2004 , resulting in an average grant of $128,734 .

for fy2007 , approximately $43.3 million was awarded to 336 grantees , with an average grant amount of about $128,821 .

average tlp award amounts declined over the period from fy2004 through fy2007 .

for fy2004 , 194 grantees shared $36,744,000 in tlp funds , resulting in an average grant of $189,402 .

the average grant award decreased to $181,558 for fy2007 , when 190 grantees shared $34,496,000 in tlp funds .

in response to concerns about funding , the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 increases the authorization of appropriations in at least one year ( fy2009 ) for the bcp , tlp , and sop , and increases the minimum bcp awards for states and territories .

however , for most programs — including those authorized under the runaway and homeless youth act — congress has passed , and the president has enacted , a continuing resolution for fy2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) , which in most cases , provides for the same level of funding as in fy2008 .

the resolution extends until march 9 , 2009 , and does not reflect final funding levels for fy2009 .

at the hearings held by the senate judiciary committee and house education and labor subcommittee on healthy families and communities , former runaway and homeless youth discussed the challenges of living on the street , such as the inability to find work and connect to school .

one witness at the senate judiciary hearing described the assistance he received at a tlp - funded program that now employs him as a manager for the program .

he explained that through intensive case management , he was empowered to stop using drugs and to live independently .

yet little is known about the outcomes of runaway and homeless youth generally .

local grantee organizations have limited information about youth after they receive services , and research on whether youth experience homelessness as adults is dated .

some grantees may decide to follow up with youth who received services , but hhs does not require longitudinal data collection .

hhs's 2007 report to congress , promising strategies to end youth homelessness , states that longer - term studies of runaway and homeless youth are challenging because of the youth's transient nature .

further , knowledge about effective strategies for serving these youth is limited and few , if any , studies appear to have been conducted to determine the costs and benefits of these interventions .

to glean more information about the runaway and homeless youth population , the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 requires hhs to determine the incidence and prevalence of runaway and homeless youth and to report on the socio - demographic and other characteristics of the population .

although not a specified goal of the act , this information may help practitioners and social science researchers develop effective interventions for the population .

efforts are currently underway at hhs to learn more about the youth who are served by the transitional living program .

in august 2007 , hhs approved a sub - contract to abt associates to conduct an evaluation of the tlp at select grantee sites .

the study seeks to describe the outcomes of youth who participate in the program and to isolate and describe factors that may have contributed to their successes or challenges , including service delivery approaches , personal characteristics , and local circumstances .

hhs ( through the family and youth services bureau ) and abt researchers have conducted three site visits to tlp grantees ( in dallas , texas ; portland , oregon ; and wichita , kansas ) and a series of consultations with hhs and outside experts to inform the design of the study .

fysb has not yet selected the tlp survey sites for the study itself ; however , the sites will likely have extensive experience working with runaway and homeless youth and have been awarded continuous tlp funding for at least three years after the survey commences .

these sites will work to ensure that after receiving training , staff will be sufficiently capable of administering the survey instruments .

the sites will also need to be large enough to capture an adequate sample size .

youth participants will complete surveys at entry and while receiving services through a survey administered by their tlp programs .

they will also complete surveys for up to one year after leaving the program .

youth will self - report the data to a website six months and twelve months after exiting .

evaluators will compare the individual outcomes of each youth to his or her benchmark data .

the youth surveys are pending executive branch review , and fysb expects to begin collecting the data by the end of calendar year 2008 .

fysb anticipates making preliminary information available before the last surveys are completed .

further , fysb expects to maintain the self - reporting website indefinitely as a means of tracking tlp graduates after the formal study is complete .

hhs issued a proposed information collection request for public comment about the evaluation in the federal register on august 25 , 2008 .

on june 19 , 2007 , the house ways and means subcommittee on income security and family support held a hearing on disconnected and disadvantaged youth , with a focus on runaway youth .

witnesses described "disconnected youth" as those youth who have weak social networks of family , friends , and communities that can provide assistance such as employment connections , health insurance coverage , housing , tuition and other financial assistance , and emotional support .

they also discussed measurable characteristics to indicate whether youth are disconnected , such as the lack of high school or college attendance coupled with not having a job over a specific period of time ( eg , one year ) .

runaway and homeless youth are vulnerable to becoming disconnected because of separation from their families , absence from school , and non - participation in the economy .

family conflict — rooted in abuse and neglect , school problems , and drug and alcohol abuse — can compel youth to leave home .

family disconnectedness is also evident among many runaway and homeless youth involved in the foster care system .

these youth are brought to the attention of child welfare services because of incidents of abuse and neglect .

further , youth "aging out" of the foster care system experience homelessness at a greater rate than their counterparts in the general population due , in part , to family disconnectedness .

some gay and lesbian youth also experience family disassociation when they come out about their sexuality .

some runaway and homeless youth spend time out of school while they are away from a permanent home .

the fy2007 neo - rhymis survey indicated that about 20% of youth were not attending school regularly before entering the basic center program .

of youth in the transitional living program , 21% had dropped out of school .

some homeless youth face barriers to attending school because of transportation problems and the absence of parents and guardians who can provide records and permission for youth to participate in school activities .

finally , some runaway and homeless youth are removed from the formal economy and resort to illegal activity , including stealing and selling drugs in exchange for cash .

other such youth are too young to work legally or experience mental health and other challenges that make working difficult .

the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 seeks to fund research projects that focus on connecting youth to work and school .

the act amends rhya to require hhs to give priority to research , evaluation , demonstration , and service projects that increase access to education and career pathways for runaway and homeless youth .

these projects must be intended to help decrease high school dropout rates , increase rates of attaining a secondary school diploma or its equivalent , or increase placement and retention in postsecondary education or advanced workforce training programs .

