since late 2007 , u.s. and international markets for major grains and oilseeds have experienced a period of tight supplies , strong demand , and high prices not seen since the mid - 1990s ( figures 1 and 2 ) .

while agricultural commodity prices rose sharply during 2007 , they jumped precipitously in early 2008 .

for example , export prices for the world's two major food crops — wheat and rice , rose by 81% and 21% , respectively , during 2007 , but have surged even higher in early 2008 .

wheat prices ( hrw no .

2 , f.o.b. , u.s. gulf ports ) rose 44% between november 2007 and march 2008 — rising from $334.6 per ton to $481.5 — before falling back in april and may .

rice export prices ( 100% grade b , f.o.b .

bangkok ) have more than doubled since november 2007 , rising from $358.3 per ton to $1,020 in late may 2008 — an increase of nearly 185% .

this report identifies the predominant factors behind the 2007 / 2008-crop - year market conditions for major agricultural commodities , with a focus on u.s. farm program crops .

in addition , it briefly discusses how higher , more volatile commodity prices have impacted farm incomes , government farm programs , hedging activities , the livestock and food processing sectors , food prices , and the international food security situation .

it reviews both the near - and longer - term commodity price outlook , and finally , it discusses various viewpoints and policy options that have been suggested as possible responses to the perceived causes and consequences of the unusually high commodity prices .

because supply and demand circumstances vary widely across these crops — particularly in terms of their seasonality , their price elasticity , and the derived nature of their end products — readers are encouraged to review the brief commodity overviews provided in crs report rl33204 , price determination in agricultural commodity markets: a primer , for background information on the underlying nature of the different commodity markets .

u.s. and global stocks for several major u.s. program commodities are expected to be at or near historically low levels — particularly when measured as a share of total usage — prior to the next harvest this coming summer and fall of 2008 ( table 1 and figures 3-8 ) .

for example , global end - of - year stocks for coarse grains and wheat are projected to drop by mid - 2008 to the lowest levels since 1977 , while ending stocks of total grains ( i.e. , rice , wheat , and coarse grains combined ) fall to the lowest level since 1981 .

more importantly , their respective stocks - to - use ratios are all projected to reach record lows .

similarly , the stocks - to - use ratios for global corn and vegetable oils are projected to be the tightest since the early 1970s .

global rice stocks , as well as the stocks - to - use ratio , are projected up slightly from the previous year at 77.2 million tons and 18.2% in 2007 / 2008 .

however , the previous year's stocks - to - use ratio of 18.1% was the lowest since 1976 .

current rice stock levels represent a halving of available supplies from the year 2000 , when global ending stocks peaked at 147.1 million tons .

a certain amount of stocks at the end of the marketing year are necessary to provide a continuous flow of grain to processors and exporters before the new crop is harvested — such stocks are referred to as pipeline supplies .

although there is no hard and fast rule on what volume of stocks represents desirable pipeline levels for the major grain and oilseed crops , whenever stocks approach historically low levels market analysts speculate about what pipeline - stock levels might be .

for wheat , u.s. pipeline stocks are estimated to be in a range of 9.5 to 11 million tons ( 350 to 400 million bushels ) ; for corn , 10 to 12 million tons ( 400 to 500 million bushels ) ; and for soybeans , about 4 to 5.5 million tons ( 150 to 200 million bushels ) .

whenever usda ending stock projections approach these levels , market prices become very sensitive to unexpected market news and prices tend to be more volatile than during periods of abundant stocks .

u.s. wheat ending stocks for 2007 / 2008 are projected to fall to their lowest level ( 239 million bushels or 6.5 million tons ) since 1947 — well below their pipeline range .

u.s. soybean stocks of 4.4 million tons are projected at the lower end of their pipeline range .

u.s. corn ending stocks , although projected at what would appear to be an ample level , are low in historical global supply - to - use terms .

furthermore , the multi - year outlook for corn supplies is strongly impacted by the biofuels usage mandate in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) , which suggests that corn supplies will continue to tighten through 2015 .

among the major program crops , cotton is the principal exception , with global and u.s. ending stocks projected at relatively abundant levels .

in 2008 / 2009 , usda projects that global coarse grain stocks will continue to tighten , while wheat and rice stocks rebuild slightly on the outlook for record harvests .

ending stocks are calculated as the difference between total supplies ( beginning stocks plus production plus imports ) and total disappearance ( all domestic uses plus exports ) .

as such , season - ending stocks of an annually produced commodity summarize the effects of both supply and demand factors during the marketing year .

expected ending stocks — expressed as a ratio over expected total use — are frequently used as an indicator of a commodity's expected price outcome by usda and other market observers .

for most seasonal commodities , annual prices tend to have a strong negative correlation with their ending stocks - to - use ratio ( figures 3-8 ) .

as a result , expectations for high stocks relative to use typically result in lower prices , while expectations for low stocks relative to use tend to raise prices .

the tight supply situation for many agricultural commodities has sparked higher commodity prices throughout the global marketing chain — farm gate , futures markets , major international ports of call , wholesale distribution points , and finally to retail prices .

however , not all prices respond with the same speed and volatility .

prices for electronically - traded agricultural futures market contracts respond almost instantaneously to new market information .

in contrast , farm prices are weighted by markets — a large share of which occur immediately after harvest , when prices are generally at their lowest point of the season — and often respond more to local rather than international market conditions .

wholesale and export market prices fall somewhere between farm and futures market prices in terms of their responsiveness to changing conditions .

rising food prices , which are affecting millions of people , are rooted in what josette sheeran , executive director of the wfp , has described as a "perfect storm" of increasing demand for food from emerging economies , competition between biofuels and food production , high fuel prices , and increasing climatic shocks such as droughts and floods .

further contributing to high commodity prices have been a series of international government policies to limit domestic export supplies that have heightened fears of shortage and a weak u.s. dollar that has made u.s. exports more competitive in international markets .

the market effects of these factors have been particularly acute for agricultural commodities because of the inelastic nature of both supply and demand .

because the current u.s. and global commodity market dynamic affects so many aspects of agricultural markets including short - term consumer needs , as well as issues related to intermediate and longer - term agricultural productivity , the nature of the u.s. and international response will necessarily vary by targeted beneficiary as well as the relevant time period .

it is unlikely that any single policy response will be able to address all issues simultaneously .

this section briefly reviews some of the more salient policy responses being suggested or implemented by major players in the u.s. and international agricultural arena .

interests from livestock and poultry sectors , food processors and retailers , and hunger advocacy groups , have advocated for changes in current u.s. agricultural and food policy .

many interests from within these sectors have advocated for the reversal of u.s. biofuels policy , while some have also advocated for a reduction in crop land retirement under the crp program .

the u.s. milling and baking industry , led by the american bakers association ( aba ) , held a march in washington , d.c. in march , 2008 , to highlight their concerns about the short grain supplies and sharp price rises in u.s. commodity markets .

as part of their campaign , the aba put forward a three - point congressional action plan .

first , the aba claims that as much as one - third of crp land could be returned to agricultural production without environmental harm .

they urge congress to accept house agriculture committee chairman , colin peterson's proposal to decrease the crp by 7 million acres ; they encourage congress and the usda to support early out - of - contract provisions within the crp ; and they request that usda and the administration undertake an evaluation to identify viable cropland within the crp to facilitate its return to production .

second , the aba recommends that epa use its waiver authority to waive the rfs annual requirements , and to drop all tariffs on imported ethanol .

third , the aba recommends that congress and usda consider the needs of the domestic food industry ahead of export markets whenever u.s. wheat stocks drop below a three - month - usage supply .

in april 2008 , a spokesperson for the u.s .

grocery manufacturers association called on congress , the epa , and states to freeze and rollback the biofuels mandates due to their effect on food prices .

in addition to interests from the food processing and grocery retail sectors , the u.s. livestock sector has expressed long - standing concerns about diverting feed crops away from commercial animal feeders and into biofuels production .

the national cattlemen's beef association ( ncba ) explicitly opposes the national biofuels rfs .

ncba members have called for a market - based approach for the production and usage of ethanol produced from livestock feedstuffs , and the ncba supports sun - setting the existing biofuels tax credits and the ethanol import tariff as scheduled and not allowing for renewal in their current form .

in april , a major international agriculture research group , the international food policy research institute ( ifpri ) , announced that a moratorium on global grain - and oilseed - based biofuels would help ease corn prices by up to 20% and wheat prices by 10% in the next few years .

on april 25 , 2008 , texas governor rick perry , in a letter to stephen johnson , administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) — the federal agency responsible for administering the rfs — to request that epa waive 50% of the rfs' ethanol requirements to alleviate their impact on corn prices .

section 211 ( o ) of the federal clean air act ( as amended by eisa of 2007 ) provides the epa administrator , in consultation with the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of energy , with the authority to suspend for one year all or part of the rfs .

epa has 90 days to respond to governor perry's petition for a waiver .

the national chicken council's president , george watts , publicly commended governor perry's action stating that ethanol has been a factor behind rising food costs .

on may 2 , 2008 , 23 republican senators sent a letter to epa administrator johnson to inquire about the status of regulations for states applying for an ethanol mandate waiver and urged that epa take into consideration food inflation concerns related to the biofuels mandate .

however , not all quarters agree with the blame being targeted on the biofuels sector .

the renewable fuels association , the national corn growers association , and other interest groups that have benefitted from u.s. biofuels policy suggest that high oil prices , global production shortfalls , and foreign export controls are the main culprits and that it is unfair and incorrect to place the entire blame on the biofuels sector .

since may 1 , 2008 , congress has held a series of hearings on issues related to the potential causes and effects of the run - up on agricultural prices .

witness lists and testimony are available for each of these at the respective committee's website .

these include the following: may 1 , 2008 ; joint economic committee ; hearing: "how are high food prices impacting american families ? .

" ; may 6 , 2008: house committee on energy and commerce ; subcommittee on energy and air quality ; hearing: "the renewable fuels standard: issues , implementation , and opportunities" ; may 7 , 2008 ; senate homeland security and government affairs ; hearing: "fuel subsidies: is there an impact on food supply and prices ? .

" ; may 14 , 2008 ; house committee on financial services ; hearing: "contributing factors and international responses to the global food crisis" ; may 14 , 2008 ; senate committee on foreign relations ; hearing: "responding to the global food crisis" ; may 15 , 2008 ; house committee on small business ; hearing: "food prices and small businesses" ; and may 20 , 2008 ; senate homeland security and government affairs ; hearing: "financial speculation in commodity markets: are institutional investors and hedge funds contributing to food and energy price inflation ? .

several bills have been introduced in direct response to the high commodity prices and the alleged causes .

on april 29 , 2008 , congressman jeff flake introduced a bill , h.r .

5911 , that would repeal the rfs biofuels usage mandate , as well as the biofuels tax credit incentive and the ethanol import tariff — all to take effect immediately upon enactment of the bill .

on may 19 , 2008 , senator kay bailey hutchinson introduced s. 3031 , a bill that would freeze the rfs at its 2009 level of 9 billion gallons rather than allowing it to increase to 36 billion gallons by 2022 .

additional legislative proposals currently being negotiated in congress that could contribute directly or indirectly to the u.s. response to the current global food crisis are possible new emergency supplemental appropriations bills .

congress is presently considering supplemental appropriations fy2008 and fy2009 for the iraq war which could include some as - yet - undetermined funding for emergency response to the international food crisis .

president bush has requested substantial new money for additional food aid as part of these emergency supplemental bills .

in addition to pending legislative proposals , on may 22 , 2008 , new farm legislation ( p.l .

110-234 ) was enacted .

farm legislation has important implications for the level and timing of funding for several areas related to the u.s.'s ability to respond to domestic and international food concerns .

for example , these include provisions related to u.s. domestic nutrition programs , u.s. foreign food aid and agricultural assistance , the on - going debate over food versus fuel , agricultural land use incentives , and agricultural productivity issues .

note , this and the next section briefly summarize some of the more salient events related to the international communities attempts at responding to the perceived food crisis .

for more detail , see crs report rl34478 , rising food prices and global food needs: the u.s .

response , by [author name scrubbed] .

on april 29 , 2008 , u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon announced that he will lead a task force to coordinate the efforts of the u.n. system in addressing the global crisis arising from the surge in food prices .

the task force on the global food crisis will bring together the heads of u.n. agencies , funds and programs , and the world bank and international monetary fund , as well as experts within the un and leading authorities from the international community .

the two principal agencies within the united nations ( u.n. ) responsible for international agricultural development and food aid are the food and agricultural organization ( fao ) and the world food program ( wfp ) .

wfp is the u.n.'s front - line agency in the fight against global hunger via emergency operations in response to natural and man - made disasters , relief and rehabilitation projects , development projects where food aid is used for social and economic development , and special operations involving logistics to speed up the movement of food aid .

in contrast , fao has a longer - term focus .

fao is mandated to raise levels of nutrition , improve agricultural productivity , better the lives of rural populations and contribute to the growth of the world economy .

fao accomplishes this through in - country agricultural research and extension support , information dissemination , international workshops and conferences , etc .

in order to help developing countries modernize and improve their agriculture , forestry and fisheries practices and ensure good nutrition for all .

on december 17 , 2007 , the u.n.'s fao launched its initiative on soaring food prices ( isfp ) as a focal point for technical and policy assistance to those countries identified as the hardest hit by the sharp increase in food prices — referred to as low - income food - deficit countries ( lifdcs ) .

the international community is seeking to coordinate on - going work by the world bank , the international fund for agriculture development ( ifad ) , wfp , regional development banks ( eg , the asian development bank and the african development bank ) , and private foundations to integrate new projects and interventions .

first , the wfp , fao , and ifad are scheduled to present their strategies for coping with the food - price crisis at a u.n. executive board meeting in geneva .

then , the wfp and other international agencies will hear directly from governments on what they believe policy responses need to be at a gathering at u.n. headquarters in new york .

these policy meetings are a prelude to the fao's "summit on food security" in rome scheduled for june 3-5 , 2008 .

it is expected that the rome summit will provide a forum for coordinating the global response to the current food crises .

the list of current proposals by the u.n. and its agencies includes: establishment of a u.n. task force on food crisis .

wfp request for $755 million of emergency food aid ( above normal program funds ) to world's poorest .

emergency $1.7 billion initiative to provide poor food importers with seed and fertilizer .

the world bank is to explore a rapid financing facility for poor countries .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) proposes aid to countries facing balance of payments gaps .

the u.n. calls for the lifting of food export restrictions .

while the international donor community is responding to short - term food needs , other interest groups are encouraging both greater investment in international agricultural productivity and the phasing out or elimination of government policies that distort market signals and diminish agricultural producer's incentives to respond to price signals .

for each country , the appropriate policy response depends on the specific policy goal .

many suggestions are being offered by market watchers , but several recurring themes are present: reverse protective country - level policies of export bans and / or limitations that have exacerbated the problem .

reduce or eliminate subsidies that divert agricultural land from food and feed production to the production of feedstocks for biofuels .

remove or phase out domestic policies that keep market prices low in favor of consumers , but at the expense of sustained investment in the agricultural sector .

remove barriers that have constrained the production and use of genetically - modified crops .

in april , the international food policy research institute ( ifpri ) — a major international agriculture research agency that operates as part of the consultative group on international agricultural research ( cgiar ) — issued a 2-page policy brief that enumerated several policy recommendations for dealing with high international commodity prices and their harmful effect on groups vulnerable to food insecurity .

first , ifpri calls for short - run reinforcement and expansion of social protection and nutrition programs targeted to vulnerable groups .

second , ifpri calls for elimination of biofuel subsidies and mandates .

third , ifpri recommends the elimination of trade barriers to reduce market distortions and thereby allow correct price signals to reach agricultural producers .

finally , ifpri encourages long - term investment in agricultural research and extension , rural infrastructure , and market access for small farmers .

the world bank ( wb ) also has released a list of policy recommendations in response to the emerging global food crisis .

the wb's recommendation focus on those policy options designed to improve household food security .

the wb recently released a policy option paper as a partial guide for government policy designed to respond to the current high commodity prices in international markets .

as such , the wb prioritizes policy options by their effectiveness at reaching target groups , the equity of distribution of program benefits , and the degree of market distortions introduced .

the wb lists country - level policy options under three broad classes: targeted safety net programs ; measures to lower domestic food prices ; and measures to stimulate medium - term food grain production .

in an attempt to deal with its own food - import dependency while responding to the global food crisis and the proliferation of export restrictions , japanese officials have announced that japan will be offering a formal proposal in the wto's doha round of multilateral trade negotiations calling for stronger disciplines on exporting members .

doha agriculture negotiations chair , crawford falconer , has proposed eliminating all existing export restrictions by the end of the first year of the implementation of any new agreement .

in addition , he has proposed that any new export restrictions and prohibitions be allowed only for a period of 12 months , extendable up to a maximum of 18 months , in consultations with affected importers .

