medicare is the nation's health insurance program for the aged , disabled , and persons with end stage renal disease .

medicare part a , the hospital insurance program , covers hospital services , post - hospital services , and hospice services .

part b , the supplementary medical insurance program , covers a broad range of complementary medical services , including physician , laboratory , outpatient hospital services , and durable medical equipment .

beneficiaries choosing traditional fee - for - service medicare may receive covered benefits from any qualified provider who participates in the medicare program .

alternatively , beneficiaries eligible for medicare part a and enrolled in part b may choose to enroll in a medicare private plan , under part c of medicare ( the medicare advantage program ) , and receive all required parts a and b benefits ( except hospice services ) through a private plan .

medicare part d provides prescription drug coverage available through either a stand - alone drug plan ( pdp ) , or for most medicare advantage enrollees through their plan .

medicare has offered its beneficiaries enrollment in a private plan as an alternative to the traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) program since the 1970s , not long after the establishment of medicare .

over the years , congress has continued to legislate an increasing number of private plan options for medicare .

in 1982 , congress created medicare's risk contract program , allowing private entities , mostly health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) , to contract with medicare .

in 1997 , congress passed the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba , p.l .

105-33 ) , creating the medicare+choice ( m+c ) program , offering new types of private plans , including private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plans .

the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) changed the name of the program to medicare advantage ( ma ) and further expanded medicare's private plan options with the addition of new regional preferred provider organizations ( ppos ) , among others .

further modifications to the ma program were made in the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 , dra ) and the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) .

recently , congressional attention has turned to the ma program , focusing in large part on pffs plans .

there are a number of reasons for this attention .

first , enrollment in these plans has risen significantly — increasing from 22,344 beneficiaries in april of 2003 to almost 1.5 million four years later .

second , payments to pffs plans are typically higher than payments to other ma plans and higher than expenditures in ffs medicare .

recent analysis conducted by the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) demonstrated that in 2006 , payments to pffs plans averaged 119% of ffs expenditures .

this is in contrast to payments to all ma plans , which averaged 112% of expected ffs expenditures , and payments to hmos , which averaged 110% .

complaints have also been made related to allegedly aggressive and potentially misleading marketing practices of pffs plans , leading some to question medicare's oversight of these plans .

most recently , in an agreement with the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , seven health care organizations representing 90% of the non - group pffs market voluntarily agreed to suspend marketing of their pffs products because of complaints and accusations of deceptive marketing practices .

according to cms , the suspension for a given plan will be lifted when the plan meets specified conditions .

finally , pffs plans are subject to different statutory and administrative requirements than other medicare private plans , specifically those related to access , quality , review of plan premiums , medicare prescription drug benefits , and balance billing .

policy makers and beneficiary advocates are questioning whether beneficiaries fully understand these differences when they enroll in a pffs plan and what their implications are for beneficiary spending , access to providers , and adequacy of benefits .

this report focuses on pffs plans and how they differ from two other widely available ma options , local hmos and regional ppos .

background information related to enrollment and the characteristics of these plans is presented , as well as a discussion surrounding current issues .

appendix provides a side - by - side comparison of the major statutory differences between these three types of plans .

it does not include all provisions of the law , rather only those for which there are significant differences .

some regulatory differences are also included , when applicable .

about 8.5 million of medicare's 44.6 million beneficiaries ( 19% ) are enrolled in a ma plan .

most ma enrollees choose a local hmo .

figure 1 shows enrollment as of april 2007 by plan type , with 5.7 million beneficiaries in local hmos , 1.5 million beneficiaries in pffs plans , 136,000 beneficiaries in regional ppos , and the remaining 1.2 million beneficiaries divided among other types of plans .

however , the proportion of beneficiaries enrolled in each plan type varies by state .

table 1 shows that in some states , the proportion of ma enrollees enrolled in pffs plans may be as low as 0% or 1% or over 90% .

figure 2 shows pffs enrollment over time .

interestingly , pffs enrollment was only 22,344 in april , 2003 , and 31,550 as of april 2004 .

by april 2007 , enrollment jumped to 1.5 million , an increase of over 4,000% in three years .

comparatively , enrollment in all other ma plans was 5.3 million in december 2004 and 6.9 million in april 2007 , an increase of about 30% .

local hmos , regional ppos , and pffs plans , while sharing many characteristics , also have many differences that may be important in determining who enrolls , the average generosity of benefits , and payment and geographic differences .

first , it is important to understand the basic structure of each of these types of plans: local hmo — a local hmo is a public or private entity that meets all of the required solvency and other standards and has a contract with cms to provide required and other health benefits .

members receive services mainly through the plan's network , although plans may allow out - of - network coverage .

hmo's typically serve one county , but are allowed to expand their service area to more than one county if they wish .

each ma participating organization offering a local hmo is required to provide at least one ma plan with qualified part d prescription drug coverage in its service area .

regional ppo — in addition to requirements for local plans , a regional ppo must provide for reimbursement for all covered benefits , regardless of whether the benefits are provided in or out of the network .

at a minimum , a regional ppo must cover an entire region .

it must also have a unified part a and b deductible and a catastrophic cap on out - of - pocket expenses .

like ma participating organizations that offer local hmos , each regional ppo must offer a plan with qualified prescription drug coverage .

pffs plan — in addition to the solvency and other standard requirements for local plans , a pffs plan ( 1 ) must reimburse hospitals , doctors , and other providers at a rate determined by the plan on a fee - for - service basis without placing the providers at financial risk ; ( 2 ) can not vary rates based on utilization relating to the provider ; and ( 3 ) can not restrict the selection of providers among those who are lawfully authorized to provide the covered services and agree to accept the terms and conditions of payment established by the plan .

enrollees in pffs plans are generally not restricted to a network of providers , although pffs plans have the option to form networks .

in contrast to other ma participating organizations , pffs plans are not required to offer qualified prescription drug coverage .

in some aspects , pffs plans are more closely related to traditional fee - for - service medicare , than to other ma private plans .

while almost all ma plans provide a full range of services to enrollees in exchange for a monthly capitated payment , local hmos act as both the insurer and provider of health care services .

to receive benefits , the enrollee must get medical care through a network of providers managed by the plan , with very few exceptions , such as emergency care .

in contrast , pffs plans cover enrollees through a private indemnity health insurance policy .

the insurer reimburses hospitals , doctors , and other providers on a fee - for - service basis at a rate determined by the plan .

the structure of pffs plans allows enrollees greater flexibility in choosing a provider than in other ma plans .

in hmos , for example , beneficiaries typically have to visit their primary care physician and get a referral before seeing a specialist .

in pffs plans , beneficiaries can visit a specialist or any provider , who agrees to the terms and conditions of the plan , without prior authorization .

enrollees can also receive services from providers outside of their service area .

regional ppos operate somewhere in between , in that members can choose in or out - of - network coverage .

members , however , save in out - of - pocket costs when selecting in - network providers .

while regional plans have a low enrollment compared to other types of ma plans , they are included in this analysis because they are a new option with unique requirements under the statutes , and because they may also have exceptions to network requirements .

also , similar to pffs plans , regional ppos are providing access to medicare managed care plans in areas that traditionally have not been served by managed care in the past .

appendix provides a detailed comparison of local hmos , regional ppos , and pffs plans , following the sequence of the social security statues for medicare advantage , including information on residency requirements , information requirements , required benefits , beneficiary financial liability , access to services and networks , quality , payments to plans , premiums , and prescription drugs .

these differences are important in determining the key issues surrounding these plans and their implications for beneficiaries .

the most significant statutory differences are highlighted below .

significant growth in enrollment in pffs plans raises concerns among policy makers because payments to pffs plans are higher than payments to other ma plans and costs in the traditional medicare program .

with enrollment in these plans projected to double over the next 10 years , payments to these plans will increase medicare spending .

furthermore , differences between pffs plans and other ma plans have important implications for beneficiaries , the impact of which are not yet fully understood .

in the coming months , policy makers will want to assess whether the intended benefits associated with participation in these plans outweigh their added costs .

eligibility and enrollment ( §1851 ) residency and service area requirements ( §1851 ( b ) ) information requirements ( §1851 ( d ) ) benefits and beneficiary protections ( §1852 ) required benefits ( §1852 ( a ) ) beneficiary financial liability ( including balance billing ) ( §1852 ( a ) and ( k ) ) supplemental benefits ( §1852 ( a ) ) access to services and networks ( §1852 ( d ) ) quality improvement program / quality measurement reporting ( §1852 ( e ) ) payments to medicare advantage organizations ( §1853 , §1854 and §1858 ) process for determining monthly payments for part a and b services ( §1853 and §1858 ) bids ( §1853 ( a - c ) and ( §1854 ( a ) ) calculation of the benchmark ( §1853 ( a - c ) and ( §1858 ( f ) ) ) adjustments to monthly payments ( §1853 ( a - c ) ) other payment provisions ( §1853 ( d ) ) risk corridors ( §1858 ( c ) ) stabilization fund ( §1858 ( e ) ) essential hospitals ( §1858 ( h ) ) premiums ( §1854 ) monthly premium for required part a and b services ( §1854 ( b ) ) rebates ( §1854 ( b ) ) organization and financial requirements ( §1855 ) state laws ( §1855 ( a ) part d prescription drug benefits for medicare advantage plans ( 1860d ) access to ma prescription drug plans ( 1860d - 1 ) payment for the prescription drug component of the ma plan ( 1860d - 15 ) premiums for the prescription drug component of the ma plan ( 1860d - 13 ) part d enrollment for ma plan enrollees ( §1860d - 1 ) .

