foreign capital inflows are playing an important role in the economy .

such inflows bridge the gap between u.s. supplies and demands for credit , thereby allowing consumers and businesses to finance purchases at interest rates that are lower than they would be without overseas capital inflows .

similarly , capital inflows allow federal , state , and local governments to finance their budget deficits at rates that are lower than they would be otherwise .

these foreign capital inflows allow the nation to support expenditures exceeding its current output level and finance its trade deficit .

a sharp reduction in those inflows likely would complicate domestic efforts at making and conducting economic policies .

to date , the world economy has benefitted from the stimulus provided by the nation's combination of fiscal and monetary policies and a trade deficit .

foreign investors now hold slightly less than 55% of the publicly held and publicly traded u.s. treasury securities , 26% of corporate bonds , and about 12% of u.s. corporate stocks .

the large foreign accumulation of u.s. securities has spurred some observers to argue that this foreign presence in u.s. financial markets increases the risk of a financial crisis , whether as a result of the uncoordinated actions of market participants or by a coordinated withdrawal from u.s. financial markets by foreign investors for economic or political reasons .

concerns are also growing that over the long run u.s. economic policies and the accompanying large deficit in its international trade accounts could have a negative impact on global economic developments , especially for the economically less developed countries .

some observers are concerned that a foreign investor with significant holdings in the united states or a group of foreign investors could engage in an abrupt and large - scale liquidation of dollar - denominated securities , particularly a sell - off of u.s. treasury securities .

these observers argue that the vast sums of dollars held and managed by some foreign governments , termed sovereign wealth funds , raise the prospects of such a coordinated withdrawal , because the funds potentially increase the ability of foreign governments to instigate a rapid withdrawal .

it is uncertain , though , what types of events could provoke a coordinated withdrawal from u.s. securities markets .

indeed , during the 2008-2009 financial crises , dollar - denominated assets were the preferred safe haven investment of foreign investors .

although unlikely , a coordinated withdrawal from u.s. financial markets potentially could be staged by foreign investors for economic or political reasons or it could arise as a result of an uncoordinated correction in market prices .

also , concerns over the ability of the federal government to service its foreign debt and a loss of confidence in the ability of national u.s. policy makers to conduct economic policies that are perceived abroad as prudent and stabilizing could spur some foreign investors to reassess their estimates of the risks involved in holding dollar - denominated assets .

in other cases , international linkages that connect national capital markets could be the conduit through which events in one market are quickly spread to other markets and ignite an abrupt , seemingly uncoordinated , withdrawal of capital .

a liquidation of capital could be limited to one segment of the credit markets as one foreign investor or a group of foreign investors attempted to adjust the composition of their portfolios .

a withdrawal also could mark a major shift in investment strategies by foreign investors as they shifted away from dollar - denominated securities .

short of a financial crisis , events that cause some foreign investors to adjust their portfolios likely would have short - run negative effects on u.s. interest rates and on the international exchange value of the dollar .

however , should a large group of foreign investors make a permanent shift in their strategies to limit or to reduce their purchases of u.s. securities , such actions likely would complicate efforts to finance budget deficits .

given the current mix of economic policies , the loss of capital inflows would affect u.s. interest rates , domestic investment , and the long - term rate of growth of the economy unless there is an accompanying shift in the national rate of saving .

such a loss of capital inflows would be especially troublesome if it occurred during a time when concerns over the rate of growth in the economy were increasing .

during periods when the rate of economic growth is slowing , the federal reserve generally resorts to reducing interest rates to stimulate the economy .

however , the loss of capital inflows would tend to push the federal reserve to raise interest rates to attract more capital inflows .

congress likely would find itself embroiled in any such economic or financial crisis through its direct role in conducting fiscal policy and in its indirect role in the conduct of monetary policy through its supervisory responsibility over the federal reserve .

some observers are also concerned that the financial crisis has damaged the international financial system and raise concerns about the u.s. leadership role .

the rapid expansion of market activity through the consolidation of equity exchanges and the development of complex financial instruments and hybrid securities that are traded across national borders has raised additional concerns that financial innovations have outpaced the efforts of regulators .

some observers argue that improvements in the financial system that arise from greater market efficiencies by spreading risk across national borders may be blunted , because the underlying risks of certain widely traded financial instruments have become more difficult to assess .

some also argue that the recent financial crisis demonstrate the risks that a domestic financial crisis pose for the global economy because such crises can spread across national borders due to the rapid internationalization of financial services .

others note that by expanding into financial activities that were not part of the original core business of financial services , providers have become exposed to new and additional types of risk for which they are not well prepared .

according to the imf , "there is little empirical evidence to date to determine whether cross - border diversification of financial institutions reduces or increases firm - specific or systemic vulnerabilities. .

capital flows are highly liquid , can respond abruptly to changes in economic and financial conditions , and exercise a primary influence on exchange rates and through those rates onto global flows of goods and services .

as indicated in figure 1 , these capital inflows are composed of official inflows , primarily foreign governments' purchases of u.s. treasury securities , and private inflows composed of portfolio investment , which includes foreigners' purchases of u.s. treasury and corporate securities , financial liabilities , and direct investment in u.s. businesses and real estate .

in 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , 2009 , and 2010 , net official inflows exceeded net private inflows .

recently , private capital flows by u.s. citizens shifted from a net outflow of $1.4 trillion in 2007 to a net inflow of $866 billion in 2008 , reflecting the financial turmoil during that period .

net private outflows by u.s. citizens , however , resumed in the 2009 to 2011 period .

during the same period , u.s. official outflows increased from $22 billion in 2007 to $530 billion in 2008 .

in contrast , foreign private inflows of capital dropped from $1.6 trillion in 2007 to $47 billion in 2008 .

during the same period , foreign official inflows increased slightly from $481 billion in 2007 to $487 billion in 2008 .

as a result of these changes , net official flows , or the combination of u.s. and foreign officials flows dropped from a net outflow of $458 billion 2007 to a net inflow of $47 billion in 2008 .

in addition , net private flows increased from a net inflow of $199 billion in 2007 to a net inflow of $581 billion in 2008 .

in 2009 , however , net private inflows dropped to a negative $774 billion , while net official inflows rose to nearly $1 trillion , as indicated in table 1 economists generally attribute the rise in foreign investment in the united states to comparatively favorable returns on investments relative to risk , a surplus of saving in other areas of the world , the well - developed u.s. financial system , and the overall stability of the u.s. economy .

these net capital inflows ( inflows net of outflows ) bridge the gap in the united states between the amount of credit demanded and the domestic supply of funds , likely keeping u.s. interest rates below the level they would have reached without the foreign capital .

these capital inflows also allow the united states to support expenditures exceeding its current output level and finance its trade deficit , because foreigners are willing to "lend" to the united states in the form of exchanging goods , represented by u.s. imports , for such u.s. assets as stocks , bonds , and u.s. treasury securities .

such inflows , however , generally tends to put upward pressure on the dollar , which tends to push up the price of u.s. exports relative to its imports and to reduce the overall level of exports .

furthermore , foreign investment in the u.s. economy drains off some of the income earned on the foreign - owned assets that otherwise would accrue to the u.s. economy as foreign investors repatriate their earnings back home .

this section analyzes four possible strategies a single large foreign investor or a group of foreign investors could employ to reduce or withdraw entirely their holdings of financial assets in the united states .

these strategies include a rapid liquidation of u.s. treasury securities , a shift in the makeup of foreign investors' portfolios among various dollar - denominated assets , a rapid shift from dollar - denominated assets to assets denominated in other currencies , and a slow shift in the makeup of future accumulations of assets away from dollar - denominated assets to assets denominated in currencies other than the dollar .

it is not uncommon for investors to adjust the composition of their portfolios as economic and financial conditions change .

given the recent surge in foreign investors' accumulation of dollars and dollar - denominated assets , it is not unreasonable to expect that from time to time they will also attempt to adjust the composition of their portfolios between corporate stocks and bonds , u.s. treasury securities , and direct investments in u.s. businesses and real estate .

a long - term shift away from dollar - denominated assets , however , could have a negative effect on the long - term rate of investment , productively , and the rate of growth in the u.s. economy .

such a shift in the value of the dollar would tend over the long run to benefit the exported goods sector of the economy , but it could also complicate efforts to conduct domestic economic policies .

although there are numerous other currencies that might attract investors , the dollar continues to be the most widely traded currency around the globe , which means it likely will retain its desirability as an investment asset and as a medium of exchange for some time to come .

also , the vast and deep capital markets in the united states combined with the highly developed banking and legal systems continue to make investments in u.s. financial assets attractive to foreign investors , despite short - run changes in perceptions of risk or economic performance .

should a foreign investor with large financial holdings in the united states or a group of investors attempt to liquidate abruptly their holdings of assets such as treasury securities , they would experience a severe loss in the value of those assets first as they attempted to sell their large holds in the market and then as they attempted to convert their dollar holdings into other currencies .

as a result of these losses , it seems unlikely that a foreign investor with large holdings or a group of foreign investors would attempt to liquidate their securities quickly .

a more likely course of action would be for foreign investors to adjust the composition of their portfolios slowly over time .

if only one or a few foreign investors engaged in a strategy to liquidate part of their u.s. financial holdings , their actions alone are likely to have a limited impact on the economy over the short run , because market forces would be expected to adjust to attract other foreign investors to replace those who had withdrawn .

however , if a broad range of foreign investors , for whatever reason , decided to reduce their holdings of dollar - denominated assets , interest rates in the united states likely would rise in response to market forces that would place them above the level where they would have been if the foreign capital inflows had remained at their higher levels .

a higher level of interest rates would lead some firms to reduce their level of borrowing and investing and spur some households to curtail their consumption , especially of such interest sensitive products as housing and automobiles , which usually are financed over long periods of time .

over the long run , the lower level of investment by firms could be expected to result in a lower rate of growth in productivity and , therefore , in a lower rate of growth in the economy .

in addition , if foreign investors were to attempt an abrupt adjustment to the composition of their portfolios that disrupted the financial markets or the broader economy , the federal reserve would not be expected to stand idly by on the sidelines .

in such circumstances , the federal reserve has shown some agility in intervening on its own to stabilize credit markets and to move in coordination with other central banks .

on december 11 , 2007 , for instance , the federal reserve decreased the federal funds rate and the discount rate on loans between banks by a quarter of a percentage point to ease credit conditions .

then , on december 12 , 2007 , the federal reserve announced that it would make $40 billion and perhaps more available to commercial banks in short - term loans to ease domestic liquidity issues and another $24 billion available to european central banks that had become so concerned about potential losses from u.s. mortgage - backed securities that they had begun to hoard cash and were unwilling to make loans to each other except at unusually high interest rate premiums .

such willingness on the part of the federal reserve to intervene in the financial markets to ensure stability likely makes a prolonged financial crisis arising from a liquidation of financial assets by one foreign investor or a group of foreign investors unlikely , even if those investors are foreign governments .

