since 1973 , 84 members of congress — 69 representatives and 15 senators — have died in office .

when a sitting member dies , the house and senate carry out a number of actions based on chamber rules , statutes , and long - standing practices .

some congressional practices related to the death of a sitting member predate the national legislature established by the constitution .

on october 23 , 1775 , the continental congress , sitting in philadelphia , was informed that peyton randolph , a delegate from virginia and president of the continental congress , "suddenly departed this life" the day before , and resolved that its members would "attend his funeral as mourners , with a crape round their left arm," and "continue in mourning for the space of one month. .

a committee of three delegates was appointed to "superintend the funeral," and the reverend jacob duché , rector of st. peter's episcopal and christ churches was requested to "prepare a proper discourse to be delivered at the funeral. .

during the first congress ( 1789-1791 ) , the first instances of the death of a sitting senator and representative occurred .

senator william grayson of virginia died on march 12 , 1790 .

no direct mention of the event is recorded in the senate journal or the annals of congress .

on june 1 , 1790 , the house was informed of the death of representative theodorick bland of virginia .

the house ordered the virginia delegation to "be a committee to superintend the funeral , and that the house attend the same. .

the next day , it was ordered that the house members go into mourning for one month , "by the usual method of wearing crape around the left arm. .

in the 19 th century , congress adopted the practice of paying some of the expenses of funeral services for sitting members .

services were sometimes held in the house or senate chamber .

on february 27 , 1838 , for example , funeral services for representative jonathan cilley of maine were held in the hall of the house , with the house and senate in attendance .

when services or interment were not held in washington , dc , it was the practice of both chambers to appoint a committee of members to escort the remains of a deceased colleague to their final destination .

on june 28 , 1847 , the house and senate each voted to accompany the remains of senator john fairfield of maine "from his house to the depot , where they were to be delivered to" representative franklin clark , who accompanied them to maine .

by the 41 st congress ( 1869-1871 ) , it had "for a long time been a custom to appoint a joint committee to attend the remains of a deceased senator or member to his home , as in the instance of senator daniel s. morton , of minnesota , on july 14 , 1870. .

in contemporary times , chamber rules and statutes set out some of the congressional response to the death of a sitting member , and former members who served as speaker .

evidence from the senate journal , house precedents , and other historical documents shows that some long - standing observances , such as adjourning briefly as a mark of respect to the deceased , appointing member delegations to attend funerals of deceased colleagues , or paying the costs of a funeral from public funds , may be employed .

other customs , such as wearing crape , holding services in the house or senate chambers , or appointing members to escort the body back to the home state , have not been observed for at least several decades .

in addition to some evolutionary changes in institutional patterns , it appears that contemporary congressional response is affected by a number of external factors including the following: circumstances of the member's death ; preferences of the deceased member , or the member's family , regarding funeral services ; whether congress is in session when the member dies ; pending congressional business at the time of the member's death ; and events external to congress .

consequently , it appears that congressional response to the death of a sitting member could be characterized as a set of actions that are determined in detail at or around the time of the death , in response to an array of factors .

generally , these actions fall into five categories: floor announcement or acknowledgment ; resolution of condolence ; funeral ; deceased member's office , staff , and survivor benefits ; and publication of memorials .

congressional recognition of the death of a sitting member occurs principally on the floor of the chamber in which the deceased served .

specific actions are contingent on whether congress is in session , the business pending before the chamber , and the circumstances of the member's death .

the first resolution of mourning for a sitting senator appears to have been adopted in 1806 .

although the house had taken other , ad hoc actions in the early years of the nation , formal resolutions adopted in response to the death of a sitting member date back at least to 1827 .

house precedents and the senate journal typically refer to resolutions designating the use of crape or other badges of mourning , and authorizing members to attend funeral services .

in the house it was typical to adjourn as a mark of respect for the deceased member .

house resolutions that included expressions of condolences to the family of the deceased member appear to have been considered in some cases dating to 1864 , before becoming more routine beginning around 1899 .

since the earliest days of the republic , some of the expenses of holding funerals of sitting members , or the procurement of cemetery monuments , have been defrayed in part from public funds .

from 1789-1801 , it appears that the travel allowances of deceased members of the house were applied to funeral costs .

when delegate narsworthy hunter of mississippi territory died on march 11 , 1802 , a week after the seventh congress ( 1801-1803 ) convened , the practice of providing a funeral at public expense was first adopted by the house .

on june 5 , 1809 , the senate adopted a resolution "that a sum not exceeding one hundred and fifty dollars be applied out of the contingent fund for placing a neat slab or monument with a suitable inscription" over the tomb of senator francis malbone of rhode island , who died on march 4 .

on june 15 , 1809 , the senate authorized the secretary of the senate to pay the expenses of senator malbone's funeral , upon allowance and certification "by the committee of arrangement. .

paying for member funerals with public funds has not been without controversy .

in an 1820 remembrance of delegate hunter's funeral , representative john randolph of virginia noted that since 1802 , the practice of funding member funerals had been "observed and abused. .

in 1848 , the subject came up twice within a few weeks .

contrary to precedent , the tenor of those discussions was that it was unusual to pay the expenses of a member's funeral except when it was held in washington , dc , and that the cost of such ceremonies amounted to an average of $1,500 .

in 1895 , the senate considered s. 236 , to provide for disposition of the remains of deceased members of the house and senate who died at the capitol during sessions .

upon the death of a sitting member in the district of columbia , the measure would have provided for a committee of members from the chamber in which the deceased served to prepare the body for transport to family or friends .

the measure provided for a specially appointed sergeant at arms to accompany the body to its final destination .

s. 236 would have authorized payment for the preparation and transport of a deceased member and prohibited payment on any other related expenses .

in introductory remarks , the bill's sponsor , senator william alfred peffer of kansas , noted that the costs associated with member funerals were rising and that the services themselves were "not usually conducted reverently and with that outward deportment which ... ought to characterize the bearing of eminent persons who accompany the remains of a public man. .

s. 236 was reported by the committee on civil service , but the senate took no further action .

finally , some concern was expressed in 1906 after representative robert adams jr. of pennsylvania committed suicide and left a letter for speaker joseph cannon indicating that he would accept payment of his funeral expenses , but asked that the house not appoint a committee or hold memorial services .

in contemporary practice , as described below , both chambers may pay for funeral services for members who die in office .

further , if a deceased member is buried in the so - called congressional cemetery in washington , dc , the sergeant at arms of the house or senate , as appropriate , is authorized to pay for a granite monument with suitable inscriptions for the grave site .

 table 3 provides examples of senate observances held to mark the passing of 28 senators who died during their senate service .

each senator listed meets one or more of the following criteria: service as president pro tempore of the senate at the time of their death ; laid in state in the rotunda of the united states capitol ; inclusion as one of the "famous nine" senators designated by the senate at various times , and who died in office ; or 14 of the sitting senators whose passing was observed with services on the senate floor during the 20 th century .

table 3 also provides a selection of actions approved by congress or adopted by the senate to honor the deceased senators .

observances held soon after a senator's death were sometimes held pursuant to senate resolution in the case of services in the senate , and concurrent resolution or bicameral agreement in the case of lying in state in the capitol rotunda .

in other instances , observances were held in the senate or capitol without formal legislative action .

regardless of the formal authorization processes , it is not possible to ascertain how those decisions were made ; in each case , however , it is arguable that some of the senators expressed advanced interest in various observances to mark their deaths , or their families or staff expressed interest or approval of senate actions after their deaths .

it appears likely that any future senate observances could be based on the following: past senate practices ; the wishes a senator expressed prior to his or her demise ; family considerations ; the intended locations of any observances ; pending congressional business at the time of the member's death ; and events external to congress .

where procedures for observances in the capitol rotunda appear to be well established , the senate floor has not been used for observances related to the death of a sitting senator in more than 50 years .

questions related to security , crowd control , and the preservation of furniture , artwork , and other fixtures may arise if proposed observances include exercises in the senate chamber .

in addition to any observances that might be held in washington , dc , services may be held in the state a deceased senator represented , and might include the following activities: public or private viewing or calling hours ; lying in honor in the state capitol , land grant university , or significant federal facility created during the senator's term of office ; public or private funeral or memorial services ; funeral procession ; and interment or inurnment .

as with washington , dc - based observances , senate participation will likely be determined in consultation with the family of the deceased .

