the conservation reserve program is a federal program originally intended to remove highly erodible croplands from production for periods of 10 to 15 years .

participants in the program agree to remove the land from production and follow an approved conservation plan .

the program was established by the food security act of 1985 .

originally enacted to be in effect through 1990 , it has been extended repeatedly .

the most recent extension was through the end of 2007 , but legislation proposed in the 110 th congress would extend it through 2012 .

participants in the program receive annual payments based on the acreage they have enrolled in the program .

early termination of the crp contract requires repayment of all amounts the participant has received .

the applicable statute refers to the annual payments as "rental payments. .

rental real estate income is generally not subject to self - employment tax even when received in connection with a trade or business .

however , early in the program , using a revenue ruling written regarding a prior agricultural program , the internal revenue service took the position that crp annual payments received by farmers were to be included as self - employment income along with other farm income and , therefore , subject to self - employment tax .

the payments were treated by the irs as rental income when received by non - farmers .

over the years , the irs has expanded its position regarding crp payments and self - employment taxes .

in december 2006 , the irs issued a notice of a proposed revenue ruling that takes the position that virtually all crp annual rental payments are subject to self - employment taxes .

the notice has been responded to by congress , as well as by others .

this report outlines the evolution of the irs's position along with relevant case law and legislative history .

it also provides comparisons to treatment of income from other sources where that income has some similarity to crp payments .

taxpayers and the internal revenue service have generally agreed that crp payments must be included in gross income and are subject to income tax .

however , there has been conflict regarding whether the payments should be considered income from farming and , therefore , subject to self - employment tax .

the self - employment tax rate is 15.3% .

many participants would prefer that their crp payments be excluded from self - employment tax treatment .

other individuals may want to increase their eligibility for social security benefits by including the payments in self - employment income .

the irs , to varying degrees , has treated the payments as includible self - employment income .

both the internal revenue service and the tax court have repeatedly looked at crp payments to determine whether they should be included in self - employment income or excluded under the rental income exclusion .

in so doing , neither has looked at the requirement that all payments received by participants , whether as annual rental payments or as cost - share payments for the conservation plan , generally must be repaid if the contract is terminated before it expires .

termination may occur if the participant violates a term or condition of the contract .

termination also occurs if owner / operators transfer their rights and interests in the contracted land unless the transferee agrees to assume the contract .

however , repayment is not required in two situations: ( 1 ) "the land is purchased by or for the united states fish and wildlife service" or ( 2 ) the secretary of agriculture and the new owner / operator agree to modifications that are in line with the program's objectives .

assuming that their tax returns were filed in compliance with the irs's position on crp annual payments , participants paid both income and self - employment tax on the annual payments that must be repaid if the contract is terminated .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) provides a possible income tax solution for those who have included amounts in taxable income and , after the close of that tax year , repaid all or part of the amount previously received .

in this situation , a taxpayer may be allowed to deduct the amount repaid in the year it is repaid .

if the amount is over $3,000 , the irc allows taxpayers to compare the income tax savings from the deduction to the income tax savings that would have occurred had the amount not been included in income in the year it was received , and recoup the larger tax savings .

there does not , however , appear to be a similar provision for recapturing the self - employment tax paid on those previously taxed but repaid amounts .

participants who are actively engaged in farming outside of their crp land may be able to recoup both the income tax and self - employment tax paid on the crp annual payments that must be repaid after termination .

if the participant's net income from farming is equal to or greater than the amount repaid , it appears that the self - employment tax might be reduced in the repayment year to the same degree that it was increased in the years in which the crp payments were included in income .

if , however , the participant had no self - employment income other than the crp payments , the self - employment tax for the year of repayment would be zero , but this would not recapture self - employment tax paid in earlier years .

thus , though some participants who must repay crp annual payments may be able to recoup some or all of the self - employment taxes paid in previous years , such recoupment is not certain for all participants .

amending prior years' tax returns to remove the crp payments does not provide a way to recoup either income or self - employment tax .

crp payments are received under a "claim of right. .

at the time the payments were received , the taxpayer had an unqualified right to the payment .

as such , the payments cannot be removed from income for the tax year in which they were received , even if they are later repaid .

the requirement to repay all crp payments that were received raises at least two issues .

first is the equitable issue regarding imposing self - employment tax on the annual payments but providing no sure means for that self - employment tax to be recouped if the money must be returned .

second is the issue of whether money that must be repaid if the land does not remain out of production for the duration of the contract can reasonably be considered money paid for services rather than money paid for agreeing to refrain from using the land commercially .

it is easy to understand the irs's move to treat all crp payments as self - employment income subject to self - employment tax .

doing so establishes a bright - line rule that does not require interpretation of facts and circumstances on a case - by - case basis .

such a rule is easier for the irs to enforce and easier for taxpayers to follow .

this is similar to the bright - line rule that treats income from hotels and motels as self - employment income , but treats longer - term real estate rentals as rental income .

a bright - line rule for crp payments might be based on a determination by congress that the services required under the crp contracts are significant and payment for them is included in the crp "rent. .

this would eliminate the need to examine the services provided on a case - by - case basis .

further , it would eliminate any arguable need to examine whether the participant was engaged in the trade or business of farming .

the crp payments would be considered income from self - employment because they included compensation for significant services .

with this bright - line rule , there would be no need to consider the extent of the services provided by the recipient on a case - by - case basis .

a different bright - line rule could be established if congress were to choose to do so: a bright - line rule that crp payments are to be treated as rent that is not subject to self - employment tax .

as evidenced by bills repeatedly introduced in congress , some members of congress have been aware that the irs was treating some crp payments as self - employment income , but , thus far , congress has not chosen to act to change that .

if congress now chooses to examine the possibility of explicitly excluding some or all crp payments from self - employment income , it may want to look at the services required under the crp contracts and conservation plans .

it may also want to determine actual fair market rental values for lands similar to those enrolled in the crp to determine whether crp payments exceed those values .

the tax court and the sixth circuit court disagreed regarding the significance of the services provided by the taxpayer in fulfilling the obligations under the crp contract .

a survey of the activities of participants might provide information as to the extent and significance of services provided by participants .

it is possible that these may be greater in the first year than in subsequent years and that services may be more significant for some types of enrolled lands and conservation plans than for others .

congress might choose to determine to what extent participants must provide significant services on an ongoing basis over the life of the contract .

if it were to determine that there were significant services in the first year of a contract , but negligible ones in subsequent years , it might choose to treat crp payments differently in the first year than in subsequent ones .

modifying the way in which the payments are reported to the participant and the irs would allow the nature of the payments to be clear and aid the irs's enforcement efforts .

of course , congress could decide to exclude the crp payments from self - employment income in all years even if the services required in the first year were disproportionate to the services required in later years .

similarly , if congress determined that some types of land or conservation plans required more ongoing services , it could designate that all crp payments for those lands or plans would be includible in self - employment income .

in either case , the statute could be modified to explicitly define the nature of the payments received and their tax treatment .

the correlation between the annual crp rental payments and the fair market rental rates for similar land might be another consideration .

the average rental payments for all crp property is $51 per acre , but payments vary depending upon the type of land , its location , and the particular type of enrollment .

even if congress finds that the crp payments are no more than the rental income that might be received from a third party who would use the land , it could still determine that the services provided were sufficient that the payments must be considered self - employment income .

however , it might conclude that payments that were at or below fair market rental values could not be considered to include compensation for services , thus shielding the payments from self - employment tax .

conversely , if it should find that the payments made by the crp were greater than the fair market rental rate , it could consider that a clear indication that the crp payments included compensation for services and thus clearly subject to self - employment tax .

congress may choose to enact legislation that explicitly excludes some or all crp payments from self - employment income .

taking no legislative action would leave the issue up to the irs and the courts .

if congress chooses not to act to exclude any or all crp payments from self - employment income , it may want to consider whether some provision should be made to allow recoupment of self - employment taxes paid whenever a contract is terminated and the participant is required to return all payments received .

the food security act of 1985 under the food security act of 1985 , the secretary of agriculture was to "enter into contracts with owners and operators of farms and ranches containing highly erodible cropland. .

other lands could be included in the program if they "pose[d] an off - farm environmental threat or ... a threat of continued degradation of productivity due to soil salinity. .

the contracts could not be for more than 15 years nor less than 10 .

no more than 45 million acres could be enrolled in the program .

in the first year — crop year 1986 — the act required enrollment of at least 5 million acres .

each year , through 1989 , the minimum was increased by 10 million acres .

for the final year , the minimum was increased to 40 million acres .

one - eighth of the land under contract was to be devoted to trees .

under the program , owner / operators were required to follow a plan , approved by their local conservation district , to convert the enrolled land to a less intensive use according to a planned schedule and to establish an approved vegetative cover on the land .

they were generally prohibited from using the land for agricultural purposes , and could not use the forage from the land commercially , whether for harvesting , grazing , or any other commercial purpose .

in return , the owner / operators were to be reimbursed for half of the cost of the conservation measures when such cost - sharing was "appropriate and in the public interest. .

additionally , they were to be paid an "annual rental payment" in cash or commodities .

however , full refunds of both the rental payments and the cost - share payments could be required in two situations: ( 1 ) violation of the contract sufficient to warrant termination of the contract , or ( 2 ) transfer of the owner / operator's rights and interests in the land to another who chose not to assume all the obligations of the contract .

in case of termination , the act specified that the repayment was to be with interest .

partial repayment might be required if the contract had been violated but the secretary of agriculture did not find termination appropriate .

the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 this act extended the conservation reserve program through 1995 and expanded the types of land eligible for the program .

in addition to highly erodible croplands , eligible land included some marginal pasture lands as well as otherwise ineligible croplands if their continued use for agricultural production created certain threats to water or the environment .

otherwise ineligible croplands could also be enrolled if they were "newly - created , permanent grass sod waterways , or ... contour grass sod strips established and maintained as part of an approved conservation plan. .

croplands that would "be devoted to ... newly established living snow fences , permanent wildlife habitat , windbreaks , shelterbelts , or filterstrips devoted to trees or shrubs" could also be enrolled in the program .

the 1990 act also modified the duties of contract holders .

rather than requiring vegetative cover to be established on all enrolled lands , the 1990 act allowed owner / operators to establish "water cover for the enhancement of wildlife" so long as it did not include commercial fish ponds or ponds used to water livestock or irrigate crops .

water cover was allowed in addition to vegetative cover .

for some contracts entered into after the date of enactment , the act prohibited owner / operators from producing agricultural commodities on their unenrolled highly erodible land if that land was purchased after the date of enactment and had not previously been used to produce nonforage agricultural commodities .

however , "alley cropping" of agricultural commodities could be allowed in conjunction with enrolled land that was planted in hardwood trees .

one - eighth of the land enrolled between 1991 and 1995 was to be devoted to either trees or "shrubs or other noncrop vegetation or water that may provide a permanent habitat for wildlife including migratory waterfowl. .

owner / operators holding contracts predating the 1990 act were allowed to convert highly erodible lands from vegetative cover to "hardwood trees , windbreaks , shelterbelts , or wildlife corridors," but were required to participate in the forest stewardship program .

in some cases , owner / operators could choose to convert the land to wetlands rather than trees .

the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 the 1996 act extended the conservation reserve program through 2002 .

it also reduced the maximum enrollment to 36.4 million acres at any one time .

it did not expand the list of land eligible for enrollment nor modify the duties of the owner / operators .

it did , however , allow for early termination of some contracts predating january 1 , 1995 .

the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 the 2002 act extended the conservation reserve program through 2007 .

the purpose of the program was revised to include conservation of the eligible land's wildlife resources as well as soil and water resources .

maximum enrollment was increased to 39.2 million acres .

the act expanded the definition of eligible lands to include otherwise ineligible cropland that was part of a field where more than half of the field was enrolled as a buffer and the remainder could not feasibly be farmed .

the act also established a pilot program for wetlands and buffers .

wetlands were eligible only if they had been cropped in 3 out of the last 10 years .

to be eligible for enrollment , buffers had to be contiguous to the wetlands and used to protect the wetlands .

so long as the total acreage of the wetland and its buffers was no more than 40 acres , buffers could be up to three times the area of the wetland or 150 feet on each side , whichever was larger .

owners and operators of the enrolled wetlands were required to fulfill the same duties as those with other eligible lands , but were also required to restore the hydrology as much as possible and establish a vegetative cover , which could include water - based vegetation .

the 2007 "farm bill" h.r .

2419 is commonly referred to as the "farm bill. .

the senate passed the bill with amendments late in 2007 , and the bill is now in conference .

the amendments include provisions for the conservation reserve program that were found in an earlier senate bill .

this act , if passed , would extend the conservation reserve program through 2012 .

it would expand the purpose of the program to include conservation and improvement of pollinator habitat resources .

it authorizes enrollment of several types of previously ineligible lands .

marginal pasture land and hay land would be eligible if devoted to appropriate native vegetation , so long as the land would "contribute to the restoration of a long - leaf pine forest or other declining forest ecosystem. .

the pilot program for wetlands and buffers would continue , but would add two additional types of land: ( 1 ) shallow water areas previously used as a "commercial pond - raised aqua - culture operation" and ( 2 ) agricultural drainage water treatment designed to remove nitrogen , so long as the flow comes from a row crop agricultural drainage system .

eligible buffers would include those around a shallow water area as well as those around a wetland .

the duties of owner / operators of land in the pilot program would remain the same ; however , acceptable vegetative cover would include "bottomland hardwoods , cypress , and other appropriate tree species in shallow water areas. .

