the united states has grave concerns about the proliferation threat posed by iran's pursuit of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons , ballistic missiles , and advanced conventional weapons .

the united states has passed laws and used sanctions to deter countries such as russia , china , and north korea from providing related technologies to iran .

the iran nonproliferation act of 2000 ( ina , p.l .

106-178 ) added two new provisions to the existing laws: it widened some of the sanctions applicable to foreign persons , and , in section 6 , contained a ban on u.s. government payments to russia in connection with the international space station unless the u.s. president makes a determination that russia is taking steps to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , and ballistic and cruise missiles , to iran .

this provision raised difficulties regarding u.s. access to the international space station when president bush in 2001 cancelled nasa's planned crew return vehicle ( crv ) , which was to act as a "lifeboat" for the astronauts on the iss , leaving them dependent on the soyuz .

the president's announcement in 2004 that the space shuttle fleet would be retired in 2010 further increased that dependence .

on january 14 , 2004 , president bush made a major space policy address directing nasa to focus its activities on returning humans to the moon and eventually sending them to mars .

inspired in part by the destruction of the space shuttle columbia the previous year , his "vision for space exploration" included retiring the space shuttle in 2010 .

the president said the united states would fulfill its commitments to its space station partners to finish construction of the iss , for which the shuttle was the only vehicle capable .

at the time president bush made his "vision" speech , the space shuttle fleet was shut down , while a review of the columbia disaster determined the cause and necessary safety measures to be taken .

transporting astronauts to and from the iss was carried out only in russian soyuz space vehicles until the shuttle discovery returned to flight in july 2005 .

in addition , the cancellation of nasa's planned crv left the iss dependent on the soyuz as a "lifeboat" for return of crew members in case of an emergency , since the shuttle could not be permanently attached to the iss because of power demands .

russia expected to be paid for the soyuz lifeboat service beginning in 2006 .

retirement of the shuttle in 2010 would leave the united states without capability to transport astronauts to the iss until a new vehicle is developed ( as contemplated for the moon / mars mission ) .

transport to and from the iss will again have to rely on soyuz in the interim .

because of these developments , nasa applied to the congress for an exemption from the ina that would allow it to contract with russian space entities for use of the soyuz for iss missions .

the response was the iran nonproliferation amendments act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-112 ) .

following president bush's "vision" plan , nasa has begun designing spacecraft for resuming flights to the moon , and has indicated that such vehicles would also be available for missions to the iss .

it has also continued flights of the space shuttle to the iss , and plans enough flights to finish the iss before the shuttle is retired in 2010 .

under the exemption provided in p.l .

109-112 , nasa has also contracted with russian space entities to continue astronaut flights to and from the iss .

however , the exemption runs out in 2012 .

on april 11 , 2008 , nasa administrator michael griffin submitted a proposed amendment to inksna that would extend the exemption for soyuz flights for the life of the iss , or until the moon flight vehicle , or a commercial crew transport vehicle , is fully operational .

the exemption would not be extended for the russian progress cargo vehicle .

in a letter to chairman udall of the subcommittee on space and aeronautics , committee on science and technology , and to senator biden , chairman of the senate committee on foreign relations , griffin said that fabrication of soyuz vehicles requires 36 months , so that nasa must contract with russian entities in 2008 for vehicles to be available in 2012 .

extension of the inksna exemptions would have to be enacted before such contracting could take place .

on june 9 , senator biden introduced by request s. 3103 , the international space station payments act of 2008 , incorporating the measures requested by nasa .

on september 23 , the bill was reported out of the senate foreign relations committee .

on july 24 the house foreign affairs and science and technology committees reported by voice vote h.r .

6574 , the united states - russian federation nuclear cooperation agreement act of 2008 .

title iii of h.r .

6574 , as reported , would extend exemption of payments until july 1 , 2016 , or until a u.s. flight vehicle is operational .

like s. 3103 , it would not have extended payments for progress vehicles .

the u.s. - russian civilian nuclear cooperation agreement was withdrawn from congressional consideration by the president on september 8 , 2008 .

on september 25 , representative tom feeney introduced bill h.r .

7062 , which was referred to the house foreign affairs and house science and technology committees .

this bill contains provisions that authorize extraordinary payments to the russian space agency for use of the soyuz before july 1 , 2016 , notwithstanding the inksna restrictions .

the waiver provisions are included in h.r .

2638 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) .

section 125 of the act amends p.l .

106-178 to set the date of expiration for waiver authority to july 1 , 2016 .

as in 2005 , an amendment would be needed before payments could be made to russia since the president has not made a determination pursuant to section 6 ( b ) of the inksna regarding russian nonproliferation policy or proliferation activities to iran , north korea or syria .

this is widely believed to be because the president would be unable to certify an absence of proliferation activities by russian entities to these countries .

the 2006 director of national intelligence report to congress on wmd acquisition says that "russian entities have supplied a variety of ballistic missile - related goods and technical know - how to china , iran , india , and north korea .

iran's earlier success in gaining technology and materials from russian entities and continuing assistance by such entities , probably supports iranian efforts to develop new longer - range missiles and increases tehran's self - sufficiency in missile production. .

in the past five years , after details about iran's clandestine nuclear activities came to light , russia has stepped up cooperation with the united states and other countries negotiating over iran's nuclear program .

russia has insisted on iaea safeguards on any transfers to iran's civilian nuclear reactor at bushehr and has delivered fuel to bushehr beginning in december 2007 , on condition that the resulting spent fuel will be returned to russia .

russia has also invited iran to participate in its newly established international uranium enrichment center at angarsk , as an alternative to an indigenous iranian enrichment capability .

the bush administration has supported this approach and since 2006 no longer objects to russia's building the bushehr nuclear power plant in iran .

president bush , most recently at the april 2008 summit in sochi , has praised russian president putin for his "leadership" in offering a solution to the iranian nuclear negotiations .

russia has been only reluctantly supportive of u.n. security council resolutions imposing penalties , preferring a primarily diplomatic solution to the crisis .

