persons with physical disabilities , intellectual or developmental disabilities , or mental illnesses may face difficulty in finding suitable housing , together with supportive services ( often referred to as person - directed or consumer - directed services ) , in which they can live as active members of their community .

for individuals with physical disabilities , it may be difficult to find rental units that are accessible , and some prospective residents with disabilities may face discrimination in their search for housing .

zoning laws may also prevent the construction of homes where persons with disabilities live together .

in addition , the affordability of housing and services may be an issue due to lower participation in the workforce and lower incomes .

individuals with disabilities have lower employment rates than those without disabilities , which may be the result of factors like employer attitudes and insufficient or improper job training .

insufficient income can put the costs of in - home care and supportive services out of reach , and state funding of home and community - based services through medicaid varies by state .

as a result of these limitations , among other causes , persons with disabilities may have difficulty finding housing , and may live in restricted settings such as nursing homes , psychiatric hospitals , or board and care homes rather than living independently .

individuals with disabilities not in such facilities may still live in group homes or small multifamily housing developments dedicated to persons with disabilities instead of on their own in the community .

however , national recognition of the need for appropriate housing for persons with disabilities gained support after the 1999 supreme court decision in the case of olmstead v. l.c .

in that case , two women who had spent years in a psychiatric hospital argued that their institutionalization constituted discrimination under the americans with disabilities act .

the supreme court agreed , finding that "[s]tates are required to provide community - based treatment for persons with mental disabilities when the state's treatment professionals determine that such placement is appropriate , and the placement can be reasonably accommodated. .

shortly after the ruling in olmstead , on february 1 , 2001 , president bush announced the "new freedom initiative," an effort through multiple federal agencies , in cooperation with the states , to ensure full participation in society of persons with disabilities .

part of the new freedom initiative was an executive order implementing the olmstead decision to ensure that all people with disabilities , not just those with mental illnesses , benefit from community - based treatment .

however , for many states and communities , it may be difficult to achieve the goal of treatment in a community environment without the availability of accessible and affordable housing .

the federal government makes funds available to finance subsidized rental housing for persons with disabilities primarily through the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

the section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities program is the only federal program that funds supportive housing exclusively for persons with disabilities .

however , the section 811 program is not the only source of funds to provide housing units for persons with disabilities .

over the years , a number of other hud programs have been used to fund housing units dedicated to persons with disabilities , and many of those units are still in service .

these programs include the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly program , public housing , the project - based section 8 rental assistance program , and the section 8 voucher program .

federal block grant programs — the community development block grant and home investment partnerships program — have also been a source of funds used by states and local communities to develop and rehabilitate housing for persons with disabilities .

another source of funds is the low income housing tax credit , administered by the internal revenue service , through which state governments have the discretion to prioritize housing for persons with disabilities .

this report describes how federal funds are used to develop housing designated for persons with disabilities .

it also discusses recent funding for the section 811 program and current issues surrounding housing for persons with disabilities , including mixed financing arrangements , worst case housing needs , and persons with disabilities who are homeless .

this report discusses federal programs that provide funds to develop affordable rental housing units specifically for persons with disabilities .

individuals with disabilities may also live in housing that has not been specifically designed for their needs , however .

the fair housing act ( fha ) , enacted as part of the civil rights act of 1968 , contains provisions that are meant to ensure that persons with disabilities may obtain accessible rental housing even in facilities not specifically designed for them .

the fha was created to prevent discrimination in the provision of housing based on "race , color , religion , and national origin. .

in 1988 , the fair housing amendments act ( p.l .

100-430 ) amended the fha to prevent discrimination based on "handicap. .

the fair housing act defines a "handicap" as ( 1 ) having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities , ( 2 ) having a record of such impairment , or ( 3 ) being perceived as having such impairment .

in addition to prohibiting discrimination against persons based on handicap , the fha imposes affirmative duties on housing providers .

under the fair housing amendments act of 1988 , if a landlord fails to follow certain requirements to make housing accessible to persons with disabilities , it is considered discrimination .

in the area of new construction , beginning 30 months after implementation of p.l .

100-430 ( in 1988 ) , it became unlawful for multifamily housing developers to design and construct housing of four or more units that fails to ( 1 ) have common areas that are accessible and useable by persons with disabilities , ( 2 ) have doors wide enough to accommodate wheelchairs , and ( 3 ) include units with accessible routes through the unit ; bathrooms and kitchens that are wheelchair accessible ; electrical outlets , light switches and thermostats that are accessible ; bathrooms with reinforcements where grab bars may be installed ; and kitchens and baths that may be maneuvered through with a wheelchair .

for units in older facilities , or in units not covered by the fha , the fair housing amendments act recognized that modifications to units may be necessary to make them accessible to persons with disabilities .

under the law , it is discriminatory for landlords to refuse to allow tenants to make physical changes to the premises — referred to as "reasonable modifications" — where changes are necessary to afford tenants full enjoyment of the premises .

in addition , the law gives tenants the right to ask their landlords for "reasonable accommodations" in the rules , policies , practices , or services that ordinarily apply to tenants living in rental property .

it is considered discrimination under the fha for a landlord to refuse to make a reasonable accommodation where it is necessary to give residents with disabilities an equal opportunity to use and enjoy their dwelling unit .

reasonable modifications and reasonable accommodations are described below .

this report discusses several hud housing programs that designate housing units for persons with disabilities .

these are the section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities program , public housing , and the tenant - and project - based section 8 programs .

in addition , prior to creation of the section 811 program , the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly program set aside units for persons with disabilities .

each of the programs defines "person with disabilities," and while the definitions are similar , there are some differences among them .

this section of the report uses the section 811 program definition as the baseline with which to compare the definitions in the other three programs ( section 8 , public housing , and section 202 ) .

for a table comparing the definitions , see the appendix .

the section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities program is administered by hud and funds permanent supportive housing for very low - income persons with disabilities ( those with family income at or below 50% of area median income ) .

over the years , since its inception in 1990 , the program has provided assistance in several ways .

until 2011 , section 811 primarily provided capital grants and project rental assistance to nonprofit housing developers .

section 811 capital grants were used for construction , rehabilitation , or acquisition of buildings to be used as housing for persons with disabilities .

nonprofit developers that obtained the grants need not repay them as long as the housing remains available and affordable for at least 40 years to very low - income persons with disabilities .

until 2011 , the section 811 program also funded tenant - based vouchers — sometimes referred to as "mainstream vouchers" — that are used by eligible tenants to rent housing in the private market .

however , the section 811 program has not funded new vouchers since fy2006 , and the funding for existing vouchers was fully absorbed by the section 8 tenant - based voucher account in fy2012 .

beginning with the fy2012 appropriation , the section 811 model of assistance has become one of "rental assistance only," whereby section 811 funds are used to subsidize units developed with capital funding from sources other than section 811 .

this section of the report describes the evolution of the section 811 program and how it currently operates .

tenant - based rental assistance allows individuals and families to find rental housing on the private market rather than in specific housing developments ( i.e. , the rental assistance goes with the tenant rather than being tied to a specific housing unit ) .

rental assistance is provided in the form of a voucher , through which hud pays a portion of a tenant's rent to landlords who are willing to accept the vouchers ( federal law does not require landlords to accept vouchers ) and whose units meet hud's housing quality standards .

the tenant - based section 8 rental assistance program is the primary way in which hud provides tenant - based rental assistance , although tenant - based assistance has been made available through other programs , including section 811 .

in voucher programs , tenants with vouchers pay between 30% and 40% of their income toward rent and hud pays the difference between the family's contribution and the rent for the unit , subject to certain limits .

both section 811 and section 8 have provided tenant - based rental assistance to persons with disabilities over the years .

however , due to a change in law made by the frank melville supportive housing investment act ( p.l .

111-374 ) , all vouchers that were originally funded through the section 811 program are now funded through the tenant - based section 8 rental assistance account instead .

this section of the report describes section 811 vouchers for persons with disabilities , section 8 vouchers for persons with disabilities , and a collaboration in which section 8 vouchers are used in conjunction with the medicaid - funded demonstration program called "money follows the person," in which vouchers have been set aside to help persons with disabilities who are transitioning institutions such as from nursing homes into the community .

while the section 811 program is dedicated solely to persons with disabilities , hud also funds housing for persons with disabilities through programs that serve all tenant populations , but that also give project owners the ability to designate buildings to special populations , including elderly persons and persons with disabilities .

in addition to housing historically provided through the section 202 program ( described in the "evolution of section 811" section of this report ) , property owners that participate in the project - based section 8 rental assistance program and public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer the public housing program may choose to designate buildings specifically for elderly residents and residents with disabilities together ( sometimes referred to as "mixed population" developments ) or for residents with disabilities alone .

beginning in the 1980s , the federal government took a less direct role in the development of affordable housing .

at the same time , the production and rehabilitation of housing at the state and local level began to increase .

this occurred , in part , due to the enactment of the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) and the home investment partnerships program .

these programs distribute funds to states and localities for the production of affordable housing .

states and localities may , in turn , decide to target a portion of the funds from these programs to develop affordable housing for persons with disabilities .

this section of the report describes the lihtc and the home program , as well as the community development block grant ( cdbg ) , a program created in 1974 to assist states and localities with economic development , including housing activities that benefit low - and moderate - income households .

the funding structure of the section 811 program changed beginning in fy2011 , in part as a result of the enactment of the frank melville supportive housing investment act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-374 ) .

changes occurred in both the voucher portion of the section 811 program as well as with capital grants funding for new projects .

regarding section 811 vouchers , the melville act authorized that funds to renew section 811 vouchers could be provided through the tenant - based section 8 rental assistance account .

in fy2011 , renewals were split between the section 811 and section 8 accounts , and starting in fy2012 , all voucher renewal funding was provided through the section 8 account .

see table 1 .

a second change authorized through p.l .

111-374 was funding for section 811 rental assistance only ( i.e. , not provided in conjunction with section 811 capital grants ) , called the project rental assistance ( pra ) program .

in fy2012 , for the first time since the creation of section 811 , congress provided no new funding for section 811 capital grants .

instead , funds were available to renew existing rental assistance contracts and for pra program rental assistance to be applied to units of housing developed with low income housing tax credits , funds through the home program , or other funding sources .

for more information , see the section " project rental assistance ( pra ) program . .

see table 1 for section 811 funding levels , including vouchers , through fy2016 and proposed fy2017 funding .

financing affordable housing , including housing for persons with disabilities , may require multiple streams of funding in order to support the design , construction , and ongoing operating costs of a project .

in addition to federal funds provided through hud programs , affordable housing developers may use mortgage revenue bonds , tax credits , and local housing trust fund resources , among other sources , to develop housing for low - income and special needs populations .

while hud funds once might have been sufficient on their own to develop an affordable housing project , that is rarely the case today .

this is true for section 811 developers , who often must bring together multiple sources of funding to develop a project .

in 2000 , in order to help section 811 developers bring together multiple financing sources , congress enacted a law that makes the interaction of section 811 funds and the low - income housing tax credits ( lihtcs ) more feasible by changing the definition of "private nonprofit organization" in the section 811 statute .

this change , and its implication for section 811 developers , is described below .

the value of lihtcs is determined , in part , based on the cost of developing a property — referred to as the qualified basis .

the costs of constructing , acquiring , and rehabilitating a property ( among other costs ) are included in calculating the qualified basis , but the amount must then be reduced by any federal grants received by the developer , which in turn reduces the value of the tax credits .

therefore , if a nonprofit developer were to receive a section 811 capital grant , its value would be subtracted in calculating the qualified basis which could result in minimal lihtcs .

the homeownership and economic opportunity act ( p.l .

106-569 ) , enacted in 2000 , allowed for - profit limited partnerships , where a nonprofit organization is the sole general partner , to be eligible section 811 owners .

the changed law allows a nonprofit section 811 grantee to loan the section 811 capital grant to the limited partnership .

under this arrangement , the section 811 funds are no longer a "federal grant" to be subtracted in calculating the qualified basis , potentially increasing the value of lihtcs .

the change in the law to allow for - profit limited partnerships to own section 811 housing developments did not immediately make mixed financing arrangements common , however .

the transactions are complicated and may require extensive expertise in housing finance to make them work .

hud acknowledges that "most developers seek to avoid the use of federal grant financing in most lihtc projects. .

in addition , the treatment of section 811 prac in tax credit transactions has been unclear .

although the irs has created exceptions to the rule that federal grants do not count toward the qualified basis of a property for certain categories of rental assistance , section 811 prac has not been among the exceptions .

the programs that have been exempted from the requirement include project - based section 8 rental assistance payments and public housing capital and operating funds , the native american housing block grant program , rent supplement and rental assistance payments programs , the shelter plus care and single room occupancy programs , and the housing opportunities for persons with aids program .

despite language in the homeownership and economic opportunity act of 2000 indicating that congress intended section 811 assistance to be included in calculating qualified basis ( rather than subtracted from it ) , the irs has not issued a ruling that would be necessary to make this possible .

another possible limitation in developing mixed finance projects using federal grants such as section 811 together with the lihtc was removed with passage of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) .

under lihtc law , developers may qualify for tax credits worth roughly 9% or 4% .

under previous lihtc law , the higher 9% credit was available for new construction that was not federally subsidized , while the 4% credit was available for either federally subsidized new construction or existing buildings .

the statutory definition of "federally subsidized" included below market federal loans ( the structure used by limited partnerships to loan section 811 capital grants ) .

the fact that developers of federally subsidized buildings did not qualify for the higher tax credit made financing projects with the lihtc less lucrative .

developers either had to accept the lower , 4% credit , or to set up a system through which federal grants were loaned to the project at a market rate of interest .

however , p.l .

110-289 removed the phrase "below market federal loans" from the definition of federal subsidy in the lihtc statute .

this makes all federally subsidized new construction placed in service after the effective date of p.l .

110-289 eligible for 9% tax credits .

the 9% credits are very competitive , however , and it may still be difficult for section 811 developers to obtain them .

according to both advocates for persons with disabilities and hud , persons with disabilities have a need for affordable housing .

since 1991 , hud has regularly released reports on the worst case needs for affordable housing in the united states .

hud defines households with worst case housing needs as very low - income renter households ( households with incomes at or below 50% of area median income ) that do not receive rental assistance and either ( 1 ) pay more than half their income toward rent , or ( 2 ) live in severely inadequate housing .

severely inadequate housing is measured using the american housing survey definition of housing with severe physical problems .

these are varying degrees of problems with plumbing , heating , electrical wiring , and upkeep of the physical unit or public areas .

using data from the 2013 american housing survey , hud found in its most recent report — worst case housing needs 20 15 — that 18.50 million renter households were very low income .

of those , 7.72 million households had worst case housing needs , a decrease of 9% compared to 2011 but an increase compared to years prior to 2011 .

to determine disability status , the american housing survey asks questions about functional limitations ( hearing , visual , cognitive , and ambulatory ) and ability to perform activities of daily living ( self care and independent living .

using the ahs data , hud estimated that 2.8 million very low - income rental households ( 15% of all households ) had a non - elderly member who answered yes to at least one of the questions regarding disability in 2013 .

further , 39% of very low - income renter households that included a nonelderly person with a disability ( about 1.09 million ) had worst - case housing needs .

although homelessness in the united states has always existed , it became a more prevalent phenomenon in the 1970s and 1980s , when the homeless population began to grow and become more visible to the general public .

explanations for the growth in homelessness include the demolition of skid rows , the decreased availability of affordable housing generally , the reduced need for seasonal unskilled labor , the reduced likelihood that relatives will accommodate homeless family members , the decreased value of public benefits , and changed admissions standards at mental hospitals .

in the early 2000s , attention was again turned to homeless individuals , this time to those persons who experience so - called "chronic homelessness," when president bush announced an initiative to end chronic homelessness within 10 years .

in the late 1990s , researchers identified chronically homeless individuals as those who have a disability ( including those who suffer from mental illness and / or substance use disorders ) and who have been homeless for long periods of time .

later , hud defined what it means to be chronically homeless in regulation , and the definition was adapted and incorporated into statute in 2009 as part of the helping families save their homes act ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

the definition was again refined by regulation in 2015 .

according to the definition , a person is chronically homeless if they have a disability and have been living in a place not meant for human habitation , an emergency shelter , or safe haven continuously homeless for 12 months or have experienced four episodes of homelessness totaling 12 months in the past three years .

a family is chronically homeless if the adult head of household ( or minor in the absence of an adult ) has a disability .

in 2015 , hud estimated that approximately 15% of the total homeless population were chronically homeless individuals and 2.3% were in chronically homeless families .

rates of mental health problems are estimated to exist in more than 60% of chronically homeless individuals , and more than 80% of individuals are estimated to have alcohol or drug problems .

medical problems , including hiv / aids , are also prevalent among chronically homeless individuals .

communities across the country have addressed chronic homelessness through a strategy called "housing first," in which permanent supportive housing is found for homeless individuals prior to treatment of their illnesses and addictions .

hud makes funds available through its homeless assistance grants for the construction or rehabilitation of new permanent supportive housing for chronically homeless individuals .

hud estimates that 108,000 beds in permanent supportive housing units have been funded since 2001 , many devoted to individuals who had been chronically homeless .

perhaps in part for that reason , hud estimates that the number of individuals considered chronically homeless has fallen by more than 30% between 2007 and 2015 .

