the senate's emphasis on individual and minority rights , reflected in both its standing rules and chamber custom , can make it challenging for the chamber to achieve its various goals in a timely manner .

for this reason , the senate routinely chooses to set aside its standing rules by unanimous consent .

this is done formally through uc agreements , which in many cases outline the terms under which specific legislation will be considered .

under recent practice , these uc agreements sometimes include a provision imposing a 60-vote requirement for approval of amendments or legislation , instead of the simple majority vote ordinarily required in the senate .

these amendments or measures are sometimes of a controversial nature with potential to be subjected to extended consideration or even a filibuster .

by incorporating a 60-vote threshold , such uc agreements avoid the multiple requirements associated with senate rule xxii , both for invoking cloture and for consideration under cloture .

such uc agreements ensure that a measure will not be successful without the same level of super - majority support that would be required for cloture by stipulating that if the 60-vote threshold is not reached , the matter will be disposed of .

as with all uc agreements , once agreed to , they can be altered only by the adoption of a further uc agreement .

several possible effects could result from the senate choosing to impose a 60-vote threshold for the passage of legislation .

first , for cases in which a large majority of senators is in favor of or opposed to the question , the time that would ordinarily be required to invoke cloture can be avoided .

once a cloture petition has been submitted , it must lay over until the second calendar day that the senate is in session before a vote on cloture occurs .

for a cloture vote to be successful , in most cases three - fifths of all senators must vote in the affirmative ( i.e. , 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) .

if the cloture vote is successful , another 30 hours of consideration are in order before a vote on the underlying business must occur .

incorporating the 60-vote threshold into a uc agreement allows the senate to bypass these time consuming requirements .

second , for cases in which a large majority either in favor of or against the question cannot be assumed , the 60-vote threshold accomplishes the same purpose as a filibuster by preventing or delaying passage , but without requiring the senate to engage in extended debate .

thus , surrendering the right to filibuster may be more palatable if senators are confident a measure will not pass without super - majority support .

another reason that a 60-vote threshold might be included in a uc agreement is that it presents senators with an opportunity to vote directly on the underlying policy issue .

votes on cloture often fail and consequently a vote on the actual measure or amendment may never occur .

the 60-vote threshold in a uc agreement has the effect of bypassing the procedural vote to grant senators a direct vote on the policy issue at hand .

lastly , in many of these 60-vote threshold uc agreements , it is a pair ( or group ) of amendments or measures that are jointly held to the 60-vote requirement .

many of the pairs ( or groups ) are competing options for the same policy issue .

this allows the senate to debate and choose between contending alternatives in a timely and controlled manner .

although examples of uc agreements placing a similar 60-vote threshold provisions can be found dating from at least the early 1990s , the practice has increased in frequency over the last four years .

unanimous consent agreements that impose a 60-vote threshold may be agreed to at any time , either in advance , or during consideration .

it is notable that unlike senate rules requiring super majorities , which typically are framed in terms of a fraction either of the membership or those voting ( eg , two - thirds , three - fifths ) , these uc agreements explicitly state the number of votes required .

given that practices generally specify disposition for a question that achieves a majority vote , but not a super - majority vote imposed by unanimous consent , the language of these uc agreements typically provides for disposition of the amendment or measure if it fails to achieve the required 60 votes .

typically , the matter is withdrawn , but it could alternately be laid on the table or returned to the calendar for example , in one uc agreement , the senate agreed that "... two amendments be subject to a 60 affirmative vote threshold , and that if neither achieves that threshold , then it be withdrawn. .

unanimous consent agreements including a 60-vote threshold may be used not just to avoid the steps associated with invoking cloture , but also to avoid a separate vote on waiving a point of order raised under the congressional budget act .

in the senate , most points of order under the budget act may be waived by a vote of at least three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) .

in one uc agreement , the senate agreed to a 60-vote threshold for the passage of a conference report stipulating that a vote on the waiving of a budget act point of order also be treated as a simultaneous vote on adoption .

