in the years preceding the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the united states lacked a comprehensive national policy and strategy for aviation security .

the united states approach to aviation security had largely been shaped by past events such as the bombing of pan am flight 103 in december , 1988 and , at that time , was undergoing a reactive shift in strategy , placing emphasis on addressing the threat of aircraft bombings aboard commercial airliners , albeit with limited resources and a much slower time frame compared to actions taken following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in april 2001 , the federal aviation administration issued a strategic plan for civil aviation security titled "a commitment to security. .

the vision was for the faa and the u.s. aviation security system to be "[r]ecognized as the world leader in civil aviation security — identifying and countering aviation - related threats to u.s. citizens worldwide. .

the strategic goal stated in the plan was to let "[n]o successful attacks against u.s. civil aviation" occur .

in comparison to the breadth and depth of the post - 9 / 11 focus on aviation security , the desired key results stated in this document in retrospect seem quite modest and the goal tragically unattained .

the pre - 9 / 11 strategic plan sought to improve on checked baggage and checkpoint screening performance and utilize a combination of explosives detection system ( eds ) screening and positive passenger baggage match ( ppbm ) techniques to vet 100% of checked baggage .

in addition to improving technical capabilities to detect explosives in checked baggage , strategies identified by the faa included establishing security screening operations and training standards which , at that time , did not exist ; ensuring federal air marshals were available to protect selected high - risk flight , although their numbers had dwindled to 33 at the time of the 9 / 11 hijackings ; ensuring that certified explosives canine teams were available at major u.s. airports ; and ensuring preparedness and crisis management to respond to incidents that may occur .

the faa civil aviation security strategic plan also sought to improve air cargo security , primarily to reduce transport of dangerous goods , a likely response to the concerns over the transport of dangerous goods highlighted by the may 11 , 1996 crash of valujet flight 592 in the florida everglades .

the strategic plan sought to achieve this objective largely through industry training and education and targeted inspections of dangerous goods transportation areas .

despite the emphasis on preventing aircraft bombs carried in passenger luggage , the potential threat of a bomb placed in air cargo was not mentioned in the strategic plan .

also , while the strategic plan addressed internal faa security , the emphasis of this strategic element was on handling and protection of sensitive information and maintaining up - to - date background checks and clearances for employees in security - sensitive positions .

while the strategic plan did identify the completion of facility security assessments and the protection of information systems among key results sought , it did not convey any insight regarding the potential threats and vulnerabilities of air traffic facilities to physical attack or faa information systems to physical or cyber - attack .

the faa's pre - 9 / 11 strategic plan also identified several key results regarding external relationships including improved communications with congress , the aviation industry , foreign governments , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the department of transportation , office of inspector general ( dot oig ) .

the strategic plan , however did not specifically address relationships with federal law enforcement agencies and the intelligence community , factors that became a central focus of post - 9 / 11 homeland security policy debate .

the strategic plan also did not address relationships and coordination with the military for incident response , a major deficiency in the faa's response to the hijackings on september 11 , 2001 , and an area of considerable focus during post - 9 / 11 strategic planning .

while the faa strategic plan for aviation security failed to adequately consider all security risks , the 9 / 11 commission concluded that the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , revealed failures in imagination , policy , capabilities , and management both on the part of the faa and the u.s. intelligence community .

although the brunt of the criticism levied by the 9 / 11 commission was directed at the u.s. intelligence community , it faulted the faa for focusing too heavily on the threat of bombings and for not involving the faa's civil aviation security intelligence functions in the faa's policymaking process .

the 9 / 11 commission pointed out that the suicide hijacking threat was imaginable , and was , in fact , imagined by faa civil aviation security intelligence analysts in 1999 , but largely dismissed as being unlikely .

the 9 / 11 commission faulted congress as well for becoming entrenched in debate over airline passenger service issues while failing to focus attention and resources on the terrorist threat to the aviation system .

the faa civil aviation security strategic plan released in april 2001 serves as evidence that the faa did not create a comprehensive strategy for protecting the aviation domain from the full spectrum of terrorist threats , and did not effectively prioritize and allocate resources for reducing the vulnerability of the aviation system to possible terrorist attacks .

immediately following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , aviation security policy and strategy debate were closely linked to the legislative process leading to the swift passage of the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ; p.l .

107-71 ) .

with regard to strategy and policy , atsa gave the newly created position of undersecretary of transportation for security ( now known as the tsa administrator ) specific authority and responsibility for assessing threats to transportation and developing policies , strategies , and plans for dealing with these threats to transportation security .

however , the primary emphasis of atsa was on the security of passenger airline operations , and the immediate focus of the tsa was to meet congressionally established requirements and deadlines for the deployment of air marshals , the federalization of airport security screeners , and 100% explosives detection system ( eds ) screening of checked baggage .

while the importance of establishing comprehensive policy and strategy for aviation security was recognized by many policymakers , a strategic plan for protecting the aviation domain was slow to take shape .

in 2002 , as these mandates for enhancing passenger airline security set forth in atsa were being carried out , and while congress debated legislation to establish the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the bush administration began examining u.s. policies for protecting the homeland against future terrorist attacks in a broader context , considering other infrastructure and assets beyond the aviation domain that may be at risk .

in july 2002 , the president issued the national strategy for homeland security and in february 2003 , the president issued the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and key assets .

however , neither of these strategies offered specific details on aviation security strategy , nor did they specify how aviation security plans and programs fit into these broader strategies for protecting the homeland and its critical infrastructure and key resources ( ci / kr ) from terrorist attacks .

on july 22 , 2004 , the 9 / 11 commission released its final report , concluding that the tsa had failed to develop an integrated strategic plan for the overall transportation sector and specific plans for each of the transportation modes .

the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the u.s. strategy for transportation security should be predicated on a risk - based prioritization for allocating limited resources to protect transportation infrastructure in a cost - effective manner , assigning roles and responsibilities for federal , state , regional and local authorities as well as private stakeholders .

following the release of the 9 / 11 commission's final report , congress made addressing the recommendations of the report a key legislative priority , reflecting many of the commission's recommendations in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) , which was enacted on december 17 , 2004 .

the act specifically required the dhs to develop , prepare , implement , and keep up - to - date a comprehensive national strategy for transportation security and mode - specific security plans .

reflecting 9 / 11 commission recommendation language , the act required the strategy to assign risk - based priorities and realistic deadlines for implementing practical and cost - effective defenses against security threats , setting forth agreed upon roles and missions for federal , state , regional , and local authorities and mechanisms for private sector cooperation and participation .

under the requirements established in the act , the national strategy for transportation security was to be accompanied by mode - specific security plans , including an aviation mode - specific plan .

the modal security plan for aviation was required to include a threat matrix outlining each threat to the united states civil aviation system and the corresponding layers of security in place to address these threats and a plan for mitigation and reconstitution of the aviation system in the event of a terrorist attack .

while the act required that the first iteration of the strategy be transmitted to the congressional homeland security authorizing committees by april 2005 , the strategy document was delivered in september 2005 .

as required by law , updates to the strategy and the mode - specific plans must be transmitted to congress every two years .

these strategy documents have been designated as security sensitive information as provided for in the act .

consequently , they have had limited distribution beyond the dhs and the homeland security authorizing committees in congress .

therefore , there has not been extensive public discourse on the dhs approach to developing a national strategy for transportation security and strategies and plans specific to protecting the aviation mode from future terrorist attacks .

however , in june 2006 , president bush issued policy guidance directing the dhs to establish and implement a national strategy for aviation security and a series of supporting plans for implementing this strategy .

unlike prior strategies and plans that had either been too broad in scope to provide detailed information regarding aviation - specific security strategies or were limited in distribution , the policy , strategy , and supporting plans developed under this presidential directive have been made available to the public , thus offering insight into the strategic direction and approach to aviation security being pursued by the dhs in coordination with other federal agencies .

these documents are also much more comprehensive in their consideration of security in the aviation domain compared to prior strategy documents and therefore provide a more thorough picture of u.s. policy and strategy for mitigating threats involving aviation .

this report examines the current national aviation security policy , the national strategy for aviation security , and formal mode - specific plans developed for implementing this strategic approach .

this report also identifies and discusses some overarching considerations for congressional oversight and possible legislative action regarding the u.s. policy and strategy for securing the aviation domain .

the national aviation security policy represents the overarching aviation - specific components of the national strategy for homeland security .

that strategy specifies that the department of homeland security ( dhs ) will serve as the focal entity for managing and coordinating border and transportation security initiatives "... to prevent the entry of terrorists and the instruments of terror , while facilitating the legal flow of people , goods , and services on which our economy depends. .

the policy , however , addresses a broader spectrum of threats to the air domain that include not only specific threats to the homeland , but also threats to national security interests both within the united states and abroad .

therefore , in addition to the overall responsibility for homeland security and aviation security for which the dhs and the tsa are directly responsible , the national aviation security policy also involves matters concerning the department of defense , the department of state , the department of justice , and a variety of other federal , state , and local agencies and private entities , and relies on close coordination with and continued cooperation from other nations .

on june 20 , 2006 , president bush issued homeland security presidential directive 16 ( hspd - 16 / national security presidential directive 47 ( nspd - 47 ) ) establishing new u.s. policy , guidelines , and implementation of actions to address threats to the air domain .

the document broadly defines the air domain as the global airspace and all aircraft operating within that airspace including both manned and unmanned vehicles , as well as all people and goods being transported by such aircraft , and all supporting aviation infrastructure .

the policy objectives set forth in hspd - 16 endeavor to prevent terrorist acts and other hostile actions either directed at or exploiting elements of the aviation domain while also minimizing the impact on air commerce and fostering the economic growth and stability of the aviation industry .

the statement of policy notes that: [t]he united states must continue to use the full range of its assets and capabilities to prevent the air domain from being used by terrorists , criminals , and other hostile states to commit acts of terrorism and other unlawful or hostile acts against the united states , its people , property , territory , and allies and friends , all while minimizing the impact on the aviation transportation system and continuing to facilitate the free flow and growth of trade and commerce in the air domain .

these efforts are critical to the global stability and economic growth and are vital to the interests of the united states .

the stated policy specifies that the united states , in cooperation with international partners , will take all necessary and appropriate actions , consistent with applicable laws , statutes , and international agreements , to enhance the security and protect the united states and u.s. interests in the air domain .

the implementation of this policy is to be consistent with a risk - based prioritization of aviation security strategies and tactics .

activities to support this policy objective specifically cited in this directive include protecting critical transportation networks and infrastructure from terrorist attacks and other hostile , criminal , and unlawful acts and reducing the vulnerability of the air domain to these types of possible attacks or exploitation ; improving situational awareness of security issues affecting the air domain and facilitating and enhancing information sharing to improve detection of threats and appropriate responsive actions ; ensuring seamless , coordinated efforts relating to aviation security among federal , state , tribal , and local agencies and authorities ; enhancing the resilience of the air transportation system to a terrorist attack , including the capability to rapidly recover from such an attack and minimize impacts on economic , transportation , social , and governmental systems ; countering the proliferation of standoff weapons , such as shoulder - fired missiles , that pose significant risks to both civilian and military users of the air domain by terrorists , criminals , and other hostile groups and individuals ; and enhancing international relationships and promoting the integration of other nations and private sector partners in an improved global aviation security framework .

implementation of this policy is to be coordinated through the president's homeland security council ( hsc ) border and transportation security policy coordination committee ( bts pcc ) .

the policy established a requirement for the secretary of homeland security to develop an overarching national strategy for aviation security and supporting plans to carry out this strategy .

hspd - 16 directed the department of homeland security to implement this policy through the creation of an overarching national strategy for aviation security .

the directive explicitly called for the development of a national strategy for aviation security that is adaptive to changing threat levels and types of threats , and it is rooted in a risk - based , multi - disciplinary , and global approach to aviation security .

the directive required that the national strategy , along with its supporting plans , include , at a minimum , risk - based approaches to address the following threats: attacks using aircraft against ground - based targets , including possible attacks using aircraft to deliver or transport chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , or explosive ( cbrne ) weapons ; attacks using stand - off weapons , such as shoulder - fired missiles or other man - portable air defense systems ( manpads ) ; attacks using on - board explosive devices and other conventional and non - conventional weapons to directly target aircraft ; hijackings and air piracy ; and physical attacks or cyber - attacks on aviation critical infrastructure and facilities , such as air traffic control facilities and networks and navigation systems .

the directive also identifies several specific action items to be addressed in supporting mode - specific plans to implement the national strategy for aviation security .

the required plans include the aviation transportation system security plan ; the aviation operational threat response plan ; the aviation transportation system recovery plan ; the air domain surveillance and intelligence integration plan ; the international aviation threat reduction plan ; the domestic outreach plan ; and the international outreach plan .

the national strategy for aviation security , along with several of these supporting plans ( except for the aviation transportation system recovery plan which is still undergoing internal review within dhs and the international aviation threat reduction plan ) , was publically released on march 26 , 2007 .

the dhs had developed a suite of aviation mode - specific plans that serve as a general framework for implementing the national strategy for aviation security under normal operating conditions , in response to an eminent threat or ongoing terrorist attack involving the aviation domain , and during recovery and reconstitution of aviation system functions and services following a potential attack .

specifically , the aviation transportation system security plan most directly addresses the day - to - day security measures and programs to reduce the vulnerability of the air transportation system to terrorist actions or other criminal acts .

this plan is augmented by the air domain surveillance and intelligence integration plan which coordinates intelligence gathering , analysis , and dissemination within the air domain .

in addition , the international aviation threat reduction plan and the international outreach plan provide a framework for working with other nations to improve the global aviation security network with an emphasis on outreach to promote the implementation of effective security practices worldwide .

upon recognition that a terrorist or criminal attack targeting or exploiting aviation assets was taking place , the aviation operational threat response plan would be activated .

this plan considers specific actions and concepts of operations for mitigating the consequences of a broad array of attack scenarios .

this plan is augmented by the domestic outreach plan which considers the involvement and coordination of state , local , and tribal government resources and private sector entities in responding to such an event , focusing most specifically on strategies for incident communications as well as the dissemination of threat information during routine operations .

an aviation transportation system recovery plan is also being developed by the dhs to facilitate rapid recovery following a possible terrorist attack or similar disruption to the air transportation system .

the goal of the recovery plan is to mitigate the operational and economic impacts of such events on the aviation system .

while the above discussed national policy and strategy for aviation security and the supporting mode specific plans provide an important framework for structuring aviation security measures in the united states , these documents themselves can appropriately be viewed with a critical eye to identify any potential shortcomings in underlying assumptions and approaches .

in the process of congressional oversight and legislative debate , specific questions regarding aviation security policy and strategic approaches may arise .

some possible issues that may arise as the result of oversight or legislative debate may include the validity of underlying risk assumptions made in developing the aviation security policy , national strategy , and mode - specific plans ; the adequacy of considerations regarding the sustainability of the aviation security system and its various components ; whether the policy and strategy are forward - looking , or rather , do they perpetuate a reactive approach to security planning in the aviation domain ; the extent to which the policy and strategy provide a comprehensive framework for developing and maintaining a robust aviation security system ; and the extent to which objectives and approaches outlined in the national strategy align with budgetary processes and resource availability to ensure that strategic objectives can be adequately met .

these possible issues are discussed in further depth below .

determining the validity of the various risk models and assumptions that have been used to set aviation security policy and strategy is a difficult task .

these risk determinations have largely arisen from restricted access intelligence information and other limited distribution sources , thus constraining the ability to engage in open public discourse on the validity of their underlying evidence and assumptions .

nonetheless , some critics have argued that these risk assumptions and resulting policy and strategic decisions may be based on inaccurate and incomplete analysis .

for example , some have noted that federal intelligence and security agencies are "inexperienced with and uninterested in statistics. .

this has led some to argue that the use of statistical techniques to study terrorism data is sorely needed , although it has been questioned whether the federal government has necessary capability and expertise to assess the reliability of available data , and use reliable methods to perform statistical analyses .

instead , some have argued that "security agencies seem to advance policies without any empirical basis," relying instead on anecdotal evidence , political pressures , or "gut feelings. .

such a basis for setting policy and establishing strategies for homeland security and aviation security can result in inappropriate estimates of risk — overstating the risk of certain scenarios while underestimating the risk of others .

while it appears that efforts are being made to better document global terrorism incidents and perform statistical analyses to identify risk trends , more comprehensive efforts to look specifically at risks to the aviation domain may be needed to provide better guidance for developing and refining aviation security policies and strategies .

congress may specifically examine dhs efforts to employ reliable statistical tools and techniques to validate underlying risk assumptions cited as the justification for pursuing certain courses of action to implement aviation security policies and strategies .

congress has relied heavily on the findings and recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission in setting legislative priorities .

the 9 / 11 commission recommendations provided a framework for consideration of legislation enacted in both in the 108 th congress when the commission's final report was first released in 2004 ( see p.l .

108-458 ) , and during the first session of the 110 th congress in 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) .

with regard to aviation security , both the 9 / 11 commission and subsequent legislation have emphasized policies and strategies to aggressively pursue capabilities to detect explosives on passengers , and pursue technologies to better screen passengers and carry - on items for a broad array of threat objects .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) specified that the dhs should give a high priority to checkpoint screening technologies for detecting nonmetallic , chemical , biological , radiological , and explosives and directed the dhs to develop a strategic plan for the deployment of explosives detection technologies at checkpoints , such as walk - through explosive detection portals , document scanners , shoe scanners , and backscatter x - ray scanners .

the act authorized funding for the development and testing of these various checkpoint screening technologies .

however , while the tsa has also recognized the importance of enhancing passenger screening capabilities , progress has been slow in developing the required checkpoint screening strategy and results of using these technologies in airport settings has been mixed , prompting congress to include language in the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) requiring the dhs to finalize its checkpoint screening strategic plan and begin implementing it by the summer of 2008 .

progress , however , has been slowed by technology hurdles including reliability issues with walkthrough explosives trace detection portals deployed for field testing and the failure of shoe explosives scanners tested on registered traveler program participants in orlando , florida to meet minimum standards set by the tsa .

the tsa has also been faced with shifting technology strategies prompting them to pursue liquids explosives screening technologies as well .

the tsa has reported good results in evaluations of highly sensitive handheld explosives trace detection sensors that are now being field tested for screening carry - on liquids at passenger checkpoints .

while technology testing is progressing , a clear strategic picture of how these emerging technologies will be deployed to upgrade and enhance screening checkpoints is still needed .

the recent mandate in p.l .

110-53 to develop and implement such a strategy appears to address this need .

however , further congressional oversight of the tsa's progress in implementing the strategic plan for emerging checkpoint screening technologies may be scheduled to ensure that appropriate and effective program and budgetary decisions are made to achieve strategic goals .

the 9 / 11 commission emphasized the need for the federal government to take over the role of checking passenger names to allow for thorough vetting of passengers against the comprehensive , consolidated terrorist watchlist maintained by the federal government .

while this objective has largely been accomplished by customs and border protection ( cbp ) for all inbound international flights , efforts to deploy a system for federal prescreening of passengers on all domestic flights has been repeatedly delayed amid continued controversy over privacy rights , protection of personal data , and adequate procedures for redress when individuals are falsely denied boarding or singled out for additional screening .

while congress has generally concurred with the 9 / 11 commission's view that comprehensive passenger prescreening against the consolidated watchlist is needed , congress has also been sensitive to these privacy rights , data protection , and redress concerns , and through legislation has placed specific contingencies related to these issues on system implementation , and has repeatedly directed the gao to carefully scrutinize the tsa's progress in addressing specific requirements for full - scale system deployment .

further congressional oversight of tsa's progress toward implementing federally run passenger prescreening on domestic flights may be called for , as the strategic plan indicates that implementation of this initiative is expected in 2008 .

the 9 / 11 commission also recommended that ongoing initiatives to integrate checked baggage explosives detection systems ( eds ) with airport baggage handling systems should be expedited .

congress has placed an emphasis on funding airport projects to integrate eds in - line with baggage handling conveyors , establishing the aviation security capital fund for this purpose as part of the vision 100 – century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) in 2003 .

nonetheless , the gao estimates that making the needed changes at all airports in the united states to integrate eds equipment will not be completed until 2024 if future funding remains consistent with historic funding levels for thee activities .

in recognition of this continuing funding need , congress took the unusual step of including a 20-year reauthorization of funding for in - line baggage system deployment , extending authority for the aviation security capital fund and other funding mechanisms for in - line eds integration through 2028 , and directed the tsa to take further steps to prioritize airport eds integration projects as part of the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) .

oversight of tsa strategies and plans for funding airport projects related to eds integration may be of long - lasting interest for congress given the size , scope , complexity , and cost of this initiative .

in addition , the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the tsa intensify efforts to identify suspicious cargo , and appropriately screen and track potentially dangerous cargo in aviation as well as in maritime operations .

toward this objective , the tsa has issued regulations to increase the security of air cargo operations and has been pursuing risk - based targeting capabilities to identify shipments requiring additional scrutiny to direct physical screening resources toward elevated risk cargo with some amount of random screening .

congress , however , has been pushing the tsa toward increasing the amount of cargo destined for passenger aircraft that is screened , and in 2007 passed legislation ( see p.l .

110-53 , sec .

1602 ) that requires the tsa to establish a system to screen 100% of cargo transported on passenger aircraft by the summer of 2010 .

unlike the requirement for 100% checked baggage screening which was tied to a specific technology , namely eds , the mandate for 100% screening of cargo placed on passenger aircraft can be met using a variety of approaches , including x - ray systems , eds , trace detection technologies , canine teams , and possibly other methods for physical examination as approved by the tsa .

to address this mandate and achieve 100% screening of cargo placed on passenger airlines within the three - year time frame set forth in the legislation , the tsa will need to move relatively swiftly in developing and implementing a strategy for cargo screening .

given the continued congressional interest on the issue of air cargo security , it is likely that extensive oversight of the tsa's progress toward meeting this mandate and effectively conducting air cargo screening operations will occur over the next few years .

while the national strategy and mode - specific plans acknowledge and emphasize passenger prescreening , checkpoint screening , in - line eds integration , and cargo screening issues , the extent to which dhs efforts on these matters align with congressional views and legislative mandates remains a specific topic for ongoing analysis and debate .

one seemingly unavoidable reality for aviation security strategists is that continued growth in demand for air travel and for shipping goods by air is anticipated .

the faa estimates that the number of airline passengers will increase at an annual rate of about 3.4% domestically and about 4.7% for international flights over the next twelve years .

this anticipated growth could strain passenger and baggage screening operations in the future if it is not adequately planned for .

similarly , growth in air cargo volume is expected to increase at an average annual rate of 3.5% domestically and by 6.7% on international routes through 2020 .

strategies and initiatives to enhance the security of air cargo operations and screen air cargo shipments must , therefore , also consider these growth projections in carrying out policies , strategies , and plans for enhancing air cargo security .

air traffic is also expected to increase about 3.8% with a growth of about 3.7% in general aviation operations expected .

airspace security strategies and approaches may need to consider this growth in flight operations in devising effective security programs and procedures for protecting airspace over areas considered critical for national security .

it remains unclear , however , whether this anticipated growth in aviation operations is being adequately planned for in the context of national strategies and mode - specific plans for aviation security .

the strategies indicate that they will evolve with shifting threat and vulnerability characteristics on the basis of ongoing risk assessments .

however , the degree to which the changing nature , size , and scope of aviation and air travel is being considered in these risk assessments remains a signficant issue for policymakers and aviation security strategists .

with regard to the sustainability of aviation security technologies , specific strategies for maintaining deployed technologies and phasing - in next generation screening technologies have not yet been clearly defined .

while plans for enhancing aviation security under the comprehensive next generation air transportation system ( ngats ) initiative envision extensive improvements to aviation security by 2025 , the roadmap to achieving these capabilities has not yet been fully defined .

according to the future concept of operations for aviation and airport security , significant security transformations will include integrated dynamic risk management solutions ; biometric technologies for airport access controls ; smaller footprint , multi - threat detection capabilities for screening passengers and baggage ; network - enabled environmental sensors to detect and warn of chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) threats at airports ; rapidly deployable , reconfigurable screening systems to meet temporary and intermittent screening requirements ; on - board aircraft safety modifications and ground - based systems and procedures to protect flights from shoulder - fired missiles ; network - centric information sharing capabilities for data mining and decision support to aid security operations personnel and security analysts ; and capabilities to allow for cbrne screening of all air cargo items not packed in secured areas or securely conveyed to aircraft .

while all of these objectives are reflected to some degree in the national strategy for aviation security and the supporting plans , congress may have a particular interest in how the strategic plan aligns with ngats plans for enhancing aviation and airport security over the next 18 to 20 years .

as previously noted , some experts have expressed concern that the dhs may be relying too heavily on "gut feelings" and anecdotal evidence in pursuing certain courses of action reflected in aviation policies , strategies , and plans .

similarly , some have questioned whether the dhs and the tsa approach to aviation security has taken on too much of a reactive stance , failing to strategically plan resource allocation based on robust and thoughtful risk analysis , instead allowing high profile events and media reaction to potentially influence decision making .

for example , using the tsa's response to the foiled liquid explosives plot in august 2006 by restricting carry - on liquids , some critics have argued that the administration is allowing single events and the media coverage and public attention they generate to shape policy decisions .

the tsa has defended its actions in response to the liquid explosives threat , making available to the public documentation and demonstrations of the formidable threat posed by improvised liquid explosive devices .

however , liquid explosives have long been known by security experts to pose a formidable threat to aircraft , yet u.s. aviation policy and strategy before this plot was uncovered had not included any specific near - term measures to screen passengers for liquid explosives .

critics argue that reacting to single events is near - sighted and goes against the very purpose of developing strategies and plans in the first place , which is to be proactive in assessing threats and directing resources to mitigate associated risks .

however , on the contrary , if strategies and underlying plans are to be adaptive , they should be able to shift rapidly in response to changing threat characteristics and changing threat levels .

reviewing the tsa response to the liquid explosives plot may provide more specific insights into whether this response was a reasonable adaptive approach to mitigate unforseen risks or a case of taking immediate , and arguably questionable , actions in an effort to restore and maintain public confidence in aviation security .

if it is determined that the tsa's actions in response to the liquid explosives plot represented a well thought out example of an evolving strategy that can respond quickly and effectively to emerging threats , then perhaps additional questions need to be asked regarding why the emerging threat of liquid explosives was not foreseen prior to widespread public disclosure of information regarding the failed liquid explosives plot in the united kingdom .

a more detailed examination of the deliberations and decision - making regarding liquid explosives , both before and after receiving knowledge of the foiled plot can perhaps provide unique insights and "lessons learned" to aid security analysts and senior policy makers in developing strategic and tactical decision making tools to improve upon the u.s. response to future emerging threat situations .

critics argue that the government must replace its practices of responding to single threats with more systematic approaches for improving homeland security .

a lingering concern is that if aviation security policies and practices , and more broadly homeland security policies and practices , remain too reactionary , terrorists may be able to exploit this approach .

terrorist may be able to trigger reactionary responses by providing misinformation about intended targets or attack methods .

this may lead to haphazard allocation or reallocation of resources that could be wasteful and inefficient , and could even result in resources being moved in a manner that could make the system more vulnerable to attack .

in other words , terrorists may be able to more easily exploit a reactionary approach to aviation security by using diversionary tactics that may increase vulnerabilities in other areas or aspects of the air domain .

in 2004 , the gao issued recommendations regarding the desired characteristics of national strategies to combat terrorism .

the desired elements of such strategies identified by the gao included a purpose , scope , and methodology ; a definition of the problem and an assessment of the associated risk ; an identification of the goals and supporting or subordinate objectives and activities to meet these goals , and performance measure to evaluate progress toward achieving these goals ; an identification of resources , costs , and a risk management analysis to determine where resources and investments should be targeted ; a clear definition of organizational roles , responsibilities , and coordination ; and a discussion of how a particular strategy relates to other strategies and how plans , activities , and objectives will be integrated to meet the stated goals of the various related strategies .

while the gao used these criteria to evaluate various national security , homeland security , counterterrorism , and infrastructure protection strategies that had been developed prior to 2004 , the national strategy for aviation security had not been developed at that time and has not subsequently been evaluated against these desired elements .

at first glance , the aviation security strategy appears to contain or address many of these desirable characteristics .

where the strategy and supporting plans may be lacking , however , is in fully defining the methodology for evaluating risk and carrying out the strategy ; fully documenting associated cost estimates and resource requirements ; providing sufficient detail regarding roles , responsibility , and coordination , particularly among non - federal entities that are expected to participate in carrying out the various mode - specific plans ; and clearly indicating how the various components fit into the hierarchy of national security , homeland security , and counterterrorism strategies and plans and how the elements of these various plans may be integrated both within and beyond the aviation domain .

congress may seek to carry out a more detailed review of the national strategy for aviation security to specifically identify potential needs for more detail and specificity with regard to addressing these , and perhaps other , key elements of the strategy and supporting plans .

additionally , one of the key required features of the national strategy for aviation security is that it must be adaptive .

consequently , the national strategy and its supporting plans and documents are likely to evolve over time to address changes in threats , intelligence , terrorist tactics and capabilities , as well as new security technologies and capabilities .

it is also likely that the strategy and its supporting plans will sometimes need to change quickly in the face of imminent threats .

therefore , congress may also have a particular interest in assessing the robustness of the national strategy for aviation security and the capability of the underlying aviation security system to adapt based on shifting risk dynamics .

as a final consideration , congress and the administration may have a particular interest in assessing how the national strategy and supporting plans align with budgetary decisions and resource availability , particularly in the context of the annual budget and appropriations process .

this could be a key consideration as elements of the current strategy call for some considerable expansion of the tsa's roles and responsibilities .

for example , dhs objectives for the tsa to assume passenger identification functions and carry out behavioral observation both at and beyond airport screening checkpoints is likely to be human resource intensive and , therefore , may need further scrutiny in the context of budget and resource prioritization .

also , technology advancements for checkpoint , baggage , and cargo screening are also being sought by both congress and the administration .

additionally , new and proposed statutory requirements may also expand the functions of the tsa and other federal agencies .

for example , provisions in the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) require the swift phase - in of air cargo inspections to achieve 100% inspections of all cargo carried on passenger air carrier aircraft within three years .

this mandate is likely to have significant cost and resource implications not only for the federal government , but also for the airline industry .

aligning this initiative with ongoing strategic plans for risk - based profiling and targeting of cargo shipments and investment in cargo screening technologies is likely to be a topic of considerable interest in the context of the federal budget process over the next few years .

as part of the budget process , the tsa has prepared a strategic context component of its congressional justification documents since the fy2007 budget cycle .

while these documents provide a general framework of key strategic issues for the tsa , they adhere to a program level justification and analysis and do not provide in - depth discussion of how specific programs and initiatives address specific strategic issues and risk management practices .

while these documents provide a general framework for understanding tsa programs in the strategic context , they may not provide sufficient detail regarding the methods used to set priorities and how the various aviation security programs and initiatives being pursued align with risk - based priorities .

as congress proceeds with initiatives to oversee and possibly modify u.s. approaches to aviation security , substantive issues relating to the contents of aviation security policy , national strategy , and planning documents may be a considerable focus of discussion and debate .

while these documents will likely play an important role as a general blueprint for guiding aviation security policy and strategy , it is also likely that the u.s. approach to aviation security will need to continually evolve and adapt to shifting threats and vulnerabilities .

addressing funding and resources to address shifts in risk and security strategy may be an issue of considerable interest in the context of future year budget planning and debate .

