the downward pressure on international oil prices associated with the global economic downturn has highlighted vulnerabilities in iran's economy .

due to iran's isolation from the international financial system , the country has been relatively insulated from negative spillovers from the international financial crisis .

however , iran's ability to access financing for trade and investment , already complicated by foreign and domestic businesses' concerns about iran's relationship with the international community , have been constrained further by the decline in international credit markets .

economic discontent was a major factor in voting decisions in the presidential elections in june 2009 .

protests and continued political unrest stemming from the presidential elections have raised questions about the future of president ahmadinejad's economic policies .

some analysts speculate that ahmadinejad may try to enact more populist policies in an effort to cement his political base .

in january 2010 , the iranian parliament approved a subsidy reform plan that would cut government subsidies on fuel and other goods and services .

implementation of the plan may enhance iran's long - term financial sustainability , but there are concerns that a reduction in subsidies will lead to high rates of inflation and political unrest in the short - term .

a number of international oil companies have recently announced that they would curb gasoline sales to iran .

they include the swiss - based vitol , glencore , and trafigura ; royal dutch shell ; india's reliance ; malaysia's petronas ; and russia's lukoil .

the house - passed and senate - passed versions of h.r .

2194 would impose more punitive sanctions on iran .

the bills would impose penalties on companies that supply iran with gasoline or support its domestic petroleum - related industries .

the islamic republic of iran is a central focus of u.s. national security policy .

the united states has designated the iranian government as a state sponsor of terrorism .

the united states contends that iran is a destabilizing force in the middle east and expresses concern about its growing influence in the region and internationally .

the united states has decried iran's uranium enrichment activities , which allegedly are being used to develop nuclear weapons .

iran also has been accused of arming shiite militias in iraq , providing support to hezbollah and hamas , and inflaming sectarian strife in the middle east .

this report provides a general overview of iran's economy , addresses related u.s. policy concerns , and discusses policy options for congress .

the purpose of this report is two - fold .

first , it provides insight into important macroeconomic trends , policy reforms and objectives , key economic sectors , international trade patterns , and sources of foreign exchange .

second , in the context of u.s. economic sanctions imposed for national security and foreign policy reasons , the report evaluates iran's economic structure , strengths , and vulnerabilities and discusses issues and options for congress .

iran boasts the word's third largest petroleum reserves , following saudi arabia and canada , and the second largest gas reserves , after russia .

iran also has the middle east and north africa region's second largest economy , after saudi arabia , and the second largest population , after egypt ( see table 1 ) .

nevertheless , iran faces a number of significant economic challenges .

internal challenges include the large role of oil export revenues in financing government spending and vulnerability to oil price fluctuations ; dependence on gasoline imports to meet domestic energy needs ; high inflation , unemployment levels , and poverty levels ; reported domestic economic mismanagement ; and widespread economic inefficiency .

external challenges include u.s. and united nations ( u.n. ) sanctions , other forms of u.s. - led financial pressure , and the fallout from the recent global economic turndown .

the 1979 islamic revolution changed iran's modern political and economic history .

ayatollah ruhollah khomeini and his supporters transformed iran into an islamic state with a public sector - dominated economy that was increasingly internationally isolated .

with the iran - iraq war ( 1980-1988 ) , iran faced negative rates of real economic growth , declines in oil production and revenue , and high levels of inflation .

this represented a reversal of economic prosperity in 1960s and 1970s , during which iran's economy experienced real economic growth rates nearing 10% , one of the world's highest , along with growth in per capita income and low inflation levels .

during the 1990s , iran strived to rebuild war - torn local production , attract international investment , enhance foreign relations , liberalize trade , and , more recently , redistribute wealth under a series of a five - year economic plans .

post - war economic growth included recovery in oil output , but the country faced a severe economic downturn in the latter part of the decade due to a drop in international oil prices .

since the 1979 u.s. embassy hostage crisis in tehran , iran has been subject to various u.s. economic sanctions .

such actions have been motivated over time by concerns regarding iran's nuclear program and support for terrorist organizations .

more recently , the united states has focused on targeted financial measures to isolate iran from the u.s. financial and commercial system .

sanctions have been imposed in order to change the iranian government's policies with respect to its nuclear program and support to terrorist organizations .

to that end , the united states has imposed sanctions to curtail the development of iran's petroleum sector and constrain iran's financial resources in a way that motivates policy change in iran .

the united states also has applied diplomatic pressure on foreign countries and companies to limit business with iran .

some european union states and other countries also have imposed sanctions on iran in line with moves by the united nations ( u.n. ) .

the united states has pushed for stronger international sanctions against iran in the united nations .

most recently , in march 2008 , the united nations security council ( unsc ) passed a third round of sanctions against iran through resolution 1803 , calling for the inspection of suspicious international shipping to and from iran that are suspected of carrying prohibited goods .

it encourages greater monitoring of named iranian financial institutions , travel bans for named iranians , and freezes of additional assets related to iran's nuclear program .

in june 2008 , the five permanent members of the unsc ( britain , china , france , russia , and the united states ) and germany offered to suspend further sanctions against iran if iran agreed to halt its uranium enrichment program and to begin negotiations on constraints of its nuclear activity .

the six countries considered iran's response unclear , and in august 2008 , they agreed to pursue a fourth round of u.n. sanctions against iran .

iran has opposed u.s. and u.n. sanctions vehemently .

the country has long maintained that the purpose of its uranium enrichment program is to produce fuel for nuclear power reactors , rather than fissile material for nuclear weapons .

the iranian government asserts its right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes .

iran increasingly has questioned the justification of the sanctions in light of some recent positive reports on its nuclear activities .

a november 2007 u.s. national intelligence estimate ( nie ) assessed that iran stopped its nuclear activities for weapons proliferation in 2003 .

iran and the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) agreed in august 2007 on a work program that would clarify the outstanding questions regarding tehran's nuclear program .

iran has clarified some questions , but a may 2008 report by the iaea raised major new questions about iran's nuclear intentions .

iran's economic growth was expected to slow in 2009 , owing to the decline in international oil prices in late 2008 , domestic economic mismanagement , and limited oil revenue savings to weather the recent global economic turndown .

economic growth is expected to pick up modestly in 2010 .

during the earlier part of the decade , iran's economy experienced broad - based growth , with the annual change in real gdp peaking in fy2007 ( see table 2 ) .

during this period , economic growth was driven by government spending on priority sectors , expansionary monetary and fiscal economic policies , increased growth in credit , and private consumption .

despite high international oil prices in recent years , the contribution of the oil and gas sector to economic growth has been more modest .

iran's oil economy has been faced with low levels of production and inadequate investment .

u.s. and u.n. sanctions levied against iran , along with the poor domestic business environment , may contribute to low levels of investment .

in recent years , iran's economic growth has been hampered by double - digit rates of inflation .

although high inflation is widespread among the oil - exporting countries in the middle east and central asia , iran has one of the highest .

iran's average consumer price index ( cpi ) inflation level was above 25% at year - end 2008 .

through 2009 , the cpi inflation level dropped , but remained above 13% .

for 2010 , budgetary constraints are expected to reduce inflation further .

by some estimates , if iran implements the recently passed subsidy reform bill , then inflation will rise again as the price of food , utilities , education , and other goods and services increases .

domestic factors contributing to the uptick in inflation include expansionary government economic policies and growing consumption demands .

external factors include international sanctions against iran and rising international food and energy import prices .

inflation levels have been associated with ahmadinejad's efforts to curb banking interest rates for loans to sub - inflation levels .

the central bank , the bank markazi , has opposed these hikes .

the unemployment rate remains high , reaching an estimated 11.8% in 2008 .

some observers contend that the unemployment rate is higher than figures reported by the iranian government .

at least one - fifth of iranians lived below the poverty line in 2002 .

iran has a young population and each year , about 750,000 iranians enter the labor market for the first time , placing pressure on the government to generate new jobs .

the emigration of young skilled and educated people continues to pose a problem for iran .

the imf reported that iran has the highest "brain drain" rate in the world .

over the past few decades , iran has engaged in a series of five - year economic plans in order to shift its state - dominated economy into an economy that is market - oriented , private sector - led , and economically diversified .

reform efforts have experienced resistance from various elements of iran's political establishment .

significant strides toward trade liberalization , economic diversification , and privatization took place under the khatemi administration ( 1997-2005 ) .

the government introduced some structural reforms such as tax policy changes and adoption of new foreign investment laws to promote iran's global market integration and attract investment .

iran shifted to a unified managed float exchange rate system in march 2002 .

at various times previously , iran has had different combinations of exchange rates , including official , export , parallel market , and tehran stock market versions .

the exchange rate reform is considered to have improved iran's trading environment and to have enhanced public sector transparency modestly .

president ahmadinejad has taken a more populist approach with his economic policies , with promises of "bringing the oil money to people's tables" when he took office in 2005 .

some critics maintain that policies under president ahmadinejad have been a major contributor to budget deficits and are ineffective tools for combating inflation , unemployment , and poverty .

in line with ahmadinejad's populist agenda , fiscal policy has been expansionary .

the government provides extensive public subsidies on gasoline , food , and housing .

energy subsidies alone represent about 12% of iran's gdp .

some observers estimate total subsidies to reach over 25% of gdp .

when including implicit subsidies , the government's spending on subsidies may be even higher .

in addition to subsidies , president ahmadinejad has provided cash handouts to the poor .

subsidies and cash handouts are considered by many to be un - targeted and ineffective at helping the poor .

in january 2010 , the parliament passed a massive overhaul of iran's system of state subsidies .

the legislation reduces state subsidies by $20 billion .

a goal of the reforms is to reduce overconsumption .

many analysts contend that high subsidies do not give iranians an incentive to conserve .

while many economists assert that a reduction of iran's subsidies are necessary for iran's long - term economic sustainability , there are concerns that subsidy cuts may lead to a sharp increase in inflation of basic goods and gasoline and , based on past experience , lead to political unrest .

in june 2007 , the government implemented a gasoline rationing system to reduce gasoline consumption .

although this policy was extremely unpopular and even led to public riots , it resulted in a drop in gasoline consumption .

iran's supreme leader has offered support to president ahmadinejad in his efforts to implement the subsidy reform .

however , some analysts speculate that the political unrest following the june 2009 presidential elections may compel ahmadinejad to return to more populist policies in an effort to maintain his political base .

monetary policy also has been expansionary under ahmadinejad .

the government has provided low - interest loans for agriculture , tourism , and industry and has instituted loan forgiveness policies .

other activities include the creation of a number of social programs to assist farmer and rural residents .

ahmadinejad's cabinet established the $1.3 billion imam reza mehr fund ( imam reza compassion fund ) to assist youth with marriage , housing , and education in 2006 .

as in other middle eastern countries , the rising cost of marriage is financially prohibitive to many young iranians .

interest - free loans are available to youth for marriage through the fund .

some economists contend that ahmadinejad's efforts to lower the interest rate have led to excessive liquidity and inflation .

the government has used oil export revenues from the oil stabilization fund ( osf ) to support expansionary fiscal and monetary policies .

the osf was created by the bank markazi , in 2001 to store surplus oil revenue and to smooth economic vulnerabilities associated with oil price fluctuations .

iran has been drawing down on its osf to finance discretionary spending , such as for public subsidies , cash handouts to the poor , and low - interest loans .

of primary concern to the united states and the international community is the purported use of oil export revenues to finance iran's nuclear program and alleged support for terrorist groups .

while estimates vary about the size of the osf , many observers express concern it no longer contains sufficient funds to cushion against the global economic turndown .

iran's economy is heavily dominated by the state , which is the recipient of revenues from crude oil exports , and quasi - state actors , such as the bonyads and the commercial entities of the islamic revolutionary guard corp ( irgc ) .

private sector activity is limited , although the government is engaged in some privatization efforts .

iran's economy has a number of key sectors .

in 2008 , industry – which includes oil and gas , petrochemicals , steel , textile , and automotive manufacturing – accounted for an estimated 45% of the iran's gdp .

the services sector , including financial services , represented about 44% of iran's economy .

agriculture constituted about 11% of iran's economy .

agriculture continues to be one of the economy's largest employers , representing one - fifth of all jobs based on a 1991 census .

some analysts have expressed concern that excessive focus on the oil and gas sector is crowding out investment and expansion opportunities in other sectors and opportunities for economic diversification .

iran's economic sectors remain heavily dominated by the state , but there are some privatization efforts under way .

international trade contributes significantly to the iranian economy .

between 2004 to 2007 , iran's total trade in goods ( exports plus imports ) nearly doubled , reaching about $147 billion in 2007 .

due to the decline in international oil prices , iran's trade surplus dropped from $32 billion 2008 to $17 billion in 2009 ( see table 3 ) .

some analysts point out that iran's trade with the world may actually be higher due to transshipment or black market trade .

iran maintained a current account surplus in 2008 .

the current account surplus declined from 12% of gdp in 2007 to 7% of gdp in 2008 .

a rebound in oil prices in 2010 would boost iran's export growth , contributing to an improvement in iran's trade balance and current account balance .

however , such improvement may be constrained somewhat by higher import prices due to sanctions .

according to the iran's trade commission , international financial sanctions have raised trade costs for iran between 5% and 10% annually and have increased the time it takes to conduct transactions .

members of congress appear to be divided about the united states' course of action with respect to iran .

some contend that the united states should pursue harsher measures against iran , given the gravity of the real and potential threats posed by iran's uranium enrichment program and terrorism financing .

others suggest that perhaps the united states should consider more positive engagement with iran through rebuilding diplomatic ties and pursuing economic engagement with iran , such as through iran's accession to the world trade organization .

they suggest that iran would be receptive to sincere positive engagement on the part of the united states .

there is debate about whether or not the united states should pursue more sanctions against iran unilaterally or through u.n. action .

some lawmakers assert that u.s. unilateral efforts to pressure iran may detract from building multilateral consensus to widen punitive measures against iran through the united nations .

some maintain that unilateral efforts also might reduce iran's willingness to cooperate with the united nations .

others note that pursuing multilateral action can be a lengthy process and that it is difficult to find consensus among foreign countries with various competing interests , such as security and commercial interests .

the united nations successfully passed the third round of sanctions against iran only after watering them down to satisfy chinese and indian concerns .

as industrializing countries with increasing energy demands and insufficient supplies , china and india view iran as a critical energy supplier for their needs .

both countries also have growing trade relations with iran .

such national interest priorities may override international security concerns about iranian alleged terrorist financing or nuclear technology development .

still , some lawmakers consider the recently - passed third u.n. resolution a good first step and support pushing for more punitive action through the unsc .

others suggest that the extent to which china and india engage in economic transactions with iran may be muted somewhat by the two countries' ties with the united states .

analysts debate the impact of sanctions on iran's economy .

international tensions associated with iran's nuclear program and alleged financing for terrorist organizations undoubtedly have complicated iran's business environment .

some analysts point to iran's low levels of foreign investment , difficulties obtaining trade finance , and challenges in developing its oil and gas sectors as evidence of the impact of sanctions .

on the other hand , according to a gao report , "iran's global trade ties and leading role in energy production make it difficult for the united states to isolate iran and pressure it to reduce proliferation activities and support for terrorism. .

the peterson institute for international economics ( iie ) writes that sanctions increasingly have been unsuccessful as globalization has allowed embargoed countries to find other suppliers and export destinations for trade and investment .

sanctions may not raise the costs to the point that they are crippling to the iranian's trade and financial interactions with the rest of the world .

iran reportedly is able to circumvent the trade ban by transshipment of u.s. exports through other countries , such as the uae .

analysts also note that international sanctions may simply result in a diversion of iran's trade to other countries that do not enforce sanctions against iran .

in addition to the impact of sanctions on iran's economy , some lawmakers question the effectiveness of sanctions , noting that despite decades of sanctions , the united states has not been able to significantly shift the iranian government's policies .

previous studies have found that sanctions have little impact on government policy and that , rather , they tend to hurt the population of a country .

in congressional testimony , one observer stated , "in a broader sense , sanctions often end up hurting ordinary people while having little impact on the government leaders we are trying to influence. .

the recent enforcement of targeted financial measures appears to signal an effort to avoid the drawbacks of the broader trade sanctions of the past and to concentrate pressure on certain key actors .

despite the narrower focus of targeted financial sanctions , the effects of these sanctions may spill over to the iranian populace .

there is uncertainty about how sanctions affect the elite , and how elite views may spillover into government policy .

congress may choose to follow with gao's assessment and require the u.s. treasury and state to collect data to assess the economic impact of sanctions on iran .

according to a recent gao report , u.s. economic sanctions on iran have had affected iran , but the extent of these effects on iran's economy and the government's decisions are difficult to gauge .

the gao notes that assessment of the impact of sanctions is challenging because of a lack of data collection by the u.s. government and baseline information for comparability .

in the 110 th congress , several bills were passed in the house related to iran .

house - passed bills encouraged tighter sanctions against iran , but noted that such action does not indicate congressional support for u.s. military action against iran .

the following were some of the major pieces of legislation proposed by lawmakers: h.r .

957 , "to amend the iran sanctions act of 1996 to expand and clarify the entities against which sanctions would be imposed," would have stiffened existing sanctions against iran .

the bill was passed by the house on july 31 , 2007 and referred to senate committee on august 3 , 2007 .

h.r .

2347 , "iran sanctions enabling act of 2007," and the corresponding senate version of the bill ( s. 1430 ) would have encouraged divestment from companies that conduct business with iran .

the bush administration opposed h.r .

2347 on the grounds that it may interfere with u.s. foreign policy efforts .

the bill would have allowed for sanctions against countries such as china , russia , and france for conducting business with iran .

h.r .

2347 was passed by the house on july 31 , 2007 and referred to senate committee on august 3 , 2007 .

h.r .

1400 , "the iran counter - proliferation act of 2007," and its companion bill , s. 970 , would have expanded economic sanctions against iran and removed the presidential waiver in the iran - libya sanctions act .

h.r .

1400 was passed by the house on september 25 , 2007 and referred to senate committee on september 26 , 2007 .

h.r .

2798 was a more narrowly targeted measure against iran .

it would have prohibited any assistance by the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) to individuals who have finance or investment ties to countries that are state sponsors of terror .

the bill would have targeted iran , north korea , and sudan .

the bill was passed by the house on july 23 , 2007 and was ordered to be reported out to the senate committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar on march 4 , 2008 .

h.r .

1357 , "to require divestiture of current investments in iran , to prohibit future investments in iran , and to require disclosure to investors of information relating to such investments," was referred to house subcommittee on june 5 , 2007 .

h.r .

7112 , "comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2008," would have widened current sanctions to u.s. firms with foreign subsidiaries doing business in iran ; would have encouraged businesses to divest from iran ; and would have imposed penalties on countries that are involved in transshipment , re - exportation , or diversion of sensitive goods to iran .

h.r .

7112 was passed by the house on september 26 , 2008 and referred to house committees .

the related senate measure , s. 3445 , was introduced on september 26 , 2008 .

in the 111 th congress , several bills have been introduced to expand economic and diplomatic pressure on iran .

some lawmakers have advocated targeting iran's dependency on imports of refined petroleum products .

h.r .

2194 , the "comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2009," was passed by the house on december 15 , 2009 .

the bill would permit sanctions to be imposed on investments of $20 million or more that directly and significantly contribute to the enhancement of iran's ability to develop iranian petroleum resources .

in addition , the bill would permit sanctions on the exportation of refined petroleum resources to iran and activities that support the exportation of refined petroleum resources , including shipping , insurance , and financing activities .

s. 2799 , the senate version of h.r .

2194 , was passed by the senate on march 11 , 2010 .

some members of congress have urged a speedy reconciliation of the two bills .

supporters of such punitive options assert that they will place pressure on the iranian government , given iran's lack of refining capacity and dependence on gasoline imports .

others fear that such action would adversely affect global energy supplies and ramp up prices for u.s. consumers .

in addition , some american business groups express concern that such measures may affect their foreign subsidiaries or partners who conduct business with iran , raising questions about trade - offs between security and commercial interests .

some critics also maintain that such an action would target the iranian populace more than the regime .

there is speculation about how congressional passage of such measures would affect president obama's efforts to secure international support for another round of u.n. sanctions .

h.r .

1327 , the iran sanctions enabling act of 2009 , would support recent actions taken by some state and local governments and education institutions to divest their pension funds from persons and companies that invest more than $20 million in iran's energy sector .

the bill would prohibit legal action against asset managers who divest and would require states to take several measures when considering divestment , including providing the targeted entity with an opportunity to demonstrate that it does not have investment activities in iran that meet the $20 million threshold .

h.r .

1327 was introduced on march 5 , 2009 , and a committee hearing was held on march 12 , 2009 .

on october 15 , 2009 , the bill was referred to senate committee .

supporters of the legislation assert that a divestment policy provides the united states with significant political and financial leverage against iran .

critics argue that a divestment strategy would hamper u.s. diplomatic negotiations with iran .

the united states also may risk trade retaliation from countries whose companies are facing divestment .

others maintain that u.s. divestment efforts may not significantly affect the financial operations of foreign companies to the extent that might prompt them to reconsider their business activities in iran .

