on august 9 , 2007 , liquidity abruptly dried up for many financial firms and securities markets .

suddenly some firms were able to borrow and investors were able to sell certain securities only at prohibitive rates and prices , if at all .

the "liquidity crunch" was most extreme for firms and securities with links to subprime mortgages , but it also spread rapidly into seemingly unrelated areas .

the federal reserve ( fed ) was drawn into the liquidity crunch from the start .

on august 9 , it injected unusually large quantities of reserves into the banking system to prevent the federal funds rate from exceeding its target .

in a series of steps between september 2007 and december 2008 , the fed reduced the federal funds rate from 5.25% to a target range of 0% to 0.25% .

it has been observed that the most unusual aspect of the crisis is its persistence over time .

over that time , the fed has aggressively reduced the federal funds rate and the discount rate in an attempt to calm the waters .

when this proved not to be enough , the fed greatly expanded its direct lending to the financial sector through several new lending programs , some of which can be seen as adaptations of traditional tools and others which can be seen as more fundamental departures from the status quo .

the fed's decision to assist specific troubled financial institutions sparked controversy .

in march 2008 , the fed helped the investment bank bear stearns avoid bankruptcy , even though bear stearns was not a member bank of the federal reserve system ( because it was not a depository institution ) , and , therefore , not part of the regulatory regime that accompanies membership .

at the same time , it created two lending facilities for other non - bank primary dealers .

in september , the investment bank lehman brothers filed for bankruptcy ( it did not receive emergency government assistance ) , and the financial firm american international group ( aig ) , which was also not a member bank , received a credit line from the fed in order to meet its obligations .

 ( additional aid to aig was extended on three subsequent occasions. ) .

the fed then began directly assisting the markets for commercial paper and asset - backed securities .

more recently , the fed and federal government has guaranteed losses on assets owned by citigroup .

this marked the first time in more than 70 years that the fed had lent to non - members , and it did so using emergency statutory authority ( section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act ) .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( h.r .

4173 ) adds conditions to the fed's emergency lending authority .

h.r .

4173 was signed into law on july 21 , 2010 , as p.l .

111-203 .

in september 2008 , the housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) fannie mae and freddie mac were taken into conservatorship by the government .

on november 25 , 2008 , the fed announced that it would make large - scale purchases of the direct obligations and mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) issued by the housing gses .

as financial conditions have improved in 2009 , the fed's focus , in turn , has shifted from stabilizing financial markets to stabilizing the housing market .

as fewer financial firms have accessed fed lending facilities , direct assistance has been replaced on the fed's balance sheet by purchases of debt and mbs issued by the housing gses .

this has kept relatively constant the overall amount of liquidity the fed has provided to the economy .

the fed purchased about $175 billion of gse debt and $1.25 trillion of mbs by the spring of 2010 .

most emergency facilities were allowed to expire in february 2010 , but the central bank liquidity swap lines were reopened in may 2010 to provide dollar liquidity to foreign countries needed as a result of the economic crisis in greece .

one of the original purposes of the federal reserve act , enacted in 1913 , was to prevent the recurrence of financial panics .

to that end , the fed has been given broad authority over monetary policy and the payments system , including the issuance of federal reserve notes as the national currency .

because this authority is delegated from congress , the fed's actions are subject to congressional oversight .

although the fed has broad authority to independently execute monetary policy on a day - to - day basis , the fed's actions in the crisis have raised fundamental questions about the fed's proper role , and what role congress should play in assessing those issues .

s. 896 , which was signed into law on may 20 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-22 ) , allows government accountability office ( gao ) audits of a limited subset of fed emergency activities .

h.r .

4173 removes most gao audit restrictions , calls for a gao audit of emergency actions , and requires disclosure of the identities of borrowers with a delay .

h.r .

4173 also made comprehensive changes to the financial regulatory system .

the fed's role in prudential regulation , consumer protection regulation , payment system regulation , and systemic risk regulation was modified by this legislation .

crs report r40877 , financial regulatory reform: systemic risk and the federal reserve , analyzes the effects of this legislation on the fed's role in the regulatory system .

this report reviews the fed's actions since august 2007 and analyzes the policy issues raised by those actions .

the fed , the nation's central bank , was established in 1913 by the federal reserve act ( 38 stat .

251 ) .

today , its primary duty is the execution of monetary policy through open market operations to fulfill its mandate to promote price stability and maximum employment .

besides the conduct of monetary policy , the federal reserve has a number of other duties: it regulates financial institutions and consumer financial products , issues paper currency , clears checks , collects economic data , and carries out economic research .

prominent in the current debate is one particular responsibility: to act as a lender of last resort to the financial system when capital cannot be raised in private markets to prevent financial panics .

the next two sections explain the fed's traditional tools , open market operations and discount window lending , and summarize its recent use of those tools .

the fed's traditional tools are aimed at the commercial banking system , but current financial turmoil has occurred outside of the banking system as well .

the inability of traditional tools to calm financial markets since august 2007 has led the fed to develop several new tools to fill perceived gaps between open market operations and the discount window .

traditionally , the lender of last resort function has focused on the banking system , and the fed's relationship with the banking system , encompassing costs and privileges , is prescribed in detail by the federal reserve act .

many of the new facilities are aimed at other parts of the financial system , however , and the federal reserve act is largely silent on the fed's authority outside the banking system .

one exception is the broad emergency authority under section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act , which the fed has frequently invoked since the financial crisis began .

over the course of the year , several financial firms that were deemed "too big to fail" received financial assistance from the fed in the form of loans , troubled asset purchases , and asset guarantees .

this assistance went beyond its traditional role of acting as a lender of last resort by providing loans to illiquid but solvent firms .

in a joint announcement in march 2009 , the treasury and fed stated a desire in the long run to transfer assets acquired by the fed ( via the maiden lane llcs ) from bear stearns and the american international group ( aig ) to the treasury , but to date have not taken any steps to do so .

h.r .

4173 alters section 13 ( 3 ) authority in an attempt to prevent assistance to individual firms in the future .

while turmoil plagues financial markets periodically , the current episode is notable for its breadth , depth , and persistence .

it is difficult to make the case that the fed has not responded to the current turmoil with alacrity and creativity .

the slow financial and economic recovery is not necessarily a sign that the fed's policy decisions have been wrongheaded — the fed has provided the financial sector with unprecedented liquidity , but it cannot force institutions to use that liquidity to expand their lending or investing .

the fed's response has raised statutory issues that congress may wish to consider in its oversight capacity .

namely , the fed's role in the bear stearns acquisition , the assistance to aig , citigroup , and bank of america , the creation of the primary dealer credit facility ( a sort of discount window for a group of non - member banks ) , and its intervention in the commercial paper market involved emergency authorities that had not been used in more than 70 years .

this authority was needed because the actions involved financial institutions that were not member banks of the federal reserve system ( i.e. , depository institutions ) .

but because the authority is broad and open - ended , the fed's actions under this authority are subject to few legal parameters .

the authority allows lending to non - member banks , but some of the loans in the bear stearns and aig agreements were to llcs that the fed created and controls , and have been used to purchase bear stearns' and aig's assets .

these actions raise an important issue — if financial institutions can receive some of the benefits of fed protection , in some cases because they are "too big to fail," should they also be subject to the costs that member banks bear in terms of safety and soundness regulations , imposed to limit the moral hazard that results from fed and fdic protections ? .

h.r .

4173 attempts to limit future emergency lending to broadly available , collateralized facilities to avoid assistance to failing firms .

some policymakers have questioned whether an institution largely independent from the elected branches of government should be able to ( indirectly ) place significant taxpayer funds at risk by providing the financial sector with hundreds of billions of dollars of assistance through use of its emergency powers .

this raises the policy issue of how to balance the needs for congressional transparency and oversight against the economic benefits of fed independence .

h.r .

4173 removes most gao audit restrictions and requires disclosure of the identities of borrowers with a delay .

furthermore , without congressional input , hundreds of billions of dollars of borrowing by the treasury ( through the treasury supplementary financing program ) has allowed the fed to increase its lending capacity without detrimental effects on inflation .

but as long as there is no government program to systematically manage financial difficulties at too big to fail institutions , the fed is the only institution that can step in quickly enough to cope with problems on a case - by - case basis .

while some had believed tarp provided the type of systemic approach that would allow the fed to return to a more traditional role , the fed's subsequent creation of lending facilities to support the commercial paper market , mortgage market , and asset - backed securities market suggests that tarp cannot cover all unforeseen contingencies .

furthermore , tarp is scheduled to expire in october 2010 and is limited in size , although fed and tarp money have been coupled in order for tarp to have an impact beyond the $700 billion authorized by congress .

the fed's actions have resulted in an unprecedented expansion in its balance sheet and the portion of the money supply it controls .

normally , this would be highly inflationary , but inflation has remained low because of the financial crisis .

as the economy improves , the fed will need to contain this monetary expansion to prevent inflation from rising , but not so fast that it causes the financial system to destabilize again .

the increase in the balance sheet could have already been automatically reversed by the decline in the fed's direct lending , but the fed has chosen to offset it through large - scale purchases of assets to maintain a high level of liquidity in the economy .

the fed views paying interest on bank reserves ( authorized by p.l .

110-343 ) as an effective way to prevent inflation from rising .

