congress plays a significant role in u.s. policymaking toward the palestinians .

since the united states established ties with the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) during the 1990s , the united states has sought to help facilitate a negotiated solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict , counter palestinian terrorist groups , and provide certain types of assistance to palestinians in the west bank and gaza .

after the signing of the israel - plo declaration of principles in 1993 , congress has committed more than $5 billion in bilateral assistance to the palestinians .

see crs report rs22967 , u.s. foreign aid to the palestinians , by jim zanotti , for more information .

almost every aspect of palestinian existence has some connection with israel .

israel occupies the west bank and effectively annexed east jerusalem after the 1967 arab - israeli war ; and it maintains significant control over administrative borders , resources , and trade in both the west bank and gaza .

israelis and palestinians vie for advantages in addressing these issues within regional and international foreign policy frameworks .

gaza presents complicated challenges for the palestinians who live there .

hamas , israel , the pa , and several outside actors affect gaza's difficult security , political , and humanitarian situations .

over the past decade , these situations have fueled cyclical conflicts between israel and hamas ( along with other palestinian militants based in gaza ) that could recur in the future .

in the aftermath of each conflict , significant international attention focused on the still largely elusive tasks of improving humanitarian conditions and economic opportunities for palestinians in gaza ; and preventing hamas and other militants from reconstituting arsenals and military infrastructure .

no significant breakthrough has occurred to reconcile civilian infrastructure needs with security considerations .

threats to israel from hamas and other militant groups based in gaza have changed over time .

although palestinian militants maintain rocket and mortar arsenals , israel's iron dome defense system reportedly has decreased the threat to israel from projectiles during this decade .

additionally , tunnels that palestinian militants used somewhat effectively in the 2014 conflict have been neutralized to some extent by systematic israeli efforts , with some financial and technological assistance from the united states .

an israeli military officer was cited in september 2018 as saying that hamas is investing fewer resources in tunnels that cross into israel , but continuing to strengthen tunnels within gaza that could present difficulties for israeli soldiers deployed inside the territory during a future conflict .

palestinian protests and violence along security fences that divide gaza from israel have attracted international attention in 2018 .

some gazans have demonstrated "popular resistance" in which crowds gather near the fences , and some people try to breach the fences or use rudimentary weapons ( slingshots , basic explosives , burning tires ) against israeli security personnel .

others have used incendiary kites or balloons to set fires to arable land in southern israel .

the purpose of these tactics may be to provoke israeli responses that evoke international sympathy for palestinians and criticism of israel — a dynamic that bolstered palestinian national aspirations in the late 1980s during the first intifada .

while some of these protests and riots have been organized on a grass - roots level , hamas has reportedly become more directly involved as they have continued .

israel has used force in efforts to contain the protests and violence near the gaza frontier .

in spring 2018 , israeli personnel killed more than 120 palestinians in gaza , given their use of live fire to patrol the security fences around the territory .

this led the u.n. human rights council to call in may for an "independent , international commission of inquiry" to produce a report .

in june , u.n. general assembly resolution es - 10 / 20 condemned israeli actions against palestinian civilians , as well as the firing of rockets from gaza against israeli civilians .

subsequently , israel - gaza altercations and occasional spikes in violence ( including rocket barrages from gaza and israeli air strikes inside gaza ) have continued , fueling speculation about the possibility of a fourth major conflict and its regional implications .

according to the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs , as of october 22 , during 2018 israeli personnel had killed more than 200 gazans and injured thousands more .

in mid - november , israel and hamas narrowly averted all - out conflict after an israeli raid uncovered by hamas contributed to a major escalation that required egyptian intervention to quiet .

the precarious security situation in gaza is linked to humanitarian conditions , and because gaza does not have a self - sufficient economy , external assistance largely drives humanitarian welfare .

recent u.s. and pa reductions in funding for gaza have affected the humanitarian assessment .

much of the focus from international organizations has been on the possibility that funding cuts could make a difficult situation in gaza worse .

gazans already face chronic economic difficulties and shortages of electricity and safe drinking water .

according to the world bank , large transfers of aid and pa money historically have kept gaza's economy afloat , but those transfers have significantly declined since 2017 .

furthermore: in this environment the usd30 million per month reduction in pa payments in 2018 , the winding down of the usd50-60 million per year [bilateral economic aid] operation of the us government , and the cuts being made in the unrwa program are having a significant effect on economic growth and unemployment .

the possibility that humanitarian crisis could destabilize gaza has prompted discussions and some efforts among u.s. , israeli , and arab leaders aimed at improving living conditions and reducing spillover threats .

in fall 2018 , israel started allowing shipments of qatari fuel and cash into gaza to partially alleviate the electricity shortages and compensate for the pa funding reductions .

public statements from administration officials and some members of congress suggest differences of opinion on how u.s. policy should link humanitarian assistance with israel - hamas - pa political considerations .

for example: on august 24 , a state department official defended the u.s. decision to reprogram bilateral economic aid away from the west bank and gaza by saying that "this decision takes into account the challenges the international community faces in providing assistance in gaza , where hamas control endangers the lives of gaza's citizens and degrades an already dire humanitarian and economic situation. .

on september 6 , president trump stated that he "stopped massive amounts of money we were paying to the palestinians" and said that "we're not paying [them] until we make a [diplomatic] deal. .

later in september , 34 senators and 112 representatives sent letters to trump administration officials urging them to reverse the u.s. funding reductions with respect to bilateral economic aid and humanitarian contributions to unrwa .

both letters expressed concern that the funding reductions would undermine , rather than advance , prospects for a negotiated solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict .

hamas and seven other palestinian groups have been designated foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) by the state department: abu nidal organization , al aqsa martyrs' brigades , army of islam , palestine liberation front - abu abbas faction , palestine islamic jihad , popular front for the liberation of palestine , and popular front for the liberation of palestine - general command .

additional information on some of these organizations is available in appendix b .

since the israel - plo agreements of the 1990s , these groups have engaged in a variety of methods of violence , killing hundreds of israelis — both military and civilian .

palestinians who insist that they are engaging in asymmetric warfare with a stronger enemy point to the thousands of deaths inflicted on palestinians by israelis since 1993 , some through acts of terrorism aimed at civilians .

palestinian militants in gaza periodically fire rockets and mortars into israel indiscriminately .

the possibility that a rocket threat could emerge from the west bank is one factor some israelis cite in explaining their reluctance to consider a full withdrawal from there .

isolated attacks still occur within israel and the west bank .

some are perpetrated by palestinians who are unaffiliated with terrorist groups and who use small arms or vehicles as weapons .

antipathy between jewish settlers and palestinian residents in the west bank leads to occasional attacks on both sides .

militants also stage attacks and attempt to capture israeli soldiers , including at or near gaza border crossings .

the plo has pursued a number of international initiatives — opposed by the united states and israel — that are part of a broader effort to obtain greater international recognition of palestinian statehood .

some 137 out of 193 u.n. member states reportedly have formally recognized the state of palestine that the plo declared in 1988 .

these do not include the most politically and economically influential western countries .

the plo's international initiatives are centered on the united nations .

in september 2011 , plo chairman abbas applied for palestinian membership in the united nations .

officially , the application remains pending in the security council's membership committee , whose members did not achieve consensus during 2011 deliberations .

the application for palestinian membership would likely face a u.s. veto if it came to a future vote in the security council .

in fall 2011 , the palestinians obtained membership in the u.n. educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) .

under u.s. laws passed in 1990 and 1994 , palestinian admission to membership in unesco in 2011 triggered the withholding of u.s. assessed and voluntary financial contributions to the organization .

if the palestinians were to obtain membership in other u.n. entities , the 1990 and 1994 u.s. laws might trigger withholdings of u.s. financial contributions to these entities .

such withholdings could adversely affect these entities' budgets and complicate the conduct of u.s. foreign policy within the u.n. system and other multilateral settings .

the following are some other significant steps for the plo in international fora: on november 29 , 2012 , the u.n. general assembly adopted resolution 67 / 19 .

the resolution changed the permanent u.n. observer status of the plo ( recognized as "palestine" within the u.n. system ) from an "entity" to a "non - member state. .

in 2016 , the palestinians acceded to the u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

some members of congress called for u.s. funding of unfccc to be cut off under the 1994 law , but the state department replied that no cutoff was required because unfccc is a treaty and the palestinians had not joined an international organization .

in september 2017 , the palestinians obtained membership in interpol .

in may 2018 , the palestinians applied to join the u.n. conference on trade and development ( unctad ) and deposited an instrument of accession to the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) with the u.n. secretary general .

a u.s. official was quoted as saying that the administration would "review the application of us legislative restrictions related to palestinian membership in certain un agencies and organizations," presumably referring to both unctad and the organisation for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( which implements the cwc ) .

the palestinians have taken various actions relating to the icc since late 2014: in january 2015 , palestinian leaders deposited an instrument of accession for the "state of palestine" to become party to the rome statute of the icc , after declaring acceptance in december 2014 of icc jurisdiction over crimes allegedly "committed in the occupied palestinian territory , including east jerusalem , since june 13 , 2014. .

later in january 2015 , the u.n. secretary - general , acting as depositary , stated that the rome statute would enter into force for the "state of palestine" on april 1 , 2015 .

later that same month , the icc prosecutor opened a preliminary examination into the "situation in palestine" to determine "whether there is a reasonable basis to proceed with an investigation" against israelis , palestinians , or others , having found that the palestinians had the proper capacity to accept icc jurisdiction in light of the november 2012 adoption of u.n. general assembly resolution 67 / 19 .

palestinian leaders have provided information to the icc on alleged israeli crimes regarding both the summer 2014 israel - gaza conflict and settlement activity in the west bank .

in may 2018 , palestinian leaders made a formal referral of the "situation in palestine" to the prosecutor .

as referenced above , the state department cited palestinian actions relating to the icc in connection with the 2018 closure of the plo office in washington , dc .

various u.s. and israeli officials have denounced palestinian efforts that could subject israelis to icc investigation or prosecution .

the icc can exercise jurisdiction over alleged genocide , war crimes , and crimes against humanity ( "icc crimes" ) that occur on the territory of or are perpetrated by nationals of an entity deemed to be a state after the rome statute enters into force for a state party ; during a period of time in which a nonparty state accepts jurisdiction ; or pursuant to a u.n. security council resolution referring the situation in a state to the icc .

palestinian accession and acceptance of jurisdiction grant the icc prosecutor authority to investigate all alleged icc crimes committed after june 13 , 2014 , by any individual — israeli , palestinian , or otherwise — on "occupied palestinian territory. .

however , palestinian actions do not ensure any formal icc investigation or prosecution of alleged icc crimes .

a party to the rome statute can refer a situation to the court and is required to cooperate with the prosecutor in her investigations , but it is the role of the prosecutor to determine whether to bring charges against and prosecute an individual .

in addition , a case is inadmissible before the icc if it concerns conduct that is the subject of "genuine" legal proceedings ( as described in article 17 of the statute ) brought by a state with jurisdiction , including a state ( such as israel ) that is not party to the statute .

the icc prosecutor is required to notify all states with jurisdiction over a potential case , and such states are afforded the opportunity to challenge icc jurisdiction over a case on inadmissibility grounds .

in september 2018 , the plo filed suit to have the international court of justice ( icj ) order the united states to remove its embassy from jerusalem .

the suit is based on the plo's argument that the 1961 vienna convention of diplomatic relations requires a country to locate its embassy on the territory of a host state .

in response , the trump administration withdrew in october from the convention's optional protocol , which gives the icj jurisdiction to hear disputes arising from the convention .

the u.s. withdrawal will not terminate the suit because it had already been filed .

questions surrounding how the icj will handle the suit may include whether "palestine" is a state for purposes of having standing to pursue a case , and whether israeli consent to icj jurisdiction is required given israel's claims to jerusalem .

appendix a .

historical background palestinian political identity emerged during the british mandate period ( 1923-1948 ) , began to crystallize with the 1947 united nations partition plan ( general assembly resolution 181 ) , and grew stronger following israel's conquest and occupation of the west bank and gaza strip in 1967 .

although in 1947 the united nations intended to create two states in palestine — one jewish and one arab — only the jewish state came into being .

varying explanations for the failure to found an arab state alongside a jewish state in mandatory palestine place blame on the british , the zionists , neighboring arab states , the palestinians themselves , or some combination of these groups .

as the state of israel won its independence in 1947-1948 , roughly 700,000 palestinians were driven or fled from their homes , an occurrence palestinians call the nakba ( "catastrophe" ) .

many ended up in neighboring states ( egypt , syria , lebanon , and jordan ) or in gulf states such as kuwait .

palestinians remaining in israel became israeli citizens .

those who were in the west bank ( including east jerusalem ) and gaza were subject to jordanian and egyptian administration , respectively .

with their population in disarray , and no clear hierarchical structure or polity to govern their affairs , palestinians' interests were largely represented by arab states who had conflicting interests .

1967 was a watershed year for the palestinians .

in the june six - day war , israel decisively defeated the arab states who had styled themselves as the palestinians' protectors , seizing east jerusalem , the west bank , and the gaza strip ( as well as the sinai peninsula from egypt and the golan heights from syria ) .

thus , israel gained control over the entire area that constituted palestine under the british mandate .

israel's territorial gains provided buffer zones between israel's main jewish population centers and its traditional arab state antagonists .

these buffer zones remain an important part of the israeli strategic calculus to this day .

after the 1967 war , israel only effectively annexed east jerusalem ( as well as the golan heights ) , leaving the west bank and gaza under military occupation .

however , both territories became increasingly economically linked with israel .

furthermore , israel presided over the settlement of thousands of jewish civilians in both territories ( although many more in the west bank than gaza ) — officially initiating some of these projects and assuming security responsibility for all of them .

settlement of the west bank increased markedly once the likud party , with its vision of a "greater israel" extending from the mediterranean sea to the jordan river , took power in 1977 .

having israelis settle in the west bank presented some economic and cultural opportunities for palestinians , but also new challenges to their identity and cohesion , civil rights , and territorial contiguity .

these challenges persist and have since intensified .

the arab states' defeat in 1967 , and israeli rule and settlement of the west bank and gaza , allowed the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) to emerge as the representative of palestinian national aspirations .

founded in 1964 as an umbrella organization of palestinian factions and militias in exile under the aegis of the league of arab states ( arab league ) , the plo asserted its own identity after the six - day war by staging guerrilla raids against israel from jordanian territory .

the late yasser arafat and his fatah movement gained leadership of the plo in 1969 , and the plo subsequently achieved international prominence on behalf of the palestinian national cause — representing both the refugees and those under israeli rule in the west bank and gaza .

often this prominence came infamously from acts of terrorism and militancy .

although jordan forced the plo to relocate to lebanon in the early 1970s , and israel forced it to move from lebanon to tunisia in 1982 , the organization and its influence survived .

in 1987 , palestinians inside the west bank and gaza rose up in opposition to israeli occupation ( the first intifada , or uprising ) , leading to increased international attention and sympathy for the palestinians' situation .

in december 1988 , as the intifada continued , arafat initiated dialogue with the united states by renouncing violence , promising to recognize israel's right to exist , and accepting the "land - for - peace" principle embodied in u.n. security council resolution 242 .

arafat's turn to diplomacy with the united states and israel may have been partly motivated by concerns that if the plo's leadership could not be repatriated from exile , its legitimacy with palestinians might be overtaken by local leaders of the intifada in the west bank and gaza ( which included hamas ) .

these concerns intensified when arafat lost much of his arab state support following his political backing for saddam hussein's 1990 invasion of kuwait .

after direct secret diplomacy with israel brokered by norway , the plo recognized israel's right to exist in 1993 , and through the "oslo agreements" gained limited self - rule for palestinians in gaza and parts of the west bank .

the agreements were gradually and partially implemented during the 1990s , but the expectation that they would lead to a final - status peace agreement has not been realized .

many factors have contributed to the failure to complete the oslo process .

a second palestinian intifada from 2000 to 2005 was marked by intense terrorist violence inside israel .

in response , israel took actions that it asserted were necessary to safeguard its citizens' security , rendering unusable much of the pa infrastructure built over the preceding decade .

during the second intifada , u.s. - and internationally supported efforts to restart peace negotiations under various auspices failed to gain traction .

after arafat's death in 2004 and his succession by mahmoud abbas , israel unilaterally withdrew its settlers and military forces from gaza in 2005 .

despite forswearing responsibility for gaza , israel has continued to control most of gaza's borders , airspace , maritime access , and even various buffer zones within the territory .

the limited self - rule regime of the pa was undermined further by hamas's legislative election victory in 2006 , and its takeover of gaza in 2007 .

having different palestinian leaders controlling the west bank and gaza since then has complicated the question of who speaks for the palestinians both domestically and internationally .

appendix b .

key palestinian factions and groups palestine liberation organization ( plo ) the plo is recognized by the united nations ( including israel since 1993 ) as the sole legitimate representative of the palestinian people , wherever they may reside .

it is an umbrella organization that includes 10 palestinian factions ( but not hamas or other islamist groups ) .

as described above , the plo was founded in 1964 , and , since 1969 , has been dominated by the secular nationalist fatah movement .

organizationally , the plo consists of an executive committee , the palestinian national council ( or pnc , its legislature ) , and a central council .

after waging guerrilla warfare against israel under the leadership of yasser arafat , the pnc declared palestinian independence and statehood in 1988 .

this came at a point roughly coinciding with the plo's decision to publicly accept the "land - for - peace" principle of u.n. security council resolution 242 and to contemplate recognizing israel's right to exist .

the declaration had little practical effect , however , because the plo was in exile in tunisia and did not define the territorial scope of its state .

the plo recognized the right of israel to exist in 1993 upon the signing of the declaration of principles between the two parties .

while the palestinian authority ( pa ) maintains a measure of self - rule over various areas of the west bank , as well as a legal claim to self - rule over gaza despite hamas's security presence , the plo remains the representative of the palestinian people to israel and other international actors .

under the name "palestine," the plo maintains a permanent observer mission to the united nations in new york and in geneva as a "non - member state," and has missions and embassies in other countries — some with full diplomatic status .

the plo also is a full member of both the arab league and the organization of islamic cooperation .

fatah fatah , the secular nationalist movement formerly led by yasser arafat , has been the largest and most prominent faction in the plo for decades .

since the establishment of the pa and limited self - rule in the west bank and gaza in 1994 , fatah has dominated the pa , except during the period of partial hamas rule in 2006-2007 .

yet , popular disillusionment has come from the failure to establish a palestinian state , internecine violence , corruption , and poor governance .

arafat's 2004 death removed a major unifying symbol , further eroding fatah's support under mahmoud abbas .

fatah's 1960s charter has never been purged of its clauses calling for the destruction of the zionist state and its economic , political , military , and cultural supports .

abbas routinely expresses support for "legitimate peaceful resistance" to israeli occupation under international law , complemented by negotiations .

however , some of the other fatah central committee members are either less outspoken in their advocacy of nonviolent resistance than abbas , or reportedly explicitly insist on the need to preserve the option of armed struggle .

other plo factions and leaders factions other than fatah within the plo include secular groups such as the popular front for the liberation of palestine ( pflp , a u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organization ) , the democratic front for the liberation of palestine , and the palestinian people's party .

all of these factions have minor political support relative to fatah and hamas .

a number of palestinian politicians and other leaders without traditional factional affiliation have successfully gained followings domestically and in the international community under the plo's umbrella , even some who are not formally affiliated with the plo .

these figures — such as salam fayyad , hanan ashrawi ( a female christian ) , and mustafa barghouti — often have competing agendas .

several of them support a negotiated two - state solution , generally oppose violence , and appeal to the palestinian intellectual elite and to prominent western governments and organizations .

non - plo factions hamas overview hamas grew out of the muslim brotherhood , a religious and political organization founded in egypt in 1928 with branches throughout the arab world .

hamas's emergence as a major political and military group can be traced to the first palestinian intifada , which began in the gaza strip in 1987 in resistance to what hamas terms the israeli occupation of palestinian - populated lands .

the group presented an alternative to yasser arafat and his secular fatah movement by using violence against israeli civilian and military targets just as arafat began negotiating with israel .

hamas took a leading role in attacks against israelis — including suicide bombings targeting civilians — during the second intifada ( between 2000 and 2005 ) .

shortly after arafat's death in 2004 , the group decided to directly involve itself in politics .

in 2006 , a year after the election of fatah's mahmoud abbas as pa president , and just a few months after israel's military withdrawal from the gaza strip , hamas defeated fatah in palestinian legislative council elections .

subsequently , israel , the united states , and others in the international community have sought to neutralize or marginalize hamas .

according to the state department's country reports on terrorism for 2017 , hamas "is comprised of several thousand gaza - based operatives. .

external support hamas reportedly receives support from a number of sources , including some states .

along with some other non - plo factions , hamas has historically received much of its political and material support ( including funding , weapons , and training ) from iran .

hamas became distant from iran when it broke with syria's government in the early years of the country's civil war .

however , the hamas - iran relationship reportedly revived — including financially — around 2017 .

additionally , in 2014 , a treasury department official stated publicly that qatar "has for many years openly financed hamas. .

qatari officials have denied that their government supported hamas financially and have argued that their policy is to support the palestinian people .

in addition to external assistance from states , hamas has other sources of support .

according to the state department's profile of hamas in its country reports on terrorism for 2017 , the group "raises funds in gulf countries" and "receives donations from palestinian expatriates as well as its own charity organizations. .

other rejectionist groups several other small palestinian groups continue to reject the plo's decision to recognize israel's right to exist and to conduct negotiations .

they remain active in the west bank and gaza and retain some ability to carry out terrorist attacks and other forms of violence to undermine efforts at cooperation and conciliation .

in gaza , some observers speculate that hamas permits or even supports the operations of some of these groups , including those with a presence in egypt's sinai peninsula , without avowing ties to them .

such groups provide hamas opportunities to tacitly acquiesce to attacks against israel while avoiding direct responsibility .

palestine islamic jihad ( pij ) the largest of these other groups is palestine islamic jihad ( pij ) , a u.s. - designated fto that , like hamas , is an offshoot of the muslim brotherhood and receives support from iran .

pij emerged in the 1980s in the gaza strip as a rival to hamas .

since 2000 , pij has conducted several attacks against israeli targets ( including suicide bombings ) , killing scores of israelis .

as demonstrated by events in fall 2018 , pij militants in gaza sometimes take the lead in firing rockets into israel — perhaps to pressure hamas into matching its hardline tactics or to demonstrate its credentials as a resistance movement to domestic audiences and external supporters .

pij's ideology combines palestinian nationalism , sunni islamic fundamentalism , and shiite revolutionary thought ( inspired by the iranian revolution ) .

pij seeks liberation of all of historic palestine through armed revolt and the establishment of an islamic state , but unlike hamas has not established a social services network , formed a political movement , or participated in elections .

perhaps largely for these reasons , pij has never approached the same level of support among palestinians as hamas .

some pij leaders reside in syria , lebanon , or other arab states .

according to the state department's country reports on terrorism for 2017 , pij "has close to 1,000 members. .

popular front for the liberation of palestine - general command ( pflp - gc ) another — though smaller — iran - sponsored militant group designated as an fto is the popular front for the liberation of palestine - general command ( pflp - gc ) .

pflp - gc is a splinter group from the pflp , and its founder and secretary - general is ahmed jibril .

according to the state department's 2017 country reports on terrorism , pflp - gc's political leadership "is headquartered in damascus , with bases in southern lebanon and a presence in the palestinian refugee camps in lebanon and syria .

the group also maintains a small presence in gaza. .

according to the state department's country reports on terrorism for 2017 , pflp - gc has several hundred members .

salafist militant groups a number of small palestinian salafist - jihadist militant groups evincing affinities toward groups such as al qaeda or the islamic state have arisen in the gaza strip .

some salafist groups reportedly include former hamas militia commanders who became disaffected by actions from hamas that they deemed to be overly moderate .

salafist groups do not currently appear to threaten hamas's rule in gaza .

palestinian refugees of the some 700,000 palestinians displaced before and during the 1948 arab - israeli war , about one - third ended up in the west bank , one - third in the gaza strip , and one - third in neighboring arab countries .

according to the u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) , there are roughly 5.4 million registered refugees ( comprising original refugees and their descendants ) in unrwa's areas of operation — the west bank , gaza , jordan , syria , and lebanon .

jordan offered palestinian refugees citizenship , partly owing to its previous unilateral annexation of the west bank ( which ended in 1988 ) , but the other refugees in the region are generally stateless and therefore limited in their ability to travel .

many of the refugees remain reliant on unrwa for food , health care , and education .

for political and economic reasons , arab host governments generally have not actively supported the assimilation of palestinian refugees into their societies .

even if able to assimilate , many palestinian refugees hold out hope of returning to the homes they or their ancestors left behind or possibly to a future palestinian state .

many assert a sense of dispossession and betrayal over never having been allowed to return to their homes , land , and property .

some palestinian factions have organized followings among refugee populations , and militias have proliferated at various times in some refugee areas in lebanon and syria .

the refugees seek to influence both their host governments and the plo / pa to pursue a solution to their claims as part of any final status deal with israel .

for additional information on palestinian refugees and unrwa ( including recent developments regarding u.s. contributions ) , see crs report rs22967 , u.s. foreign aid to the palestinians , by jim zanotti .

