legislative interest in the patent system has been evidenced by substantial discussion of omnibus reform bills .

some of the reforms considered in the 110 th congress , but ultimately not enacted , would have impacted the united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) .

among these proposals are the adoption of patent opposition proceedings , changes to the rules governing the publication of pending patent applications , and third party submission of information to the uspto that may be pertinent to the decisions whether to allow a patent to issue or not .

alongside these congressional proposals , the uspto itself has engaged in a substantial rulemaking effort in recent years .

this process culminated in new rules that would make several significant changes to the patent acquisition process .

first , the rules would limit the number of "claims" that can be filed in a particular patent application , unless the applicant supplies the uspto with an "examination support document" in furtherance of that application .

second , the rules would limit the number of "continued applications" that could be filed , absent a petition and showing by the patent applicant of the need for such applications .

in addition , the uspto has proposed reforms that would impose additional applicant disclosure obligations with respect to "information disclosure statements" filed in support of a particular patent application .

the uspto rules concerning claims and continued applications are controversial .

some patent professionals are concerned that the rules would make the process of patent acquisition more costly , impede the ability of innovators to protect their inventions adequately , and ultimately harm innovation .

some have also opined that the rules are inconsistent with the provisions of the governing patent legislation , the patent act of 1952 .

on the other hand , other observers believe that current claiming and continued application practices are subject to abuses that can potentially place undue burdens upon the uspto during its examination tasks , be harmful to competitive industry , and at times work against the public interest .

these observers favor reforms that would limit what they see as applicant abuses of the current system .

criticisms of the uspto rules have led to legal challenges before the u.s. district court for the eastern district of virginia .

the result was the april 1 , 2008 decision in tafas v. dudas .

there , the u.s. district court for the eastern district of virginia concluded that the uspto claims and continued application rules were substantive in nature .

because congress has not granted general substantive rulemaking power to the uspto , the district court declared that the rules were void and therefore unenforceable .

the uspto has appealed this judgment .

at the time of the publication of this report , this outcome of this appeal is not yet available .

congressional response to the claims and continuing application rules has thus far been limited .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

1908 would have expressly provided the uspto with regulatory authority to specify the circumstances under which a patent applicant may file a continuing application .

that bill passed the house on september 7 , 2007 , as the "patent reform act of 2007. .

no other legislation in the 110 th congress — including s. 1145 , the senate legislation also titled the "patent reform act of 2007" — addressed the new uspto rules .

this report reviews the uspto rules that would restrict claims and continuing applications .

it begins by offering a summary of the patent system and the role of patents in innovation policy .

the context , details , and legal challenges to the new uspto rules are then explained .

the report then offers both the policy justifications for the new rules , as well as concerns that patent professionals and other observers have expressed over their effectiveness and impact .

the report closes by identifying congressional issues and options .

criticisms over the propriety of the claims and continued application rules led to litigation against the uspto in federal court .

legal challenges to the rules resulted in the april 1 , 2008 decision in tafas v. dudas .

there , the u.s. district court for the eastern district of virginia concluded that the uspto claims and continued application rules were substantive in nature .

because congress has not granted general substantive rulemaking power to the uspto , the district court declared that the rules were void and therefore unenforceable .

the tafas v. dudas  ruling arose from lawsuits filed by two separate plaintiffs: ( 1 ) individual inventor triantafyllos tafas , and ( 2 ) the multinational pharmaceutical enterprise organized as smithkline beecham corp. and glaxo group limited .

the plaintiffs requested a permanent injunction that would prevent the uspto from implementing the claims and continued application rules .

although a number of arguments were before the district court , judge cacheris confined his ruling to the issue of whether the uspto claims and continued application rules were substantive or not .

he concluded that the rules were indeed substantive because they would "affect[] individual rights and obligations. .

in particular , judge cacheris observed that the patent act placed no strict limitations upon the number of claims or continuing applications that an inventor could pursue .

because the rules would deprive inventors of these rights , they were substantive in nature and thus beyond the ability of the uspto to enact .

in keeping with its opinion , the district court issued an order permanently enjoining the uspto from implementing its claims and continued application rules .

the uspto has appealed this judgment to the federal circuit , where the appeal remains pending at the time of the publication of this report .

although patent professionals have focused attention upon the claims and continued application rules , the uspto has proposed additional reforms as well .

one of these reforms relates to the so - called information disclosure statement , or ids .

an ids is a document submitted to the uspto that discloses all journal articles , patents , and other "prior art" of which a patent applicant is aware .

the uspto has expressed concerns that applicants too frequently include numerous "irrelevant or marginally relevant" prior art reference that not only fail to bring the most relevant material to the attention of examiners , but also require them to sort through dozens or hundreds of documents that are not pertinent to the question of patentability .

as a result , the uspto has proposed rules that would impose additional applicant responsibilities with respect to ids filings .

in particular , the uspto proposes that if more than 20 documents are disclosed in an ids , the applicant must provide an explanation of each cited document .

that explanation consists of "an identification of a portion of a document that caused it to be cited , and an explanation of how the specific feature , showing , or teaching of the document correlates with language in one or more claims. .

if an ids contains fewer than 20 documents , the applicant would be required to provide an explanation only for documents not published in english , or for english - language documents over 25 pages in length .

critics of the proposed ids rules assert that "their practical effect will be to dramatically increase the cost of obtaining patent protection" and "make it much more difficult for inventors and innovators to protect their legitimate intellectual property rights .

 .

.." at present time , the uspto has not taken final action with respect to the proposed ids rules .

should congress conclude that the current situation with respect to the uspto rulemaking is satisfactory , then no action need be taken .

if congress wishes to intervene , however , a number of options present themselves .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

1908 would have expressly provided the uspto with regulatory authority to specify the circumstances under which a patent applicant may file a continued application .

that bill passed the house on september 7 , 2007 , as the "patent reform act of 2007," and was referred to the senate .

no other legislation that was before the 110 th congress — including s. 1145 , the senate legislation also titled the "patent reform act of 2007" — addresses the subject matter of the claims or continuation rules .

one possibility would be to provide the uspto with substantive rulemaking authority .

in the 110 th congress , an earlier verison of h.r .

1908 would have granted the uspto director the authority to "promulgate such rules , regulations , and orders that the director determines appropriate to carry out the provisions of this title or any other law applicable to the united states patent and trademark office. .

this provision was ultimately removed from the bill in favor of a more narrow grant of authority with respect to continued applications .

more specific legislative amendments provide another option .

amendments to the relevant provisions of the patent act could confirm that no limitations should be imposed upon the number of claims or continuations that applicants may file .

they could also address ids filing requirements or other aspects of uspto procedures .

alternatively , amended statutory provisions could impose such limitations , or grant the uspto the authority to do so .

patent administration has becoming increasingly difficult as the uspto faces both a rising number of filings and more technologically complex applications .

on the other hand , many patent professionals have viewed both judicial and legislative developments as emphasizing well - crafted applications .

limitations upon claims and continued application practice have been widely viewed as constraining the ability of patent professionals to achieve this goal .

establishing the appropriate balance of rights and responsibilities between applicants and the uspto forms an important consideration in maintaining a fair and efficient patent system .

