in medimmune v. genentech , the u.s. supreme court held that , at least in instances where the licensor - patentee has implicitly or explicitly threatened to sue for patent infringement if the licensee did not pay the demanded royalties , a patent licensee need not terminate or breach its license agreement before it may bring suit to obtain a declaratory judgment that the underlying patent is invalid , unenforceable , or not infringed .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit had previously adopted a procedural rule that a licensee must stop paying royalties ( and thereby materially breach the agreement ) before bringing suit to challenge the validity or scope of the licensed patent .

the medimmune decision thus repudiates the federal circuit's rule that had resulted in federal courts dismissing such declaratory judgment actions for lack of subject matter jurisdiction .

medimmune , inc. is a pharmaceutical company that manufactures a drug , synagis , used to prevent respiratory tract disease in infants and young children .

a year before the u.s. food and drug administration approved synagis for marketing to consumers , medimmune had entered into a patent license agreement with the biotechnology company genentech in 1997 , concerning an existing genentech patent relating to the production of "chimeric antibodies" ( the cabilly i patent ) and also a then - pending patent application for "the coexpression of immunoglobulin chains in recombinant host cells. .

medimmune agreed to pay royalties on sales of any "licensed products" that it may make or sell which would infringe the claims of either of the patents , if not for the license agreement .

in december 2001 , genentech was awarded a patent on the "coexpression" application that was the subject of the licensing agreement ( cabilly ii patent ) .

genentech sent medimmune a letter , asserting that the synagis drug came within the scope of the new cabilly ii patent , and that therefore it was a "licensed product" for which royalties are owed under the 1997 license agreement .

medimmune , however , believed the cabilly ii patent invalid and unenforceable or , alternatively , that synagis did not infringe the patent's claims .

despite this assessment , medimmune paid the royalties "under protest," because it considered genentech's letter a threat to sue for patent infringement if it failed to comply with the demands therein .

as this drug accounted for more than 80% of the company's revenue from sales since 1999 , medimmune was unwilling to risk the consequences of losing a patent infringement suit , which included being enjoined from selling synagis .

medimmune initiated a declaratory judgment action against genentech , seeking a declaration that the patent was invalid and unenforceable .

genentech filed a defense motion pursuant to federal rules of civil procedure 12 ( b ) ( 1 ) , asserting that the federal courts lacked article iii jurisdiction over the claim because no "actual controversy" existed between the parties .

the u.s. district court for the central district of california granted genentech's motion , dismissing the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction .

the district court explained that it was obliged to dismiss the case due to the controlling precedent of the federal circuit's gen - probe inc. v. vysis , inc. decision in 2004 , which had held that "a patent licensee in good standing cannot establish an article iii case or controversy with regard to validity , enforceability , or scope of the patent because the license agreement 'obliterates any reasonable apprehension' that the licensee will be sued for infringement. .

because medimmune continued to pay royalties under the license agreement and did not otherwise breach it , it was a licensee in good standing and was not under threat or in reasonable apprehension of suit , the court reasoned .

on appeal , medimmune conceded that it was free of apprehension of suit , and that it continued to pay royalties only to avoid the consequences of a successful patent infringement suit by genentech .

however , medimmune asserted that the lear case provided it with "the absolute right to challenge the validity or enforceability of the patent , whether or not it breaches the license and whether or not it can be sued by the patentee," and appealed for gen - probe to be overruled .

in response , genentech argued that the facts of the case did not support invocation of lear ( which had dealt with licensee estoppel ) , but rather that the threshold question for the dispute concerned article iii jurisdiction under the declaratory judgment act .

the federal circuit agreed with genentech and affirmed the district court's judgment , relying on its earlier gen - probe decision in determining that there was a lack of a justiciable controversy .

the appellate court rejected the applicability of lear because in that case , the licensee had ceased royalty payments , thus breaching the license , and was then sued by the patentee .

in contrast , the federal circuit explained , here such "breach was assiduously avoided .

thus this case does not raise the question of whether patent invalidity is available as a defense to suit against a defaulting licensee — the licensee estoppel that was laid to rest in lear — for there is no defaulting licensee and no possibility of suit. .

the supreme court granted certiorari on february 21 , 2006 , to review the medimmune case , in order to answer the following question: does article iii's grant of jurisdiction of "all cases ... arising under ... the laws of the united states," implemented in the "actual controversy" requirement of the declaratory judgment act , 28 u.s.c .

§ 2201 ( a ) , require a patent licensee to refuse to pay royalties and commit material breach of the license agreement before suing to declare the patent invalid , unenforceable or not infringed ? .

on january 9 , 2007 , the supreme court reversed the federal circuit's judgment in an 8-1 decision , and remanded the case to the district court .

the court held that a patent licensee is not required to repudiate its license agreement before seeking a declaratory judgment in federal court that the underlying patent is invalid , unenforceable , or not infringed .

writing for the majority , justice antonin scalia first explained that the article iii "case or controversy" requirement would have been satisfied if medimmune had refused to make royalty payments .

at issue here , however , was whether a case or controversy still existed when medimmune's compliance with the license terms eliminated the immediate threat of injury from a patent infringement lawsuit .

justice scalia offered a comparison to a situation where the government threatens legal action , in which there is no requirement that "a plaintiff [] expose himself to liability before bringing suit to challenge the basis for the threat — for example , the constitutionality of a law threatened to be enforced. .

in such a case , he noted , courts have not found article iii jurisdiction to be lacking despite the fact that the plaintiff's own action ( or inaction ) in failing to violate the law eliminates the imminent threat of prosecution .

although a private party , rather than the government , threatened the enforcement action in medimmune , this distinction does not make a significant legal difference that would eliminate jurisdiction , justice scalia argued .

he identified an earlier supreme court decision , altvater v. freeman , that had a substantially similar fact pattern as medimmune .

in altvater , the patentees had filed suit against their licensees to enforce territorial restrictions in the license .

the licensees then filed a counterclaim for declaratory judgment that the underlying patents were invalid .

however , the licensees continued to pay royalties "under protest," although it was being required to do so under an injunction decree that the patentees had obtained in an earlier case .

yet justice scalia explained that the absence of an injunction in medimmune does not distinguish the case from altvater because if the altvater licensee had stopped paying the royalties in defiance of the injunction , the licensee would have risked being liable for actual and treble damages in a patent infringement lawsuit .

the altvater court had held [c]ertainly the requirements of [a] case or controversy are met where payment of a claim is demanded as of right and where payment is made , but where the involuntary or coercive nature of the exaction preserves the right to recover the sums paid or to challenge the legality of the claim .

here , genentech had demanded that medimmune make royalty payments under the licensing agreement and apparently threatened to bring a patent infringement lawsuit to enjoin sales of medimmune's synagis drug if royalties were not paid .

medimmune's payment of royalties under such "coercive" circumstances does not eliminate jurisdiction of a court to entertain a declaratory judgment action , justice scalia stated .

he opined , "the rule that a plaintiff must destroy a large building , bet the farm , or ( as here ) risk treble damages and the loss of 80 percent of its business , before seeking a declaration of its actively contested legal rights finds no support in article iii. .

justice scalia cautioned that the supreme court's decision in this case is limited to the procedural issue of whether federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction over these types of declaratory judgment actions brought by nonrepudiating licensees ; the court declined , however , to express an opinion on the merits of the arguments made by the licensor - patentee for denying declaratory relief to the licensee .

in its briefs filed with the court , genentech had appealed to a common - law doctrine that a party to a contract cannot challenge its validity while simultaneously continuing to reap its benefits .

furthermore , genentech had argued that the license agreement itself precluded the suit , because [w]hen a licensee enters such an agreement ... it essentially purchases an insurance policy , immunizing it from suits for infringement so long as it continues to pay royalties and does not challenge the covered patents .

permitting it to challenge the validity of the patent without terminating or breaking the agreement alters the deal , allowing the licensee to continue enjoying its immunity while bringing a suit , the elimination of which was part of the patentee's quid pro quo .

justice scalia observed , however , that these two points raised by genentech went to the merits of the case , and not to the question of whether article iii jurisdiction is available over medimmune's declaratory judgment action .

finally , noting that the declaratory judgment act provides that a court " may declare the rights and other legal relations of any interested party," justice scalia decided to "leave the equitable , prudential , and policy arguments in favor of such a discretionary dismissal for the lower courts' consideration on remand. .

similarly left for consideration on remand are any merits - based arguments for denial of declaratory relief in the case .

in lone dissent , justice clarence thomas maintained that a patent licensee in good standing must breach its license prior to challenging the validity of the underlying patent .

he stated , "[t]he declaratory judgment procedure cannot be used to obtain advanced rulings on matters that would be addressed in a future case of actual controversy. .

in his view , medimmune's suit was an attempt to seek a ruling on hypothetical or conjectural matters , and thus federal courts lacked article iii jurisdiction over its claims .

since medimmune was decided , the federal circuit has acknowledged that the first prong of its "two - part test" for declaratory judgment jurisdiction , the "reasonable apprehension of suit" prong , is no longer valid because it contradicts supreme court precedent as explained by the medimmune court .

medimmune , however , left open several unresolved questions whose impact on the patent law remain to be seen ; lower courts' interpretations of the decision will be instructive , and the supreme court may well revisit the issues it declined to address in medimmune during a future case .

for example , the lear court had ruled that a repudiating licensee need not comply with its contract and continue paying royalties until the patent is held invalid by a court .

however , the medimmune court "express[ed] no opinion" on whether a nonrepudiating licensee is relieved of its contract obligations during the suit challenging the patent's validity .

therefore , the applicability of the licensee estoppel doctrine to this situation is an open question after medimmune .

also , the medimmune court had emphasized that district courts still have statutory discretionary authority to decline to hear declaratory judgment actions ; it will be up to licensors - patentees to craft "equitable , prudential , and policy arguments" to successfully persuade the district court to exercise that discretion .

finally , the medimmune court did not consider the enforceability of drafting a provision in a license agreement that obliged a licensee not to challenge the validity of the underlying patent unless he or she breached the license .

other ramifications of medimmune on the patent law are significant .

first , the ruling may spark an increase in patent litigation activity , as more patent licensees may find it easier to bring declaratory judgment actions to challenge the patent's validity — without having to terminate or breach their license agreements before doing so .

second , the decision promises to play a role in drafting and negotiating the terms of patent licensing agreements , as licensors - patentees may be interested in having licensees agree to the inclusion of "no challenge" clauses .

it is also likely that the decision may have an impact beyond patent law , as it may be applicable to licensing and contract law matters that do not involve intellectual property .

