on may 25 , 2007 , president george bush signed into law a supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r .

2206 : p.l .

110-28 ) which included an increase in the federal minimum wage under the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

it was the first such increase in a decade .

under p.l .

110-28 , among other things , the federal minimum wage , which had been $5.15 per hour , is increased in steps to $5.85 per hour on july 24 , 2007 $6.55 per hour on july 24 , 2008 $7.25 per hour on july 24 , 2009 .

in addition , the bill raised wages in two insular territories of the pacific: the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands and american samoa .

the level of wages in the islands will rise at different rates to equal the federal minimum .

under the flsa , an increase in the minimum wage has been the element around which other aspects of the act have clustered .

it was often the vehicle for consideration of overtime pay , child labor , industrial homework , and similar issues that are a part of the flsa .

the federal minimum wage , now having been raised , may , perhaps , be dormant for a time .

this could provide an opportunity , absent a more sustained pressure for a new rate increase , to examine the basic concept of the fair labor standards act and its various component parts .

this report discusses a few of the topics that , collectively , make up the flsa .

in some cases , the report is historical because there is a long and , often , important history to the evolution of the act .

on other occasions , it tends to focus upon the administration of the act and the interpretation of provisions which congress has left , largely , to the discretion of the secretary of labor .

this report also considers judicial decisions which , inevitably , make up a substantial part of wage / hour issues and have an impact upon enforcement of the statute .

the several issues discussed , here , are suggestive and by no means definitive .

none of these issues needs to be taken up in the sense that they are obligatory ; and , indeed , the congress may choose not to address any of them .

for many of these issues , general crs background papers exist and are listed in the footnotes .

under current law , a sub - minimum wage at $4.25 per hour is allowed for youth workers ( under 20 years of age ) through the first 90 consecutive days of employment with an employer .

no change was made by the 2007 amendments .

during the 1960s and 1970s , the flsa was progressively expanded to cover retail and service employees .

some of these workers were 'tipped employees' and , their employers argued , that since they were given tips by the public , they ( the employers ) should not be required to pay such employees a full minimum wage .

as things stand ( under the tip credit provisions of the flsa ) , all covered workers do receive at least the federal minimum wage .

of that wage , at least $2.13 per hour must come directly from the employer .

the employer may have to include a higher amount in order to supplement tips that the employee receives ( i.e. , to make up for a deficiency ) .

but , whatever tip income the worker receives , employers must pay at least $2.13 per hour .

through the years , the level of the tip credit ( the difference between $2.13 per hour and the minimum wage ) has varied .

in june of 2007 , a unanimous supreme court decided long island care at home v. coke ( u.s. , no .

06-593 , 6 / 11 / 07 ) .

evelyn coke , through the years , had provided companionship services through long island care and , now , charged denial of overtime pay and minimum wage .

in justice breyer's opinion for the court , all third party employees who provide companionship services ( those hired by firms like long island care at home ) were termed exempt from minimum wage and overtime pay coverage .

indexation of the minimum wage has been a topic of discussion among economists through nearly a century .

increasingly , during recent years , the states have moved in this direction , with several states having indexed their own minimum wage: among them , arizona , missouri , montana , oregon , vermont and washington .

might indexation work at the federal level ? .

some think that it might ; others are less certain , while still others reject the concept outright .

under the flsa , provision has been made for small businesses to be exempt from the minimum wage and / or the payment of overtime where their workers are employed for more than 40 hours a week .

the terms of such provisions have varied through the years .

under the 1989 flsa amendments ( still in effect ) , small businesses , defined as those that earn $500,000 or less in gross receipts , are exempt .

however , there is an offsetting provision: where a worker is engaged in interstate commerce , he or she may be individually covered by the statute .

under section 14 ( c ) of the flsa , special treatment is afforded to persons with physical or mental disabilities .

under certificates issued by the secretary of labor , such persons can be employed at rates below those otherwise specified in the flsa and with no absolute minimum .

wages for persons with disabilities are based upon the relative productivity of the individual: that is , the commensurate wage rate .

the minimum wage under the flsa generally applies to any state , territory , or possession of the united states .

special treatment ( a reduced wage rate , generally consistent with the insular economy ) was afforded to puerto rico and the virgin islands ; but , by the 1990s , they had come under the full minimum wage structure .

guam has always been under the act .

this has left two major jurisdictions — american samoa and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( or cnmi ) — that are still under a reduced rate structure .

in the 2007 flsa amendments ( p.l .

110-28 ) , american samoa and the cnmi were brought under the national minimum wage , in steps ( though at a slightly different rate ) , until the national minimum should be reached .

thereafter , according to the 2007 legislation , they will proceed along in tandem with the flsa standard .

in addition , a study was to be made by dol that would focus on insular conditions in the wake of changing wage rates .

minimum wage statutes had originated with the states early in the 20 th century .

massachusetts , wisconsin , oregon , the district of columbia , california , and other jurisdictions had experimented with various aspects of wage regulation , but , often , where such efforts were effective , they were overturned by the courts .

then , in 1937 , the supreme court , in west coast hotel co .

v. parrish , reversed a long tradition of opposing federal regulation of labor standards by affirming the right of the state of washington to regulate working conditions .

federal legislation was promptly introduced .

with passage of the fair labor standards act the following year , attention focused upon the federal jurisdiction .

and , intermittently , the federal act has been expanded .

on march 31 , 2003 , wage / hour administrator tammy mccutchen published in the federal register a proposed rule updating section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) , that portion of the flsa that deals with minimum wages and overtime coverage for executive , administrative or professional ( eap ) workers .

under section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) , bona fide staff in the several categories are exempt from the basic wage and hour provisions of the statute .

the mccutchen proposal was contentious , triggering several congressional hearings .

speaking generally , organized labor was strongly opposed to the new regulation ; the department of labor was strongly in support of the change .

with modification , a final rule was issued in april 2004 , taking effect in august 2004 .

since that time , dol has been engaged in a review of the operation of the rule , offering a series of new opinion letters ( administrative advisories ) on classification of workers .

the original rule governing eap workers , with roots going back to the early new deal era , had been given effect in 1938 and had been revised periodically up to 1975 .

thereafter , although various suggested changes were announced , the regulation was not updated until the 2003-2004 rulemaking .

as implemented , in order to qualify for exemption from the flsa , targeted workers have to be paid at least $23,660 per year and be engaged in activities that would qualify one as an executive , administrator or professional .

for persons paid in excess of $100,000 per year , there is a presumption that he or she has met the qualifying criteria , absent any contention to the contrary .

what does it mean 'to qualify' for exempt status ? .

if one meets the salary and duties tests , one is an eap employee .

this means , in effect , that one does not need to be paid for overtime hours worked regardless of how frequent and extensive such 'overtime' may become .

working through to the completion of one's task is merely part of the responsibility that goes along with being an executive , an administrator , or a professional .

thus , there is a trade - off .

each of these categories may have certain advantages associated with them ; but , in wage / hour terms , the bottom line is relatively simple .

eap workers do not need to be paid overtime for hours worked in excess of 40 per week .

there are two tests for qualification under the rule .

the first test is one of salary , as noted above .

the second test involves duties .

each position is judged individually , but the duties of each individual worker can present a problem .

for example .

when is an emergency medical technician 'a professional' or simply a staffer with very serious work but with no real 'professional' responsibility ? .

how about a funeral director , a journalist , a paralegal , or a chef ? .

in each of these fields ( and in many others ) , a clear distinction between exempt and non - exempt must rest upon a precise analysis of the work that is being performed: the duties test .

a number of questions need to be asked .

does the worker exercise independent discretion and judgment ? .

does he have a choice of work assignments and some measure of independence over the content of his work ? .

does she have the power to hire or fire subordinates ? .

what is their 'primary duty,' and , as telling , how important is their 'primary duty' to their employer ? .

such questions , under dol regulations , need to be addressed for each type of work and , frequently , must be defined in the context of the work environment and culture .

in some cases , though it may no longer be controlling , the amount of time that one spends in performance of a task may assist in determining eap status .

is one task — an executive or administrative or professional function — performed once a year sufficient to render a worker exempt ? .

or , if one looks at the element of 'hiring and firing' of subordinates , does the decision rest strictly with the putative epa worker ? .

or , is there an internal review panel that oversees such actions ? .

how much real latitude does the worker have ? .

the duties test can be enormously complex , involving categories of workers across the entire spectrum .

it can also be a source of near endless litigation as persons move into and out of exempt or non - exempt status .

the new rule is in place and being tested .

during recent months , the department has been engaged in numerous reevaluations of the work processes of eap workers .

mainly , these reviews and analyses deal with the duties test ; but , such efforts tend to be of limited reach , often resting upon a specific case and particular assumptions and unable to be applied , with confidence , to general categories of workers .

in early 2004 , prior to release of the final rule , labor secretary elaine chao stated that the "primary goal" of the proposed rule "is to have better rules in place that will benefit more workers" — especially "low - wage workers. .

its intent , she affirmed , is "to restore overtime protections , especially to low - wage , vulnerable workers who have little bargaining power with employers. .

ms. chao added: "clear , concise and updated rules will better protect workers and strengthen the department's ability to enforce the law. .

when the final rule was released in april 2004 , ms. chao stated: "the department is very proud of the final rule. .

she added that she was "pleased to see people recognize the significant gains to workers under our final rule" and noted that "there can be no doubt that workers win. .

but , again , there are two tests involved .

raising the qualifying floor to $23,660 may be a "win" for certain low income workers .

how the law ( or regulation ) might affect a worker , earning $30,000 a year ( higher than required but , in some regions , a low wage ) , assigned as a 'primary duty' an executive or administrative or professional function , and be stripped of his / her overtime pay protections , may be less clear .

the dispute continued through the implementation date in august 2004 and into the 109 th congress ( 2005 ) , but largely without effect .

"the predictions were not accurate," howard radzely , then dol's solicitor , was quoted as saying shortly after the new regulations had gone into effect .

"almost without exception , the reports indicate people are gaining overtime protection. .

later , radzely was quoted as saying: "we have not seen a single incident — let alone the predicted 6 million incidents — of an employee who has lost pay as a result of the regulations. .

and further: "[o]nce we got past the extreme rhetoric ... there have been surprisingly few issues" in contention .

the real test may come with the administration of the rule: in particular , the long - term impact upon the kinds of workers to which ms. chao has referred .

recently , the bureau of national affairs reported that "[t]hree years after the new fair labor standards act white - collar exemption regulations were implemented," referring to discussion by a panel of attorneys at the american bar association's employment law section , "...the changes have opened the door to new areas of wage and hour litigation that were not predicted when the rules were launched. .

steven zeiff , an attorney from san francisco , suggested that the "increased emphasis on the duties test has occurred because the new regulations clarified that the white - collar exemption analysis should look to an employee's duties and not merely the job title. .

zeiff stated: "courts are all over the place when it comes to the duties test...." the administration is several years into the new section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) regulations .

have workers been bumped up ( or down ) in terms of pay and duties as a result of these tests in order to assist them in qualifying for exemption ? .

how many non - eap workers , from before the rule was implemented , now find themselves with the status of an executive , administrative or professional ? .

has the new regulation clarified eap status , resulting in reduced litigation — an outcome pledged by dol ? .

it is possible that the new section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) regulation could have an important impact upon the workforce and labor - management relations .

how many persons might be affected by the change may be impossible to tell , given the conflicting documentation and interpretation from each side of the dispute .

