on june 27 , icc judges issued arrest warrants for libyan leader muammar al qadhafi , his son sayf al islam al qadhafi , and intelligence chief abdullah al senussi , having found "reasonable grounds" to believe that they are responsible for crimes against humanity , including murder and "persecution. .

 ( see " libya ," below. ) .

the trial of congolese militia leader thomas lubanga dyilo , in icc custody since 2006 , is expected to bring the court's first final verdict before year's end .

the six kenyan suspects sought by the icc , most of them senior government officials , appeared voluntarily before the court in april 2011 .

charges against them have not yet been confirmed by icc judges .

in march 2011 , icc judges confirmed war crimes charges sought by the prosecutor against two darfur rebel commanders , paving the way for a trial ( see " darfur rebel commanders ," below ) .

on june 23 , 2011 , the icc prosecutor requested authorization from icc judges to open a formal investigation into war crimes and crimes against humanity following côte d'ivoire's disputed presidential run - off vote in november 2010 .

a u.n. investigation concluded in june that "serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law were committed by different actors," potentially amounting to crimes under icc jurisdiction .

côte d'ivoire is not a state party , but its government submitted it to icc jurisdiction in 2003 .

the government of newly inaugurated president alassane ouattara has also accepted icc jurisdiction , and signed a cooperation agreement with the icc on june 28 .

members of congress have taken a range of positions on the icc with regard to africa .

many in congress are concerned about massive human rights violations on the continent , and some see the icc as a possible means of redress for these crimes .

at the same time , many members oppose the court on jurisdictional and other grounds .

for example , several pieces of draft legislation introduced during the 111 th congress , such as h.r .

5351 ( ros - lehtinen ) , s.con.res .

59 ( vitter ) , and h.con.res .

265 ( lamborn ) , expressed broad objections to the icc and to u.s. cooperation with it .

s.con.res .

71 ( feingold ) stated that it is in "the united states national interest" to help "prevent and mitigate acts of genocide and other mass atrocities against civilians," but did not explicitly reference the icc .

in the 112 th congress , s.res .

85 ( menendez ) , agreed to in the senate on march 1 , 2011 , welcomes the u.n. security council referral of libya to the icc .

draft legislation introduced during the 111 th congress referenced the icc in connection with human rights abuses committed in the democratic republic of congo and by the lord's resistance army in central africa , and in connection with the global use of child soldiers .

additionally , there has been particular congressional interest in the icc's work related to darfur .

the icc prosecutor has opened cases against 26 individuals in connection with five african countries .

twenty - five of these remain open ; the 26 th , against darfur rebel leader bahar idriss abu garda , was dismissed by judges , though the prosecutor may attempt to submit new evidence in an attempt to re - open it .

the cases stem from investigations into violence in libya , kenya's post - election unrest in 2007-2008 , rebellion and counter - insurgency in the darfur region of sudan , the lord's resistance army insurgency in central africa , civil conflict in eastern democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , and a 2002-2003 conflict in the central african republic .

the prosecutor is also examining 2010-2011 violence in côte d'ivoire , a 2009 military crackdown on opposition supporters in guinea , and inter - communal violence in central nigeria , but has not opened formal investigations or opened cases with regard to these situations .

uganda , drc , car , kenya , nigeria , and guinea are states parties to the icc .

sudan , libya , and côte d'ivoire are not .

icc jurisdiction in sudan and libya stems from u.n. security council actions , while jurisdiction in côte d'ivoire was granted by virtue of a declaration submitted by the ivorian government on october 1 , 2003 , which accepted the jurisdiction of the court as of september 19 , 2002 .

five suspects — four congolese nationals and one rwandan — are currently in icc custody .

the icc prosecutor has sought summonses , rather than arrest warrants , in connection with attempted prosecutions of darfur rebel commanders and of kenyan suspects .

the prosecutor has not secured any convictions to date .

some observers have praised the icc's investigations in africa as a crucial step against impunity on the continent , but icc actions have also provoked debates over the court's potential impact , its perceived prioritization of africa over other regions , its selection of cases , and the potential effect of prosecutions on peace processes .

notably , critics have accused the icc of potentially jeopardizing political settlements that may keep the peace in the pursuit of an often abstract "justice. .

supporters of the court reject these criticisms , and hope that icc investigations will contribute to africa's long - term peace and stability .

the african union ( au ) has strongly objected to certain icc actions , causing some backers of the court to be concerned that it could lose the support of its largest regional block .

in particular , the au objects to icc attempts to prosecute sitting heads of state in sudan and libya , and has decided not to enforce arrest warrants for bashir or qadhafi .

indeed , the sudanese president has visited chad , kenya , and djibouti , all icc states parties , since the first warrant for his arrest was issued in 2009 .

at least one au member , botswana , has indicated , however , that it intends to enforce the warrants , and other au states may quietly hold the same position .

at an au summit in january 2011 , the au assembly additionally endorsed kenya's request for a deferral of prosecutions there .

such a deferral could only be enacted through action by icc judges or at the u.n. security council , and neither has moved to do so .

au commission chairman jean ping has repeatedly accused the icc prosecutor of relying on "double standards" with regard to africa ( see " accusations of bias ," below ) .

at the same time , african parties to the icc have refrained from withdrawing from the court .

the icc's founders anticipated that by ending impunity , the icc would deter future atrocities .

indeed , some observers argue that the icc's success should be evaluated not just based on the punishment of past atrocities , but also in terms of "the effect its investigations have on reducing abysmal conduct in the present and future. .

 ( the office of the prosecutor maintains that the choice of cases is not based on calculations of deterrent effect , though the office acknowledges that strategic communications related to icc prosecutions may play a role in deterrence. ) .

the goal of deterrence has been particularly salient in the icc's investigations in africa , which have focused on regions where atrocities are ongoing or have only recently ended .

however , difficulties encountered in enforcing icc arrest warrants and the fact that the court has yet to convict any suspects have led some to question whether the threat of icc prosecution is credible .

some observers suggest that the court's failure to apprehend suspects in sudan , in particular , has bared tensions between the icc's universal mandate and its reliance on the enforcement power of states .

others maintain that deterrence is difficult to evaluate and that changes in perpetrators' behavior may be visible only over the long run .

some argue that the court's compilation of evidence , including transcribed interviews with witnesses , may serve future prosecutions or reconciliation processes even if they do not immediately lead to convictions .

some commentators have raised the possibility that transitional countries in the middle east — such as tunisia and egypt — might submit to the icc to investigate past abuses by authoritarian regimes .

the icc's investigations in africa have stirred concerns over african sovereignty , in part due to the long history of foreign intervention on the continent .

for example , president paul kagame of rwanda , a country which is not a party to the court , has portrayed the icc as a form of "imperialism" that seeks to "undermine people from poor and african countries , and other powerless countries in terms of economic development and politics. .

some commentators allege that the prosecutor has limited investigations to africa because of geopolitical pressures , either out of a desire to avoid confrontation with major powers or as a tool of western foreign policy .

the attempt to prosecute bashir has been particularly controversial , drawing rebuke from african governments and regional organizations .

jean ping , president of the au commission , has accused the icc of hypocrisy , contending that "we are not against the icc , but there are two systems of measurement … the icc seems to exist solely for judging africans. .

supporters of the court respond that most investigations to - date have been determined by referrals , either by african states or the security council , and that the prosecutor continues to analyze situations outside of africa .

the office of the prosecutor maintains that its choice of cases is based on the relative gravity of abuses , and that crimes committed in africa are among the world's most serious .

a prominent south african jurist , constitutional court chief justice sandile ngcobo , recently expressed a similar interpretation , stating that "abuses committed in sub - saharan africa have been among the most serious , and this is certainly a legitimate criterion for the selection of cases. .

icc officials , including deputy prosecutor fatou bensouda — a national of the gambia — contend that the court is protecting africans rather than "targeting" them .

supporters also contend that national legal systems in africa are particularly weak , which has allowed the icc to assert its jurisdiction under the principle of complementarity .

these sentiments were echoed by former u.n. secretary - general kofi annan , who stated , "in all of these cases , it is the culture of impunity , not african countries , which are the target .

this is exactly the role of the i.c.c .

it is a court of last resort. .

at the june 2010 meeting of icc states parties in kampala , uganda , participants initiated mechanisms for increasing coordination between donors on strengthening national justice systems .

the united states , which participated in the meeting as an observer , has expressed support for such efforts .

the prosecutor's selection of cases also has proven controversial .

as one pair of authors has written , "perceptions of the icc on the ground have at times been damaged by insufficient efforts by the court to make clear the basis on which individuals have been the subject of warrants and of particular charges , while those of apparently equal culpability have not. .

for example , some have criticized icc prosecutions in uganda , the drc , and car for focusing on alleged abuses by rebel fighters to the exclusion of those reportedly committed by government troops .

the decision to pursue drc opposition leader jean - pierre bemba gombo has provoked accusations that the prosecutor was swayed by political bias or , potentially , excessive pragmatism , since other congolese and car politicians accused of similar abuses have not been pursued to date .

icc supporters have responded that the prosecutor is mandated to focus on particularly serious cases , and that investigations are ongoing in these countries .

one of the most persistent criticisms of the icc's actions in africa has been that by prosecuting participants in ongoing or recently settled conflicts , the court risks prolonging violence or endangering fragile peace processes .

by removing the bargaining chip of amnesty from the negotiating table , critics allege , the icc may remove incentives for peace settlements while encouraging perpetrators to remain in power in order to shield themselves from prosecution .

some analysts observe that in such cases , "it is difficult to tell victims of these conflicts that the prosecution of a small number of people should take precedence over a peace deal that may end the appalling conditions they endure and the daily risks they face. .

concerns that the aims of "justice" and "peace" may conflict have been particularly prominent in connection with sudan , kenya , and the lord's resistance army .

similar concerns have recently been voiced with regard to libya , where qadhafi has refused to cede power .

as one commentator recently argued , "in the past , africa's deposed heads of state could count on a comfortable exile in a friendly country.. .

but since the international criminal court was established in 2002 , rulers who have committed war crimes or human rights violations against their own people have found their exile options substantially diminished. .

in sudan , some observers have argued that the attempt to prosecute president bashir complicated implementation of the 2005 comprehensive peace agreement for southern sudan and the peace process in darfur , by providing an incentive to the ruling party's inner circle to cling to power .

for example , according to former u.s. special envoy to sudan andrew natsios , "the regime will now avoid any compromise or anything that would weaken their already weakened position , because if they are forced from office they face trials before the icc.... [an icc warrant for bashir] may well shut off the last remaining hope for a peaceful settlement for the country. .

in kenya , concerns persist that icc prosecutions could destabilize the fragile political truce that has underpinned the post - 2007 government of national unity , although some argue that a lack of accountability for human rights violations would also threaten future stability .

some argued that icc arrest warrants against lra commanders acted as an impediment to achieving a final peace agreement to that long - running conflict between 2006 and 2008 .

ugandan critics included community elders who supported the use of traditional reconciliation mechanisms instead of international prosecution .

others contend that lra leaders never seriously intended to negotiate a peace , and that the threat of icc prosecution could serve as "an important ingredient in a political solution" for the conflict - plagued north .

this discussion has been muted in recent years , as senior lra commanders are no longer in northern uganda and have sought refuge instead in neighboring countries .

criticisms connected to the case against bashir in sudan were reinforced when the sudanese government responded to the icc arrest warrant for bashir by expelling aid agencies and threatening ngos and peacekeeping troops .

in march 2009 testimony before congress , when asked about the impact of the icc warrant on u.n. peacekeeping operations in darfur , then - director of national intelligence dennis c. blair said that "the indictment and president bashir's reaction have made him less cooperative than he was" and that the warrant would "make it harder" for peacekeeping operations in darfur .

in early august 2009 , the outgoing commander of the hybrid u.n. - au peacekeeping mission in darfur ( unamid ) , general martin luther agwai , reportedly stated that the decision to pursue bashir had been a "big blow" for unamid and the peace process , although it had not had as drastic an effect on the ground as he had feared .

u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon , who has maintained a neutral position on the icc's actions in sudan , has nonetheless argued that the international community must seek to balance "peace" and "justice" in dealing with the conflict in darfur and expressed concern that the expulsion of aid organizations was detrimental to relief and peacekeeping operations .

supporters of the court maintain that the warrant against bashir may open up new opportunities to secure peace in darfur , as a credible threat of prosecution may serve as an important lever of pressure on actors in a conflict .

for example , priscilla hayner of the international center for transitional justice has written that "it would be wrong to suggest that pragmatism always trumps principle in matters of life and death , and thus that one must ease up on justice in order to achieve peace .

in some cases , the interest of peace has been well served by strong , forthright efforts to advance justice. .

some argue that "peace deals that sacrifice justice often fail to produce peace" in the long run .

many observers point out that discerning the effect of icc actions on complex processes is extremely difficult .

