obstruction of justice is the frustration of governmental purposes by violence , corruption , destruction of evidence , or deceit .

it is a federal crime .

in fact , federal obstruction of justice laws are legion ; too many for even passing reference to all of them in a single report .

this is a brief description of those that outlaw interference with congressional activities .

the general federal obstruction of justice provisions are six: 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( tampering with federal witnesses ) , 1513 ( retaliating against federal witnesses ) , 1503 ( obstruction of pending federal court proceedings ) , 1505 ( obstruction of pending congressional or federal administrative proceedings ) , 371 ( conspiracy ) , and contempt .

all but §1503 apply to congressional activities .

in addition to these , there are a host of other statutes that penalize obstruction by violence , corruption , destruction of evidence , or deceit .

in addition to the basic federal crimes of obstruction of justice , federal law features a host of criminal statutes that proscribe various obstructions according to the obstructive means used , be it physical violence , bribery , property destruction , or deception .

thus , quite aside from the general obstruction provisions of §§1512 , 1513 , 1505 , and 1503 , several federal statutes outlaw the use of threats or violence for the purpose of obstruct federal government activities .

section 1512 ( b ) outlaws witness tampering by corrupt persuasion .

several other federal statutes outlaw bribery in one form or another .

the main federal bribery statute is 18 u.s.c .

201 which prohibits bribing federal officials , employees , jurors and witnesses .

although it makes no mention of bribery , the honest services component of the mail and wire fraud statutes , 18 u.s.c .

1341 , 1343 , 1346 , in some circumstances may afford prosecutors of public corruption greater latitude and more severe penalties than §201 .

the hobbs act , 18 u.s.c .

1951 , condemns public officials who use their position for extortion .

a few other statutes , noted in the margin , outlaw bribery to obstruct specific activities .

other than subsection 1512 ( c ) , three federal statutes expressly outlaw the destruction of evidence in order to obstruct justice , only one of which may apply to obstruction of congress: 18 u.s.c .

1519 prohibits destruction of evidence in connection with federal investigation or bankruptcy proceedings ; 18 u.s.c .

1520 prohibits destruction of corporate audit records ; and 18 u.s.c .

2232 ( a ) prohibits the destruction of property to prevent the government from searching or seizing it .

none of the three are rico or money laundering predicate offenses .

there are no explicit statements of extraterritorial jurisdiction for any of them , but the courts are likely to conclude that overseas violation of their provisions are subject to prosecution in this country .

none of them feature an individual conspiracy component , but all of them are subject to general federal law governing conspiracy , principals , accessories after the fact , and misprision .

in addition to the obstruction of justice provisions of 18 u.s.c .

1503 and 1512 , four other general statutes outlaw obstructing the government's business by deception .

three involve perjury: 18 u.s.c .

1623 which outlaws false swearing before federal courts and grand juries ; 18 u.s.c .

1621 the older and more general prohibition that proscribes false swearing in federal official matters ( judicial , legislative , or administrative ) ; and 18 u.s.c .

1622 which condemns subornation , that is , inducing another to commit perjury .

the fourth , 18 u.s.c .

1001 , proscribes material false statements concerning any matter within the jurisdiction of a federal executive branch agency , and to a somewhat more limited extent within the jurisdiction of the federal courts or a congressional entity .

none of the four are rico predicate offenses or money laundering predicate offenses .

the laws relating to aiding and abetting , accessories after the fact , misprision , and conspiracy , however , apply to all four .

sections 1621 and 1623 state that their prohibitions apply regardless of whether the perjurious conduct occurs overseas or within this country .

section 1001 has no such explicit declaration , but has been held to have extraterritorial application nonetheless .

regardless of the offense for which an individual is convicted , his sentence may be enhanced as a consequence of any obstruction of justice for which he is responsible , if committed during the course of the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing for the offense of his conviction .

the enhancement may result in an increase in his term of imprisonment by as much as 4 years .

the enhancement is the product of the influence of §3c1.1 of the united states sentencing guidelines .

federal sentencing begins with ( and its greatly influenced by ) the calculation of the applicable sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines .

the guidelines assign every federal crime a base offense level to which they add levels for various aggravating factors .

obstruction of justice is one of those factors .

each of the final 43 offense levels is assigned to one of six sentencing ranges , depending on the extent of the defendant's past crime history .

for example , a final offense level of 15 means a sentencing range of from 18 to 24 months in prison for a first time offender ( criminal history category i ) and from 41 to 51 months for a defendant with a very extensive criminal record ( criminal history category vi ) .

two levels higher , at a final offense level of 17 , the range for first time offenders is 24 to 30 months ; and 51 to 63 months for the defendant with a very extensive prior record .

the impact of a 2-level increase spans from no impact at the lowest final offense levels to a difference of an additional 68 months at the highest levels .

section 3c1.1 instructs sentencing courts to add 2 offense levels in the case of an obstruction of justice: if ( a ) the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded , or attempted to obstruct or impede , the administration of justice with respect to the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instant offense of conviction , and ( b ) the obstructive conduct related to ( i ) the defendant's offense of conviction and any relevant conduct ; or ( ii ) a closely related offense , increase the offense level by 2 levels .

u.s.s.g .

§3c1.1 .

the accompanying commentary explains that the section "is not intended to punish a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional right. .

more specifically , a "defendant's denial of guilt ( other than a denial of guilt under oath that constitutes perjury ) , refusal to admit guilt or provide information to a probation officer , or refusal to enter a plea of guilty is not a basis for application of this provision. .

early on , the supreme court made it clear that an individual's sentence might be enhanced under u.s.s.g §3c1.1 , if he committed perjury during the course of his trial .

moreover , the examples provided elsewhere in the section's commentary and the cases applying the section confirm that it reaches perjurious statements in a number of judicial contexts and to false statements in a number of others .

the examples in the section's commentary cover conduct: ( b ) committing , suborning , or attempting to suborn perjury , including during the course of a civil proceeding if such perjury pertains to conduct that forms the basis of the offense of conviction ; ( f ) providing materially false information to a judge or magistrate ; ( g ) providing a materially false statement to a law enforcement officer that significantly obstructed or impeded the official investigation or prosecution of the instant offense ; ( h ) providing materially false information to a probation officer in respect to a presentence or other investigation for the court ; [and] ( i ) other conduct prohibited by obstruction of justice provisions under title 18 , united states code ( eg , 18 u.s.c .

§§1510 , 1511 ) .

the courts have concluded that an enhancement under the section is appropriate , for instance , when a defendant has ( 1 ) given preposterous , perjurious testimony during his own trial ; ( 2 ) given perjurious testimony at his suppression hearing ; ( 3 ) given perjurious , exculpatory testimony at the separate trial of his girl friend ; ( 4 ) made false statements in connection with a probation officer's bail report ; ( 5 ) made false statements to the court in an attempt to change his guilty plea ; ( 6 ) made false statements to federal investigators ; and ( 7 ) made false statements to state investigators relating to conduct for which the defendant was ultimately conviction .

when perjury provides the basis for an enhancement under the section , the court must find that the defendant willfully testified falsely with respect to a material matter .

when based upon a false statement not under oath , the statement must still be material , that is , it must "tend to influence or affect the issue under determination. .

even then , false identification at the time of arrest only warrants a sentencing enhancement under the section when the deception significantly hinders the investigation or prosecution .

the commentary accompanying the section also states that the enhancement may be warranted when the defendant threatens a victim , witness , or juror ; submits false documentations ; destroys evidence ; flees ( in some cases ) ; or engages in any other conduct that constitute an obstruction of justice under criminal law provisions of title 18 of the united states code .

