the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states ( 42.4 million ) is at the highest level in our history and , as a portion of the u.s. population , has reached a percentage ( 13% ) not seen since the early 20 th century .

of the foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately 11 million are speculated to be unauthorized residents ( often characterized as illegal aliens ) .

the degree to which unauthorized resident aliens should be accorded certain rights and privileges as a result of their residence in the united states , along with the duties owed by such aliens given their presence , remains the subject of debate in congress .

included among the specific policy areas that spark controversy are due process rights , tax liabilities , military service , eligibility for federal assistance , educational opportunities , and pathways to citizenship .

this report focuses on the policy and legislative debate surrounding unauthorized aliens' access to federal benefits .

researchers at pew research center estimate that there were 11.1 million unauthorized immigrants living in the united states in march 2014 .

the three main components of the unauthorized resident alien population are foreign nationals who overstay their nonimmigrant visas , foreign nationals who enter the country surreptitiously , and foreign nationals who are admitted on the basis of fraudulent documents .

in all three instances , these aliens are in violation of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) and subject to removal .

nonetheless , the actual number of unauthorized aliens in the united states is not known , as locating and enumerating people who are residing in the united states without permission poses many methodological problems .

as mentioned before , most persons lacking legal authority to reside in the united states are not eligible for federally provided assistance .

however , it is not unexpected that many persons residing illegally would be on the margins socioeconomically and thus , would pose particular dilemmas for service providers .

the policies discussed below reflect a balancing of the integrity of entitlement programs with humanitarian provision of emergency services and assistance .

although the bars on unauthorized aliens obtaining federal benefits are emphatic , determining a person's immigration and citizenship status is not always easy .

the laws governing the eligibility of lprs for means - tested federal assistance are based on a complex set of factors ( eg , work history , category of admission , and petitioning sponsorship ) , and states have options to provide benefits to lprs that they may not opt to provide to unauthorized aliens .

although the law appears straightforward , the policy on unauthorized aliens' access to federal benefits is peppered with ongoing controversies and debates .

some center on demographics issues , such as how to treat mixed - immigration - status families .

others explore unintended consequences , most notably when tightening up the identification requirements results in denying benefits to u.s. citizens .

still others are debates about how broadly the clause "federal public benefit" should be implemented .

the concluding section of this report offers an illustrative sampling of these issues .

whether an unauthorized alien who is head of household is permitted to be the payee of a federal benefit for u.s. citizen children varies across programs .

most federal statutes are silent on the matter because the benefit is given to the eligible individual .

in the case of the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly called food stamps ) , the "assistance unit" is a household , typically those living together who also purchase and prepare food together .

snap eligibility and benefits depend on the number of eligible household members and household financial resources .

when determining a household's eligibility status and benefit level , unauthorized aliens living with eligible members are not counted as household members ; but their income , typically less their pro - rata share , is counted ( deemed to the rest of the household ) .

snap rules allow an unauthorized alien household member to apply for and obtain benefits on behalf of eligible members , and eligibility / benefit determinations are carried out as described above .

the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , while not expressly barring them , sets a barrier for unauthorized alien parents to be the payees of ssi benefits for their u.s. citizen children .

more precisely , the social security act requires an investigation into a potential representative payee to determine his or her suitability and as part of this investigation: "verify the social security account number ( or employer identification number ) of such person. .

this provision is somewhat analogous to the requirement that taxpayers claiming the eitc provide their ssn and the ssn of any qualifying child .

foreign nationals who are lprs , as discussed more fully above , have biometric identification documents , and their eligibility for federal benefits may be confirmed through the save system .

congress has already enacted strong incentives for states to issue enhanced drivers licenses ( edls ) that indicate country of citizenship .

requiring that the social security administration issue ssns that may be used to verify immigration status and citizenship is another option .

proponents of expanding the documentary requirements to include proof of u.s. citizenship assert that it is the most effective way to stop ineligible aliens from making false claims of u.s. citizenship .

a secondary argument is one of equal treatment ; that is , it levels the playing field by holding u.s. citizens to the same documentary requirements as foreign nationals .

medicaid provides an excellent example because , as noted earlier , a citizenship documentation requirement was added in 2006 to supersede the self - declaration of citizenship status .

medicaid now requires that a state obtain satisfactory documentation of citizenship and identity to determine eligibility .

when the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) evaluated the new requirement in 2007 , it found only limited information about the extent to which the requirement deterred aliens who were not qualified from applying for medicaid .

these findings were consistent with the 2005 u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) office of inspector general report on state self - attestation policies , which did not find problems regarding false allegations of citizenship .

rather , the gao found evidence of inadvertent denials of persons who appeared to be u.s. citizens .

"twenty - two of the 44 states reported declines in medicaid enrollment due to the requirement , and a majority of these states attributed the declines to delays in or losses of medicaid coverage for individuals who appeared to be eligible citizens. .

also at issue is whether expanded documentary requirements are cost effective .

the hhs centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) had estimated the citizenship documentation requirement would result in savings for the federal government and states of $90 million for fy2008 .

when gao investigated this cost savings , it concluded that the potential fiscal benefits for the federal government and states were uncertain .

"specifically , cms did not account for the increased administrative expenditures reported by states , and the agency's estimated savings from ineligible , noncitizens no longer receiving benefits may be less than anticipated. .

the language of section 401 of prwora appears to be quite broad ( see the " current federal law " section , above ) , yet its implementation across federal public benefits is not uniform .

an example of this ambiguity centers on tax refunds .

as noted earlier , the internal revenue code generally does not distinguish between resident aliens who are lawfully present in the united states and those who are not ( with the exception of the eitc ) .

it appears that the internal revenue service ( irs ) permits unauthorized resident aliens to claim the additional child tax credit .

there is no indication , moreover , that the irs generally considers refundable tax credits to be federal public benefits that unauthorized migrants are barred from receiving .

it is possible that refundable tax credits could fall within the types of benefits described by section 401 .

under this interpretation , the refundable nature of a credit makes it equivalent to a "grant" or "payment or assistance" provided by a federal agency or appropriated funds .

refundable tax credits , as some elaborate , are being "provided to an individual , family , or eligibility unit" and thus could be classified as a federal public benefit under section 401 of prwora .

government officials sometimes face competing priorities when dealing with unauthorized aliens , and such dilemmas are especially evident during major disasters .

when a major disaster occurs , two competing priorities come into play: access to emergency disaster relief and immigration enforcement .

according to section 401 of prwora , unauthorized aliens are eligible for short - term , in - kind emergency disaster relief and services or assistance that deliver in - kind services at the community level , provide assistance without individual determinations of each recipient's needs , and are necessary for the protection of life and safety .

the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , the authority under which the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) conducts disaster assistance efforts , requires nondiscrimination and equitable treatment in disaster assistance .

fema assistance provided under the stafford act includes ( but is not limited to ) grants for immediate temporary shelter , cash grants for uninsured emergency personal needs , temporary housing assistance , home repair grants , unemployment assistance due to the disaster , emergency food supplies , legal aid for low - income individuals , and crisis counseling .

when a situation threatens human health and safety , and a disaster is imminent but not yet declared , the secretary of dhs may pre - position employees and supplies and provide precautionary evacuation measures .

as part of a mock evacuation in may 2008 in the rio grande valley of texas , dhs border patrol officials in that region announced that border patrol agents would pre - screen residents for citizenship documents before allowing them to board evacuation buses in the event of a hurricane .

dhs border patrol spokesperson dan doty stated that the border patrol will assist other federal , state , and local authorities in a safe evacuation but at the same time uphold its job of "border security , protecting the border , and establishing alienage. .

dhs has reportedly acknowledged the importance of keeping families together during an evacuation ; however , officials have not indicated how mixed - immigration status families would be treated , or what would happen ( when asked ) if everyone in the family except an elderly grandparent had proper documents .

notwithstanding the media reports , dhs headquarters officials indicate that the department has not issued a formal policy on pre - screening during emergency evacuations .

when the disaster relief moves from emergency assistance for the protection of life and safety to disaster aid based on determinations of each recipient's needs ( eg , funds to help repair a damaged home ) , the "federal public benefits" question arises .

fema requires additional information from applicants at this point in the application process .

that information may include proof of a rental agreement or property ownership , employment status , and other factors that may further identify an applicant's citizenship status as part of the eligibility determination .

regardless of their programmatic eligibility , when unauthorized aliens are receiving federal disaster aid , according to dhs officials , they have no immunity from deportation .

in the aftermath of hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 , there were reportedly many displaced aliens who feared that seeking government help might lead to their deportation .

"the administration's priority is to provide needed assistance: water , food , medical care , shelter," dhs spokesperson joanna gonzalez explained at the time .

"however , as we move forward with the response , we can't turn a blind eye to the law. .

dhs arrested , detained , and ordered deported an unspecified number of unauthorized aliens displaced by the 2005 hurricanes .

in addition to the disaster - related emergency assistance , fema also funds the emergency food and shelter national board ( efs ) program , which provides funding to service providers assisting homeless individuals and families .

when there was an influx of unaccompanied alien children and families from central america in the spring and summer of 2014 , the efs program was one of the few potential sources of supplemental funding for the homeless service providers that provided them shelter .

as awareness of and confusion over "quasi - legal" migrants grows , the policies embodied by prucol have returned to the fore .

this issue most frequently arises in the context of compensation or training for laid - off workers or in debates over tax refunds or rebates .

those aliens who have eads and ssns — but who are not otherwise authorized to reside in the united states — pose a particular dilemma to some because they are permitted to work and have likely paid into the system that finances the particular benefit .

they also are difficult to distinguish from lprs because they possess valid government - issued documents .

a similar issue is whether states may provide in - state tuition to foreign nationals who have temporary protected status ( tps ) , a subset of "quasi - legal" migrants .

some have asserted the bar on benefit receipt does not apply to foreign nationals with tps because section 244 of ina considers them lawfully present .

however , others point out that section 244 ( f ) ( 4 ) limits that "lawfully present" designation to nonimmigrant adjustments or changes in immigration status .

aliens with tps are not defined as qualified aliens under prwora .

given the bar on federally funded postsecondary education in section 401 of prwora , the question of states providing in - state tuition to foreign nationals with tps may ultimately hinge on whether federal funds are involved .

congress has grappled on numerous occasions with the question of whether to refine or revise the access rules for unauthorized aliens .

these issues are sometimes centered in intricate and , some would say , secondary concerns ( eg , the citizenship documentation requirements in the chip reauthorization legislation in the 111 th congress ) .

other times , the issue becomes embroiled in major "hot - button" controversy , such as the motion to re - commit h.r .

3161 in the 110 th congress with instructions to amend it to bar use of funds to employ or provide housing for unauthorized aliens .

some argue that — if unauthorized aliens can end - run the system — federal benefit programs are a magnet for unauthorized migration .

others argue that — in the absence of congressional action on comprehensive immigration reform — the dilemma of unauthorized aliens , mixed - immigration status families , and "quasi - legal" migrants fosters a growing underclass of noncitizens who lack access to services .

whether additional restrictions and expenditures to further bar access to benefits , as well as fraudulent receipt of benefits , are cost - effective options in terms of the value of the benefits provided is yet another argument for congress to weigh .

