in the early 1980s , u.s. satellites tracked a growing indigenous nuclear program in north korea .

the north korean nuclear program began in the late 1950s with cooperation agreements with the soviet union on a nuclear research program near yongbyon .

its first research reactor began operation in 1967 .

north korea used indigenous expertise and foreign procurements to build a small nuclear reactor at yongbyon ( 5 mwe ) .

it was capable of producing about 6 kilograms ( kg ) of plutonium per year and began operating in 1986 .

later that year , u.s. satellites detected high explosives testing and a new plant to separate plutonium from the reactor's spent fuel .

in addition , construction of two larger reactors ( 50 mwe at yongbyon and 200 mwe at taechon ) added evidence of a serious clandestine effort .

although north korea had joined the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) in 1985 under soviet pressure , safeguards inspections began only in 1992 , raising questions about how much plutonium north korea had produced covertly .

in 1994 , north korea pledged , under the agreed framework with the united states , to freeze its plutonium programs and eventually dismantle them in return for several kinds of assistance .

at that time , western intelligence agencies estimated that north korea had separated enough plutonium for one or two bombs .

north korea complied with the agreed framework , allowing international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) seals — including the "canning" of spent fuel rods at the yongbyon reactor — and permanent remote monitoring and inspectors at its nuclear facilities .

when in 2002 , u.s. negotiators reportedly presented north korean officials with evidence of a clandestine uranium enrichment program , the north korean officials reportedly at first confirmed this , then denied it publicly .

the conflict quickly led to the breakdown of the agreed framework .

the bush administration argued that north korea was in "material breach" of its obligations and , after agreement with south korea , japan , and the eu ( the other members of the korean economic development organization , or kedo ) , stopped the next shipment of heavy fuel oil .

in response , north korea kicked out international monitors , broke the seals at the yongbyon nuclear complex , and restarted its reactor and reprocessing plant after an eight - year freeze .

members of the six - party talks — the united states , south korea , japan , china , russia , and north korea — began meeting in august 2003 to try and resolve the crisis .

in september 2005 , the six parties issued a joint statement on how to achieve verifiable denuclearization of the korean peninsula , which formed the basis for future agreements .

negotiations broke down , and north korea tested a nuclear device in october 2006 .

on february 13 , 2007 , north korea reached an agreement with other members of the six - party talks to begin the initial phase ( 60 days ) of implementing the joint statement from september 2005 on denuclearization .

phase 1 of this agreement included the shut - down of plutonium production at the yongbyon nuclear complex in exchange for an initial heavy fuel oil shipment to north korea .

phase 2 steps include the disablement of facilities at yongbyon and a "complete and correct" declaration of dprk nuclear activities , in exchange for delivery of heavy fuel oil and equivalent , and removal of the trading with the enemy act ( twea ) and state sponsors of terrorism ( sst ) designations .

the united states provided funding and technical assistance for disablement activities in north korea until april 2009 .

energy assistance was divided evenly between the six parties in phase 2 of the agreement .

north korea submitted a declaration of its past plutonium production activities in june 2008 as agreed in an october 3 , 2007 , joint statement on "second - phase actions. .

thereafter , president bush removed north korea from the twea list and notified congress of his intent to lift the sst designation after north korea agreed to verification provisions .

north korea did not accept initial u.s. verification proposals , and in september 2008 , threatened to restart reprocessing plutonium .

u.s. officials announced a bilateral agreement on verification in october 2008 , and the bush administration removed north korea from the sst list .

the agreement was verbal , and north korea then said that it had not agreed to sampling at nuclear sites , a key element in verifying past plutonium production .

the six parties met in december 2008 , but did not reach agreement on verification measures .

disablement activities at yongbyon continued through april 2009 , when north korea expelled international monitors .

north korea then announced it would restart its reprocessing plant and boasted progress in uranium enrichment technology development and soon after tested as nuclear device ( see detailed discussions below ) .

the february 2007 denuclearization action plan did not address uranium enrichment - related activities or the dismantlement of warheads and instead focused on shutting down and disabling the key plutonium production facilities at yongbyon .

a third phase , to have begun after disablement was complete and a declaration accepted by the six parties , was expected to deal with all aspects of north korea's nuclear program , including weapons , using north korea's declaration as a basis for future action .

understanding the scope of the program and the weapons capability would require transparency and careful verification for the pledged "complete , verifiable , irreversible" disarmament to be achieved .

six party talks have not been held since spring 2009 , but the united states and other countries have held bilateral talks with the north since then .

north korea openly acknowledged a uranium enrichment program in 2009 , but has said its purpose is the production of fuel for nuclear power .

in november 2010 , north korea showed visiting american experts early construction of a 100 mwt light - water reactor and a newly built gas centrifuge uranium enrichment plant , both at the yongbyon site .

the north koreans claimed the enrichment plant was operational , but this has not been independently confirmed .

u.s. officials have said that it is likely other , clandestine enrichment facilities exist .

a february 2012 announcement committed north korea to moratoria on nuclear and long - range missile testing as well as uranium enrichment suspension at yongbyon under iaea monitoring .

however , an april 2012 satellite launch , which violated un security council resolutions as well as the february missile moratorium , caused a collapse of the february agreement .

following a december 2012 satellite launch and subsequent un security council condemnation , north korea rejected future denuclearization talks , saying it would only denuclearize when all other nuclear weapons states also did so .

a third nuclear test conducted on february 12 , 2013 , could further complicate diplomatic efforts toward denuclearization .

north korea is widely believed to have mastered the engineering requirements of plutonium production a decade ago and may now be focusing its efforts on mastering uranium enrichment .

acquiring fissile material — plutonium - 239 or highly enriched uranium ( heu ) — is the key hurdle in nuclear weapons development .

producing these two materials is technically challenging ; in comparison , many experts believe weaponization to be relatively easy .

north korea has industrial - scale uranium mining and plants for milling , refining , and converting uranium ; it also has a fuel fabrication plant , a nuclear reactor , and a reprocessing plant — in short , everything needed to produce pu - 239 .

it has recently been built a uranium enrichment facility at yongbyon that could produce heu for weapons , or leu reactor fuel which could be irradiated for plutonium production .

in its earlier 5 mwe nuclear reactor , north korea used magnox fuel — natural uranium ( > 99%u - 238 ) metal , wrapped in magnesium - alloy cladding to produce plutonium for weapons .

about 8,000 fuel rods constitute a fuel core for the reactor .

when irradiated in a reactor , natural uranium fuel absorbs a neutron and then decays into plutonium ( pu - 239 ) .

fuel that remains in the reactor for a long time becomes contaminated by the isotope pu - 240 , which can "poison" the functioning of a nuclear weapon .

spent or irradiated fuel , which poses radiological hazards , must cool after removal from the reactor .

the cooling phase , estimated by some at five months , is proportional to the fuel burn - up .

reprocessing to separate plutonium from waste products and uranium is the next step .

north korea used a purex separation process , like the united states .

after shearing off the fuel cladding , the fuel is dissolved in nitric acid .

components ( plutonium , uranium , waste ) of the fuel are separated into different streams using organic solvents .

in small quantities , separation can be done in hot cells , but larger quantities require significant shielding to prevent deadly exposure to radiation .

it operated its 5 mwe nuclear reactor , is believed to have separated pu from the spent fuel , and has reportedly taken steps toward weaponization .

in january 2004 , north korean officials showed an unofficial u.s. delegation alloyed "scrap" from a plutonium ( pu ) casting operation .

dr. siegfried hecker , a delegation member , assessed that the stated density of the material was consistent with plutonium alloyed with gallium or aluminum .

if so , this could indicate a degree of sophistication in north korea's handling of pu metal , necessary for weapons production .

but without testing the material , hecker could not confirm that the metal was plutonium or that it was alloyed , or when it was produced .

in november 2010 , north korean officials showed a visiting unofficial u.s. delegation — led by former los alamos national laboratory director dr. siegfried hecker — what they claimed was an operating gas centrifuge uranium enrichment plant at the yongbyon nuclear complex .

in his trip report , dr. hecker estimated that the plant had 2,000 centrifuges ( most likely p - 2 centrifuges ) in six cascades , with a capacity of 8,000 kg swu / year .

north korea at that time claimed the uranium enrichment facility was built to produce enriched uranium for power reactor fuel .

in more recent statements , it has confirmed what the international community suspected , that it could also be used for weapons material production .

the north does not have any functioning nuclear power reactors , but said it is in the process of building a 100 megawatt - thermal ( 25-30 megawatt - electric ) experimental light - water reactor .

satellite images , as well as visitors to the site , confirm initial construction .

the reported size of the enrichment plant would match the annual fuel needs for the proposed 100 mwt reactor , which would require 3.5% low - enriched uranium fuel .

however , the plant could be altered to produce 40 kg of 90% highly enriched uranium per year .

highly enriched uranium can be used for weapons , while low - enriched uranium cannot .

while it was known prior to dr. hecker's visit that north korea was pursuing a uranium enrichment capacity , many analysts were surprised at the size and sophistication of the plant .

although north korea's weapons program has been plutonium - based from the start , in the past decade , intelligence had emerged pointing to it pursuing a second route to a nuclear bomb using highly enriched uranium .

even before north korea unveiled the facility in november 2010 , there was some certainty that north korea had parts and plans for such a program , but far less certainty over how far this program had developed .

in particular , this revelation raises questions about north korea's domestic capability to manufacture components , as well as how and when pyonyang obtained any equipment or materials for the facility .

analysts point to a history of cooperation with pakistan , particularly through the a. q. khan network , and multiple reports of transshipments through china .

the scale of the plant at yongbyon could suggest north korea possesses research level facilities elsewhere in the country .

another concern is that a clandestine facility might exist that is configured to produce heu for the north korean nuclear weapons program .

u.s .

ambassador to the iaea glyn davies told the iaea board of governors in december 2010 that the united states believes it is likely that other , clandestine uranium enrichment facilities exist in locations other than yongbyon .

a pilot - scale centrifuge plant would likely be needed to serve as a test - bed for the larger plants , perhaps consisting of a few hundred centrifuges .

pakistani president musharraf revealed in his september 2006 memoir , in the line of fire , that abdul qadeer khan — chief scientist in pakistan's nuclear weapons program who proliferated nuclear weapons technology for profit — "transferred nearly two dozen p - 1 and p - 2 centrifuges to north korea .

he also provided north korea with a flow meter , some special oils for centrifuges , and coaching on centrifuge technology , including visits to top - secret centrifuge plants. .

according to press reports , north korea said it had imported 150 tons of high - strength aluminum tubes from russia that could be used in a uranium enrichment program in the 2002-2003 period .

it is not known where north korea develops or manufactures centrifuges itself .

as described in the united nations panel of experts on north korea report of june 2012 , there is some debate whether north korea has the capacity to manufacture the specialized equipment required for centrifuges , such as maraging steel or high - strength aluminum , or whether it could have imported the components .

some experts posit that north korea could have built a centrifuge based on a less sophisticated design with less stringent quality requirements .

based on what has been reported on procurements of relevant equipment , former iaea safeguards director olli heinonen in an april 2012 article estimated that north korea was likely developing a 5,000 centrifuge enrichment capacity , plus spares .

north korea has technical and military reasons for testing an additional device or devices if it has enough fissile material to do so .

analysts would look for two main indicators after a nuclear test that could reveal information about north korea's nuclear weapons program .

first , the yield of the device , and secondly , the type of fissile material used .

there are many uncertainties over whether north korea would test a plutonium device and deplete its shrinking plutonium stockpile but advance the knowledge learned in earlier tests , whether it might pair a plutonium and heu device together in a test , or whether north korea has enough heu to test .

furthermore , it is not guaranteed that the international community could discern the type of material used in a nuclear test .

the ability to do so would depend on what is vented from the test site and what is detected through air sampling .

although former defense intelligence agency ( dia ) director lowell jacoby told the senate armed services committee in april 2005 that north korea had the capability to arm a missile with a nuclear device , pentagon officials later backtracked from that assessment .

a dni report to congress says that "north korea has short and medium range missiles that could be fitted with nuclear weapons , but we do not know whether it has in fact done so. .

north korea has several hundred short - range scud - class and medium range no dong - class ballistic missiles , and is developing an intermediate range ballistic missile .

the taepo - dong - 2 that was tested unsuccessfully in july 2006 would be able to reach the continental united states if it becomes operational .

dni assessed in 2008 that the taepo - dong - 2 has the potential capability to deliver a nuclear - weapon - sized payload to the united states , but that absent successful testing the likelihood of this is low .

a launch of a taepo - dong 2 missile as part of a failed satellite launch in april 2009 traveled further than earlier unsuccessful launches but still did not achieve a complete test .

an april 2012 launch of a taepo - dong 2 ( called the unha - 3 by north korea ) also failed in the first stage .

the december 2012 launch of a taepo - dong 2 ( unha - 3 ) was north korea's first successful launch of a satellite into space .

however , putting a satellite into orbit , while moving north korea technically to its goal , does not translate into a reliable missile .

further testing would be required .

it is possible that pakistani scientist a.q .

khan may have provided north korea the same chinese - origin nuclear weapon design he provided to libya and iran .

even though that design was for an heu - based device , it would still help north korea develop a reliable warhead for ballistic missiles — small , light , and robust enough to tolerate the extreme conditions encountered through a ballistic trajectory .

learning more about what is needed for miniaturization of warheads for ballistic missiles could have been the goal of north korea's testing smaller nuclear devices .

u.s. officials in their threat assessments have described the north korean nuclear capabilities as being more for deterrence , international prestige , and coercive diplomacy than for war fighting , and assess that pyongyang most likely "would consider using nuclear weapons only under narrow circumstances. .

the director of national intelligence said in early 2012 that "we also assess , albeit with low confidence , pyongyang probably would not attempt to use nuclear weapons against us forces or territory , unless it perceived its regime to be on the verge of military defeat and risked an irretrievable loss of control. .

statements by north korean officials emphasize that moves to expand their nuclear arsenal are in response to perceived threats by the united states against the north korean regime .

nuclear weapons also give north korea leverage in diplomatic negotiations , and threatening rhetoric often coincides with times of crisis or transitions in negotiations .

in january 2008 , a north korean media report stated that the country "will further strengthen our war deterrent capabilities in response to u.s. attempts to initiate nuclear war," to express its displeasure that it had not yet been removed from the u.s. terrorism list .

statements from pyongyang in january 2009 may also be part of a strategy to increase leverage in nuclear talks , or could indicate an increasing role for the north korean military in nuclear policy making .

a spokesman for north korea's general staff said on april 18 , 2009 , that the revolutionary armed forces "will opt for increasing the nation's defense capability including nuclear deterrent in every way. .

at the same time , the dprk issues periodic statements , such as its 2010 new year's address stating its dedication to achieving a nuclear - free korean peninsula through negotiations .

in may 2012 , north korea changed its constitution to say that it was a "nuclear - armed state. .

on april 1 , 2013 , its party congress adopted the "law on consolidating position of nuclear weapons state. .

the official media ( kcna ) summarized the law as saying that nuclear weapons "serve the purpose of deterring and repelling the aggression and attack of the enemy against the dprk and dealing deadly retaliatory blows at the strongholds of aggression until the world is denuclearized. .

the statement also said that the "nuclear weapons of the dprk can be used only by a final order of the supreme commander of the korean people's army to repel invasion or attack from a hostile nuclear weapons state and make retaliatory strikes .

the dprk shall neither use nukes against the non - nuclear states nor threaten them with those weapons unless they join a hostile nuclear weapons state in its invasion and attack on the dprk. .

this is the most detailed statement on north korean nuclear use policies to date .

in september 2005 , north korea agreed to abandon "all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs," but implementation of this goal was stalled .

the october 9 , 2006 , nuclear test is seen as a catalyst in uniting the other members of the six - party talks to toughen their stance towards north korea , and as a turning point in pyongyang's attitude .

u.n. security council resolution 1718 calls on north korea to abandon its nuclear weapons in a "complete , verifiable , and irreversible manner. .

in february 2007 , as part of implementation of the september 2005 joint statement , north korea committed to disable all nuclear facilities and provide a "complete and correct" declaration of all its nuclear programs .

a set of february 2012 agreements collapsed after north korea violated its missile moratorium with a failed satellite launch in april .

the united states and north korea on february 29 , 2012 , had separately announced agreement on a number of steps that could have paved the way for a return to denuclearization under the six - party talks process .

efforts toward dismantling north korea's nuclear weapons program under the six - party talks had been stalled since the spring of 2009 when north korea conducted a second nuclear test .

in the february 29 , 2012 , announcements , north korea committed to a long - range missile testing moratorium , a nuclear testing moratorium , a moratorium on enrichment activities at yongbyon , and a return of iaea inspectors to the yongbyon nuclear facilities .

the united states announced that the two countries would hold further talks to finalize details on a "targeted u.s. program consisting of an initial 240,000 metric tons of nutritional assistance with the prospect of additional assistance based on continued need. .

the u.s. statement also emphasized several wider security issues , such as its continued commitment to the 1953 armistice agreement and desire to increase people - to - people contacts with the dprk .

the dprk statement included a reference to a "discussion of issues concerning the lifting of sanctions on the dprk and provision of light water reactors" as priorities once the six - party talks have resumed .

the united states did not include those issues in its statement , and they are likely areas of continued disagreement between the parties .

in the past , u.s. officials have not supported the lifting of sanctions until after full denuclearization and a determination by the u.n. security council , and have supported only "discussion" of light - water reactors in the 2005 six - party statement .

the february 29 announcement was the culmination of several rounds of bilateral talks since summer 2011 .

after the death of kim jong il in december 2011 , u.s. officials were uncertain whether the new leader of north korea , kim jong - un , would agree to terms that were being discussed .

several questions were still to be resolved even before the agreement's collapse — including to what extent north koreans would grant the iaea inspectors access to the yongbyon facilities , and whether the north koreans would have agreed to u.s. requirements for monitoring of food aid .

additional questions surrounded the potential impact missile and nuclear testing moratoria would have had on north korea's weapons programs .

some prominent analysts of north korea's nuclear and missile programs emphasize that halting progress on north korea's ability to develop a warhead on a long - range missile should be the united states' top priority , and further missile and nuclear testing would be necessary for north korea to accomplish this .

others point out that weaponization activities and a clandestine uranium enrichment facility or facilities could continue even if a moratorium of testing and activities at yongbyon was in place .

concerns persist that north korea will continue its proliferation of missile and nuclear technology for a variety of motivations , including financial profit , joint exchange of data to develop its own systems , and as part of the general provocative trend .

according to dni admiral dennis blair's testimony to congress in 2009 , north korea is known to have sold in the past ballistic missiles and associated materials to "several middle eastern countries , including iran , and , in our assessment , assisted syria with the construction of a nuclear reactor. .

on the likelihood of nuclear proliferation from the dprk , the dni assessed that pyongyang is less likely to risk selling nuclear weapons or weapons - quantities of fissile material than nuclear technology or less sensitive equipment to other countries or non - state actors , in part because it needs its limited fissile material for its own deterrent .

pyongyang probably also perceives that it would risk a regime - ending military confrontation with the united states if the nuclear material was used by another country or group in a nuclear strike or terrorist attacks and the united states could trace the material back to north korea .

it is possible , however , that the north might find a nuclear weapons or fissile material transfer more appealing if its own stockpile grows larger and / or it faces an extreme economic crisis where the potentially huge revenue from such a sale could help the country survive .

due to concerns of proliferation and north korea's past track record , the security council deliberations on a resolution condemning the may 2009 north korean test focused on ways to interdict north korean shipments of missile and wmd - related technologies and prevent their financing .

u.n. security council resolution 1874 calls on all states to "inspect , in accordance with their national legal authorities and consistent with international law , all cargo to and from the dprk , in their territory , including seaports and airports," if that state has information that the cargo is prohibited by u.n. security council resolutions .

this would include cargo related to heavy arms ( see unscr 1718 ( 8 ) ( a ) ) and nuclear - related , ballistic missile - related , or other wmd - related programs .

the resolution also calls on states to inspect suspect vessels on the high seas , with the consent of the flag state , and prohibits "bunkering services" for such shipments such as refueling or servicing .

this is significant because north korea reportedly ships most goods under its own flag , and typically uses small vessels that would need refueling .

reportedly due to objections by russia and china , the resolution does not authorize the use of force if a north korean vessel resists inspection .

the resolution also has strict provisions regarding financial services and transfer of funds through third parties , measures that may also help prevent proliferation - related transfers .

resolution 1874 bans all arms transfers from north korea , and all arms transfers to north korea except for small arms and light weapons ( which require notification ) .

in addition , the proliferation security initiative is a u.s. - led coordinating mechanism that is meant to guide international cooperation in carrying out interdictions of proscribed wmd and missile - related goods , including to or from north korea .

china does not participate in psi .

therefore , a key question for implementation of the security council resolution will be china's commitment to actual interdiction measures and willingness of others to share sensitive information , particularly if chinese firms are implicated , as has been the case in the past .

also , there is little emphasis on airspace interdictions , which would be relevant , for example , in the case of north korean shipments passing over chinese airspace on their way to the middle east .

however , questions remain about the true commitment of china and others to preventing wmd and missile - related transfers to and from north korea , in particular because north korea has stated it views any interdiction as an "act of war. .

congress will have a clear role in considering u.s. funding for any future dismantlement of north korea's nuclear facilities , as well as other inducements for cooperation as agreed in the six - party talks .

u.s. assistance to nuclear disablement activities at yongbyon was funded through the state department's nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) .

the state department paid the north korean government for the labor costs of disablement activities , and also paying for related equipment and fuel .

approximately $20 million was approved for this purpose .

ndf funds may be used "notwithstanding any other provision of law" and therefore may be used to pay north korea .

doe's national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) has been contributing its personnel as technical advisors to the u.s. six - party delegation and as technical teams on the ground at yongbyon overseeing disablement measures .

nnsa has estimated it spent approximately $15 million in support of phase two ( yongbyon disablement ) implementation .

congress has also provided funding for energy assistance to north korea under the six - party talks through the state department's economic support fund .

congress also plays a role in establishing legal authority for assistance to nuclear disablement and dismantlement in north korea .

section 102 ( b ) ( the "glenn amendment" u.s.c .

2799aa - 1 ) of the arms export control act prohibits assistance to a non - nuclear weapon state under the npt that has detonated a nuclear explosive device .

due to this restriction , doe funds cannot be spent in north korea without a waiver .

congress passed language in the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 ) that would allow the president to waive the glenn amendment restrictions and that stipulates that funds may only be used for the purpose of eliminating north korea's wmd and missile - related programs .

if the president had exercised the glenn amendment waiver authority , then doe "will be able to procure , ship to north korea , and use equipment required to support the full range of disablement , dismantlement , verification , and material packaging and removal activities that phase three will likely entail. .

nnsa estimated that this would cost over $360 million in fy2009 if verification proceeded and north korea agreed to the packaging and disposition of separated plutonium and spent fuel at yongbyon .

because north korea conducted an underground nuclear test on may 25 , 2009 , the waiver may no longer be issued under p.l .

110-252 .

the law stipulated that a nuclear test after the date of enactment would nullify the waiver authority .

congress had expressed concern that the department of energy have enough funds available to support the disablement of north korea's nuclear weapons arsenal and production capability .

in the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act , the committees on appropriations provided doe's nnsa with funding discretion to provide up to $10 million towards its activities in north korea .

it also directs the department to submit a supplemental budget request if additional resources are required during fy2008 .

however , due to north korean withdrawal from the six - party talks , congress did not fund administration requests in the fy2009 supplemental appropriations or the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act .

the state department's ndf , which did receive funding , could be used for denuclearization assistance in the case of a breakthrough in the talks .

beyond the glenn amendment restrictions , department of defense funds must be specifically appropriated for use in north korea .

section 8045 of the fy2008 defense appropriations act says that "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available in this act may be obligated or expended for assistance to the democratic people's republic of korea unless specifically appropriated for that purpose. .

section 8044 of the fy2009 consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) also contains this language .

however , authorization was given for ctr funds to be used globally .

the fy2008 defense authorization act specifically encourages "activities relating to the denuclearization of the democratic people's republic of korea" as a potential new initiative for ctr work .

senator richard lugar has proposed that the ctr program be granted "notwithstanding authority" for this work since the defense department's experience in the former soviet union , expertise and resources could make it well - positioned to conduct threat reduction work in north korea and elsewhere .

the department of defense did not work on recent disablement efforts , but there may be a future role for dod if north korea in the future agrees to dismantlement work .

congress may choose to influence the course of negotiations with north korea through legislation that limits or places requirements on u.s. diplomatic actions .

for example , the north korean counter - terrorism and non - proliferation act ( h.r .

3650 ) introduced in the 110 th congress called for certification by the president that north korea has met a range of nonproliferation and political benchmarks before the administration could lift any u.s. sanctions .

congress could establish reporting requirements on progress , or condition appropriations or disbursement to north korea upon verification measures .

congress could also be involved in other aspects of potential changes in u.s. relations with pyongyang , such as the monitoring of human rights issues , funding for further denuclearization steps including verification provisions , and establishment of normalized ties once nuclear dismantlement has been achieved .

congress also plays a role in setting sanctions policies , as in the bill security through termination of proliferation act of 2009 ( h.r .

485 ) .

congress also sometimes gives its sense of what actions north korea should take .

house resolution 1735 , passed by the house on december 1 , 2010 , called on north korea to immediately cease any and all uranium enrichment activities and take concrete steps to dismantle , under international verification and assistance , all sensitive nuclear facilities , in accordance with united nations security council resolutions 1695 ( 2006 ) , 1718 ( 2006 ) , and 1874 ( 2009 ) ; this resolution was passed following north korea's unveiling of a uranium enrichment plant at yongbyon in november 2010 and its attack on yeonpyeong island .

congress may also wish to examine the implementations of multilateral sanctions on north korea .

the united nations security council ( unsc ) has passed resolutions condemning north korean missile and nuclear tests and imposing increasingly strict sanctions on the already - isolated regime .

the resolutions have condemned the tests , and called for north korea to abandon its ballistic missile and nuclear programs .

unsc sanctions on north korea primarily ban all trade in military goods and wmd - related and missile technologies , as well as forms of financial support that could contribute to prohibited dprk weapons programs .

however , the unsc sanctions are not an embargo , and explicit exclusions are made for humanitarian and denuclearization aid .

several problems arise in implementation especially related to chinese companies' trade in dual - use goods to north korea .

a un sanctions committee and panel of experts monitor implementation of international sanctions on north korea .

