in 2009 , the war in iraq appears to be winding down , as security gains made since the height of the insurgency in 2006 and 2007 continue to be sustained , and as iraqis increasingly seek management of their own affairs .

a new u.s. - iraqi security agreement that went into effect on january 1 , which confirmed the iraqis' responsibility for their own security , introduced a new era in operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) — the us - led coalition military operation in iraq — and in us - iraqi bilateral relations .

secretary of defense robert gates called the agreement a "watershed , a firm indication that american military involvement in iraq is winding down. .

u.s. military commanders on the ground have indicated that in most parts of iraq , the focus of u.s. military efforts has shifted from counterinsurgency ( coin ) to stability operations , including advising the iraqi security forces ( isf ) , and supporting security , economic , and governance capacity - building .

on february 27 , 2009 , at camp lejeune in north carolina , president obama delivered a speech addressing "how the war in iraq will end," in which he announced the drawdown of u.s. combat forces by august 2010 and the transition of the rest of the military mission to training and advising iraq security forces , conducting counter - terrorism , and providing force protection for u.s. personnel .

the united states begins this transition from a position of significant commitment – including some 140,000 u.s. troops deployed in iraq as of march 2009 , in addition to civilian experts and u.s. contractors , who provide substantial support to their iraqi counterparts in the fields of security , governance , and development .

senior u.s. officials , including outgoing u.s .

ambassador to iraq ryan crocker , and secretary gates , have suggested that lasting change in iraq will require substantially more time , and that while the u.s. military presence will diminish , u.s. engagement with iraq is likely to continue .

the government of iraq ( goi ) , for its part , still faces challenges at the operational level , in countering the lingering threads of the insurgency ; and at the strategic level , in achieving a single , shared vision of the iraqi state , and in improving its capacity to provide good governance , ensure security , and foster economic development for the iraqi people .

key policy issues the obama administration may choose to address , with oversight from the 111 th congress , include identifying which u.s. national interests and strategic objectives , in iraq and the region , should guide further u.s. engagement ; monitoring and evaluating the impact of the changes in the u.s. presence and role in iraq ; and laying the groundwork for a future , more traditional bilateral relationship .

the administration's decision to launch operation iraqi freedom had antecedents stretching back to the 1991 gulf war and its aftermath .

as the prussian military theorist karl von clausewitz wrote , war planning includes articulation of both intended goals and how they will be achieved .

in the case of operation iraqi freedom , administration goals included both short - term military objectives and longer - term strategic goals .

to meet that intent , the administration planned — though apparently in unequal measure — for both combat operations and the broader range of operations that would be required on "the day after" regime removal .

major combat operations in iraq , launched in march 2003 , roughly followed the course that had been outlined at the centcom component commanders conference in january that year .

the coalition force was both joint — with representatives from all the u.s. military services — and combined — with participants from coalition partner countries .

this report uses the term "post - major combat" to refer to the period from the president's announcement of the end of major combat , on may 1 , 2003 , to the present .

this period has not been monolithic — it has included evolutions in national and military strategy , and in the specific "ways and means" used to pursue those strategies on the ground , as described below .

from a political and legal perspective , the major marker after may 1 , 2003 , was the june 28 , 2004 , transition of executive authority from the occupying powers back to iraqis .

from a military perspective , the period after may 1 , 2003 , has included a continuation of combat operations as well as the introduction of many new missions .

the multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) , like its predecessor cjtf - 7 , is a joint , combined force .

it includes some department of defense civil servants , and it is supported by civilian contractors .

the security situation in iraq is multi - faceted , geographically varied , and constantly evolving .

in a society where the rule of law is not completely established , politics — the struggle for power , resources and influence — more readily and frequently takes the form of violence .

iraqi people are often faced with imperfect , pragmatic decisions about who is best suited to protect them and their interests .

as a general trajectory , after a brief period of relative quiet in 2003 following major combat operations , forms of violent expression grew in variety , intensity , and frequency , hitting peaks in 2005 and 2006 .

by 2008 , indicators of violence had tapered off to markedly lower levels .

by the end of 2008 , dod assessed , "the strength of the insurgency continues to decline. .

over time , u.s. military strategy for iraq — and thus also operations on the ground — have been adapted to support evolving u.s. national strategy .

in turn , national strategy has directly drawn some lessons from oif operational experience .

given the scope and scale of the mission , and its lack of precise historical precedents , there has been ample need and opportunity for learning and adaptation .

the administration's basic national strategic objectives have remained roughly consistent over time .

so have the major categories of activities ( or "lines of operation" ) — political , economic , essential services , diplomatic — used to help achieve the objectives .

what have evolved greatly over time are the views of commanders in the field and decision - makers in washington , d.c. , about the best ways to achieve "security" and how that line of operation fits with the others .

this section highlights key episodes and turning - points in the theory and practice of oif military operations , including early operations during formal occupation , "fallujah ii," coin operations in tal afar , operation together forward , the operations associated with the 2007 "new way forward," and surge follow - on operations in 2008 .

the review suggests that the application of counter - insurgency ( coin ) theory and practice grew over time , but by no means steadily or consistently .

as of the beginning of 2009 , the iraqi security forces ( isf ) consisted of three major groups: the army , navy and air force under the ministry of defense ( mod ) ; the iraqi police service , the national police , and the department of border enforcement under the ministry of interior ( moi ) , as well as the facilities protection service that was still being consolidated under the moi ; and the iraqi special operations forces that report to the counter - terrorism bureau , under the office of the prime minister .

developing the isf and the security ministries that oversee them is a critical component of the role of u.s. and coalition forces in iraq — a role that has evolved over time in response to events on the ground and changes in u.s. strategy .

a central tenet of counter - insurgency is reaching out to the local population and securing at least their acceptance , if not their active support .

in iraq , a number of u.s. military commanders have pointed to changes in the attitudes and behavior of the iraqi population as the most important difference between 2008 and earlier periods .

in december 2007 , for example , the out - going commander of multi - national division - baghdad , major general joseph fil , noted: "i attribute a great deal of the security progress to the willingness of the population to step forward and band together against terrorist and criminal militia. .

coalition and iraqi government efforts to reach out to the iraqi population have increasingly fallen under the broad semantic rubric of "reconciliation. .

as of 2008 , the term is very broadly used — from u.s. national strategy , to congressional legislation , to the names of iraqi government structures and of offices and job titles in coalition headquarters .

the term is variously used , but in the broadest sense , it refers to a multi - lateral reconciliation among all sub - groups and members of iraqi society , except the self - designated truly "irreconcilables" and those who may have disqualified themselves by some egregious action .

in practice , "reconciliation" in iraq has taken a number of forms , several of which , discussed below , have played critical roles in shaping the security climate .

from the earliest days after major combat operations , civilian and military coalition leaders in iraq recognized the central importance of the governance and economics "lines of operation" — indeed , military commanders have consistently viewed them as essential counterparts to security .

the 2007 surge "theory of the case" adjusted the sequencing — improved security would now lay the groundwork for progress in governance and economics — but all three lines of operation remained essential to long - term success .

the iraqi government would have the lead role in governance and economics , but the coalition , including civilian and military personnel , would support their efforts .

the key tension over time has centered on the balance of civilian and military roles and responsibilities in these areas .

while all practitioners agreed that civilian agencies are best placed , by training and experience , to lead the governance and economics lines of operation , civilian efforts have been hampered by the relatively limited resources of their agencies , and by delayed and limited staffing .

military forces , with far greater numbers of "boots on the ground," have sometimes stepped in to spearhead these efforts , and have consistently played at least a supporting role .

the 2007 surge included a revitalization of the civilian / military provincial reconstruction team effort .

at the same time , as security conditions on the ground improved , in 2007 and 2008 , military units turned a greater share of their own attention to governance and economic activities .

current debates include future civilian and military roles in supporting iraqi capacity - building , as the u.s. force presence in iraq draws down .

one critical limiting factor may be the diminishing appetite of iraqi officials and practitioners to be "mentored," as the de facto exercise of iraqi sovereignty expands .

strategically based decision - making about the united states' next steps in iraq and its future relations with that country requires a clear assessment of trends to date in security conditions , and a clear evaluation of the factors that produced those changes .

for further information about iraq - related issues , see crs report rl33110 , the cost of iraq , afghanistan , and other global war on terror operations since 9 / 11 , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34064 , iraq: oil and gas legislation , revenue sharing , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33834 , defense contracting in iraq and afghanistan: issues and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r40011 , u.s. – iraq withdrawal / status of forces agreement: issues for congressional oversight , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl31339 , iraq: post - saddam governance and security , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl34568 , u.s. - iraq strategic framework and status of forces agreement: congressional response , by [author name scrubbed] .

