the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty , or ctbt , would ban all nuclear explosions .

it was opened for signature in september 1996 ; as of february 2008 , 178 nations had signed it and 144 of them had ratified .

to enter into force , 44 nations with nuclear reactors must ratify it ; so far , 35 of them have ratified and another 7 have signed .

the united states signed the treaty in september 1996 ; the senate rejected it in october 1999 .

nuclear test bans have a long history ( see appendix a ) .

there has been strong international support for test ban treaties ; u.s. opinion has been divided .

most u.s. presidents have sought agreements to limit testing .

the eisenhower administration devoted great , but unsuccessful , effort to negotiating a treaty .

the kennedy administration sought a ctbt ; when that proved nonnegotiable , it achieved the limited test ban treaty ( ltbt ) in 1963 , which bans nuclear tests in the atmosphere , under water , and in space .

the nixon administration negotiated the threshold test ban treaty ( ttbt ) with the soviet union in 1974 , which limits underground tests to a yield of 150 kilotons .

the ford administration negotiated the peaceful nuclear explosions treaty ( pnet ) in 1976 , which extended the 150-kiloton limit to peaceful nuclear explosions .

the carter administration did not pursue entry into force of these two treaties , but sought a ctbt ; partly because of strong opposition within the administration , no treaty was concluded .

the reagan administration rejected the ttbt and pnet because of verification concerns , but in 1987 began to negotiate new verification protocols .

the george h.w .

bush administration concluded negotiation of these protocols ; the senate approved the two treaties in 1990 , and they entered into force in that year .

president bush also signed into law a provision implementing a nine - month moratorium on nuclear testing starting in october 1992 .

president clinton extended the moratorium ; he had initially thought to pursue a test ban treaty of limited duration and permitting a low explosive yield , but in 1995 he opted for a ctbt of zero yield and unlimited duration .

the george w. bush administration has continued the moratorium but has not pursued the ctbt .

u.s. interest in the ctbt waned after 1999 , but has since reemerged .

in the wake of 9 / 11 and the rise of nuclear programs in iran and north korea , the risk of nuclear proliferation has become more stark ; some claim the treaty would curb that risk .

an op - ed in january 2007 by henry kissinger , sam nunn , william perry , and george shultz called for steps toward eliminating nuclear weapons , including ratification and entry into force of the ctbt .

the administration is pursuing the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) , which it argues would make nuclear testing less likely ; some envision a ctbt - rrw bargain .

scientists around the world have made progress in detecting nuclear explosions , and u.s. scientists have made progress in maintaining nuclear weapons without testing ; both topics were of concern in the 1999 debate .

others hold that monitoring capability is insufficient and that new weapons requiring testing are needed .

international pressure for the treaty has continued through u.n. general assembly votes and international conferences .

the treaty might be an issue in the presidential campaign .

several bills and resolutions in the 110 th congress call for ratification of the ctbt .

opinions on the treaty reflect contending views on how to obtain security ; the role of nuclear weapons ; nuclear nonproliferation and its relationship , if any , to nuclear disarmament ; and international relations generally .

 ( 1 ) some opponents would revoke the u.s. signature of the treaty and resume testing to maintain u.s. nuclear weapons , weapons expertise , and the credibility of the nuclear deterrent , and to develop new weapons .

 ( 2 ) some supporters and opponents prefer to maintain the moratorium because of concern for political and international ramifications , but would test if necessary to fix a warhead problem .

 ( 3 ) some supporters favor the treaty on grounds that it has significant value for nonproliferation and can help the united states monitor nuclear testing by other nations .

 ( 4 ) others favor the ctbt as a step toward abolition of nuclear weapons .

while many people of all stripes favor abolition of nuclear weapons as an ultimate goal , those in the fourth group see abolition as a realistic if long - term possibility and believe that the ctbt is a critical step toward reaching that goal .

these views are on a continuum , with overlaps and shades of gray between positions .

still others feel the treaty would make little difference in restraining weapons development because technical advances enable such development without testing , or that it would make little difference in countering nuclear proliferation as a stand - alone measure .

while the united states has observed a nuclear test moratorium since 1992 , few appear to hold it as their preferred position ; instead , the treaty's supporters accept the moratorium as better than a return to testing , and opponents accept it as better than the ctbt .

this report seeks to present information that may help members understand many ctbt issues and to assess whether , on balance , the united states is better off with or without the ctbt .

it is organized around three aspects of how the treaty might affect u.s. security that were prominent in the 1999 debate: the ctbt and deterrence ; monitoring and verification ; and implications for nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament .

in the public debate since 1999 , ctbt supporters have written extensively on all aspects of the treaty , while opponents have written much less .

to provide balance , crs has obtained many comments from people representing all perspectives .

as a result , this report contains a substantial amount of new material .

during the cold war , the united states and soviet union engaged in an arms competition , often called an "arms race" or "action - reaction cycle. .

this competition was dynamic .

the united states built submarines carrying ballistic missiles ; the soviet union followed suit .

the soviet union built deeply buried bunkers for its leaders ; the united states built very high yield weapons to destroy them .

scores of such examples could be listed .

despite this effort , u.s. and soviet nuclear strategies and programs resulted in a rough parity between the two sides , and the cold war passed into history with no nuclear or conventional war between them .

while deterrence has had many permutations over the years , most in the united states supported it during the cold war for want of a better alternative .

to be sure , some argued that the united states should seek superiority , while others held that a minimum deterrent sufficed .

others reluctantly supported deterrence as an interim measure , arguing that while it purports to reduce the risk of nuclear war , that very outcome could be expected if a low probability per year is aggregated over many years .

despite these differing views , congress supported the forces to implement a deterrent strategy over many decades .

the capability to deter the soviet union was by far the most stressing case , so it was seen as more than sufficient to deter other threats .

in that environment , nuclear testing served many purposes .

nuclear tests were mainly conducted for weapons development , but also for safety , weapons physics , stockpile confidence , and certification of modifications .

tests also served to maintain skills in weapons science , engineering , and manufacturing , and to demonstrate the credibility of the u.s. deterrent .

with the end of the cold war and the soviet union , the "comfort" of dealing for four decades with a single more - or - less predictable adversary ended , to be replaced by considerable uncertainty .

r. james woolsey , in his 1993 nomination hearing to be director of central intelligence , said "yes , we have slain a large dragon , but we live now in a jungle filled with a bewildering variety of poisonous snakes .

and in many ways the dragon was easier to keep track of. .

despite this changed situation , there remains wide , but not universal , agreement in the united states on the need to maintain a nuclear deterrent for the foreseeable future .

lawrence korb and max bergmann of the center for american progress wrote , "to maintain an effective deterrent , the united states must continue to possess conventional and nuclear forces capable of quickly and decisively destroying these regimes," referring to "extreme regimes ... such as iran and north korea. .

sidney drell and james goodby , in an arms control association report , "estimate that a u.s. strategic force of some 500 operationally deployed warheads would be more than adequate for deterrence .

... this force level would be enough to provide a degree of flexibility in a fluid security environment. .

a responsive force of 400 to 500 warheads would supplement this force .

the administration's nuclear posture review of 2001 stated that with the end of the cold war , "u.s. nuclear forces still require the capability to hold at risk a wide range of target types .

this capability is key to the role of nuclear forces in supporting an effective deterrence strategy relative to a broad spectrum of potential opponents under a variety of contingencies. .

at issue , though , is what is needed for deterrence .

the aim of deterrence has always been to make an adversary fear it will suffer unacceptable consequences if it takes certain actions .

many believe that the u.s. - soviet deterrent relationship worked during the cold war because threats were credible and each side understood the consequences of attacking the other .

in the post - cold war , post - 9 / 11 world , many questions arise .

who is to be deterred , by what threats ? .

what weapons are needed to make them credible ? .

is deterrence dynamic , with constant weapons development needed to respond to changing threats , or is a modest number of nuclear weapons of existing designs , together with u.s. conventional forces and economic might , more than sufficient ? .

are existing nuclear weapons sufficient to deter north korea , or are new ones needed that could destroy underground bunkers where leaders might hide , or is the nation so irrational that it is beyond deterrence , or is a north korean nuclear attack wildly implausible ? .

is a satisfactory outcome possible through diplomacy ? .

what capabilities are needed to deter iran or to roll back its nuclear program ? .

do nuclear forces have any relevance to deterring terrorists or their state sponsors ? .

this report now considers ctbt and nuclear testing issues that link to these broader issues of deterrence .

without testing , can the united states maintain the facilities and skilled personnel supporting u.s. nuclear weapons ? .

this question is considered first because these capabilities are the bedrock on which nuclear weapons rest .

can existing weapons be maintained without testing ? .

this is a necessary criterion for deterrence under the ctbt , as it would take many years to develop and deploy new weapons .

does deterrence require new weapons that incorporate new military capabilities , and is testing required to develop them ? .

do u.s. weapons need more features for safety and security , and is testing required to add them ? .

such features might deter terrorist attempts to seize and detonate these weapons .

monitoring and verification have been central to the debate and negotiations on nuclear test bans for a half - century .

while the terms are often used interchangeably , there is a difference .

monitoring involves looking for indicators that a nuclear test has taken place .

it is a dynamic contest between hiders and seekers , with ctbt supporters showing that monitoring capability is improving and treaty opponents raising doubts about that capability and claiming that evasion capability is improving .

verification , literally "truth making," involves deciding whether a nation is in compliance with its treaty obligations .

at issue is not perfect verification but effective verification .

in 1988 , paul nitze offered a widely - used definition: by effective verification , "[w]e mean that we want to be sure that , if the other side moves beyond the limits of the treaty in any militarily significant way , we would be able to detect such violation in time to respond effectively , and thereby deny the other side the benefit of the violation. .

thus monitoring is a technical activity that provides data , while verification uses the data to form judgments on compliance .

it is for this reason that the ctbt establishes an international monitoring system and leaves it to individual nations to determine whether a nation has violated the treaty .

monitoring capability , the military value of clandestine tests , and effective verification are linked .

if , as a hypothetical example , tests above 0.1 kiloton had significant military value and the threshold of detection was 10 kilotons , the ctbt could not be effectively verified , but it could be if the numbers were reversed .

thus ctbt opponents claim the threshold for detection is high and that for military value is low ; supporters make the opposite claim .

accordingly , the following section examines what the treaty bans ; describes several monitoring technologies and arguments about their capabilities and weaknesses ; considers whether clandestine testing would confer military advantages ; and discusses risks a nation might run if it is caught cheating .

the public 1999 debate on ratification did not go into detail on the technical ability to monitor the ctbt .

for example , no scientists with primary expertise in a monitoring technology testified in senate hearings on the treaty .

however , members and staff received extensive classified briefings from scientists from the national laboratories and from the intelligence community .

since 1999 , scientists have made many advances in detection capability that have been widely published .

the most important technical report on monitoring was prepared in 2002 by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) .

it is generally favorable to the treaty .

two other overviews of technical progress prepared in 2007 also favor the treaty .

many journal articles discuss specific technical advances .

in contrast , few if any unclassified technical reports rebut claims of progress in monitoring .

nevertheless , ctbt opponents have developed many arguments , so any future debate on monitoring is likely to be less lopsided than one might infer from the imbalance in writing .

there is widespread agreement among experts within and outside the government that nuclear proliferation , especially if it leads to terrorists obtaining nuclear weapons , is one of the greatest security threats facing the united states .

the nuclear nonproliferation regime is a decades - long attempt to hold nuclear proliferation in check .

this regime is an array of treaties , agreements , nuclear weapon free zones , restrictions on exports of nuclear - related equipment , controls of nuclear materials , and national laws , with the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) at its core .

the npt entered into force in 1970 .

it represents a bargain in which nuclear weapon states could have nuclear weapons , non - nuclear weapon states agreed not to acquire them , and both agreed , in article vi , "to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament , and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control. .

many see this regime as being in danger .

north korea conducted a nuclear test in 2006 .

iran is embarked on a nuclear program that many fear is , or will become , a nuclear weapons program .

many nations are expected to begin nuclear power programs , which would make fissile materials and nuclear expertise more widely available .

there are concerns about unsecured nuclear weapons in pakistan and elsewhere , and about whether another proliferation network such as that operated by a.q .

khan will emerge , or if another one still exists undiscovered .

another concern is the threat of terrorists armed with nuclear weapons .

some fear a cascade of nuclear proliferation .

for example , if iran develops nuclear weapons , that could put pressure on egypt and saudi arabia to do likewise , and a continued north korean nuclear weapons program could lead japan and south korea to follow suit .

at issue is how to protect this regime and thwart nuclear proliferation .

a major argument by supporters on behalf of the ctbt is that the treaty would promote nonproliferation .

some ctbt supporters favor the treaty by itself as a means to slow proliferation , while other supporters see the treaty as a step toward nuclear disarmament .

opponents argue that the treaty would weaken deterrence and that nonproliferation and disarmament are not linked .

some opponents would resume testing promptly to restore confidence in existing weapons , develop new ones , and train weapons designers , while other opponents would resume testing only under more limited circumstances , such as if a problem developed with an existing warhead that could only be fixed through testing .

greg mello , executive director of the los alamos study group , offers the following view: the nonproliferation value of u.s. ctbt ratification depends on other u.s. policies , some connected to the treaty and some not .

if those other policies build on and implement the ctbt as a disarmament treaty , as the text of the treaty proclaims it to be , it could have significant nonproliferation value .

on the other hand , a ctbt that aims to "ban the bang , but not the bomb," and that the united states ratifies and implements on that basis , may have little if any nonproliferation value .

in that case it would be widely and correctly seen as furthering a world order based on a nuclear double standard .

for example , ratifying the ctbt while making long - term investments to maintain and improve a leaner u.s. nuclear arsenal would make a mockery of this treaty in the eyes of most of the world .

merely having a ctbt is not enough of a goal to provide real improvement in the foreign relations of the united states .

freedom from the threat of nuclear attack , i.e .

freedom from nuclear deterrence , would be such a goal , with the ctbt one means to it .

in contrast , should a situation arise in which a world led by nuclear - armed , rich states enforced a future ctbt regime by threat of military force or by economic sanctions that cause widespread suffering , that situation would not be much different than the one we have today prior to ratification and entry into force .

another possible position is that the ctbt would make little difference one way or the other .

in this view , the extent of proliferation is about what it would be had the united states ratified the ctbt ; this nation has made progress on nuclear nonproliferation despite not having ratified the treaty ; the weapons labs have supported 12 annual assessments that nuclear weapons remain safe and reliable despite the lack of testing ; and the strategic balance favors this nation whether or not russia or china has tested clandestinely .

thus , neither the worst fears of those who opposed the treaty on grounds that deterrence would collapse without testing , nor of those who supported it on grounds that u.s. failure to ratify would accelerate nuclear proliferation , have been realized .

this position has received little if any support .

some have suggested modifying the ctbt in order to gain acceptance by the u.s. senate .

one possibility is a treaty that would permit withdrawal after 10 years with no reason required , but no nation other than the united states supported this position in negotiations for the treaty .

another is a ban permitting very low yield tests , but the nuclear weapon states could find no threshold to which all could agree other than zero and the nonnuclear weapon states pressed for zero .

a third possibility would be to conduct some tests before ratifying a zero - yield , indefinite - duration ctbt .

indeed , the hatfield - exon - mitchell amendment to the fy1993 energy and water development appropriations act ( p.l .

102-377 , section 507 ) provided for some tests from july 1993 to september 1996 under certain conditions , though the tests were not conducted .

for the united states , this approach would accomplish many things that the treaty's critics favor .

testing would: indicate whether leps had maintained existing weapons sufficiently and , if not , would validate fixes ; indicate whether rrw designs were effective ; provide experimental data to validate computer models and data drawn from nonnuclear experiments ; provide nuclear test experience for a new generation of weapons designers and others ; and benefit from advances made by ssp , which would guide the tests to gather key pieces of data , and from technical advances made in the broader economy since the last test in 1992 .

on the other hand , u.s. testing could lead to testing by russia and china , which would enable them to maintain and improve their weapons and develop new ones , undermining u.s. security , and could lead other nations to test as well , in a proliferation cascade .

nonnuclear weapon states might grudgingly have accepted some u.s. testing in 1993-1996 ; indeed , china and france conducted several tests in this period , though accompanied by international protests .

at present , however , critics of this approach believe that with the u.s. moratorium in effect for over 15 years and the treaty ratified by over 140 nations , resumed u.s. testing — even if limited in number and duration and presented as a way to secure u.s. ratification — could well lead to the demise of the ctbt .

in any future debate on the treaty , the senate may wish to examine whether any of these three alternatives merits consideration .

even if these alternatives are rejected , others might be considered that are not inconsistent with the treaty .

ctbt supporters might offer new safeguards in addition to those set forth by president clinton in 1995 , but the 45-year history of safeguards indicates that they are all but certain to be a part of any future resolution of ratification of the ctbt and so may offer little leverage on behalf of the treaty .

as another alternative , ctbt supporters might offer an rrw - ctbt package to secure senate advice and consent to ratification .

yet rrw appears an insufficient inducement .

some ctbt opponents hold that the united states could not have confidence in rrw without nuclear testing , and rrw has only modest political support as evidenced by the fact that congress eliminated fy2008 funds for it .

therefore , if the treaty were to come up again for senate consideration , it might have to be considered on its own merits .

in every arms control treaty , each state party gives up something in the expectation that the risks of so doing are outweighed by gains from what it can give up ( such as expensive weapons or programs ) , what the other parties give up , and what threats it averts .

this argues for a net assessment rather than accepting or rejecting a treaty based on one criterion in isolation .

there are many criteria to consider in this assessment: can the united states maintain the safety and reliability of its nuclear weapons , and the health of the nuclear weapons enterprise , well enough over the long term without nuclear testing ? .

and what constitutes "well enough" ? .

are new nuclear weapons needed for deterrence , or do existing weapons , coupled with conventional forces , suffice ? .

will new weapons require testing ? .

what is the current balance between monitoring and evasion ? .

given that monitoring technology will continue to improve , and that evasion capability may improve , but in ways that are generally classified and may well be unknown , how is the monitoring - evasion balance likely to shift over time ? .

how confident can an evader be in its ability to succeed , given the many and improving monitoring techniques and the difficulties that could cause an evasion attempt to fail ? .

how confident can monitors be in their ability to detect and identify a clandestine or an unattributable test in light of the many scenarios that have been set forth and the vast information on monitoring capabilities available in the open literature and available through the ims to states parties to the treaty ? .

how likely are russia and china to cheat , and to gain a strategic advantage thereby ? .

how likely are other nations to cheat , and how would that affect deterrence , regional stability , and nuclear proliferation ? .

would the international community impose severe consequences on a ctbt member that conducted clandestine tests ? .

would it impose such consequences on a state not party to the ctbt that conducted tests , whether clandestine or not ? .

would u.s. ratification of the treaty make nuclear proliferation more or less likely ? .

what specific steps would entry into force of the ctbt lead nonnuclear weapon states to take in order to rein in nuclear proliferation ? .

would these states take these steps only if the treaty enters into force ? .

is u.s. movement toward nuclear disarmament , as exemplified by the ctbt , essential for nuclear nonproliferation , as some suggest , or do the many u.s. steps toward disarmament and nonproliferation taken to date provide a firm basis for further nonproliferation efforts ? .

is the u.s. moratorium on nuclear testing a reasonable long - term balance between those who demand that the united states ratify the ctbt and those who urge a return to testing ? .

is the united states likely to exit the moratorium if a problem arises that calls for a test ? .

is this nation less likely to exit the ctbt under that circumstance ? .

how likely is the ctbt to enter into force if the united states ratifies it and works to secure ratification by all annex 2 states ? .

could the treaty be brought into force if the united states and china ratified it but a few annex 2 states did not ? .

do technical and geopolitical developments since 1999 warrant a reconsideration of the treaty ? .

one's net assessment depends on the importance one attaches to these and other criteria , and the degree and probability of adverse consequences resulting from an incorrect judgment .

the assessment is complicated by the accretion of criteria over the course of test ban debates over the past half - century .

while arguments over each criterion necessarily shift over time , it also appears that new criteria are added but old ones never leave the debate .

beyond that , perceptions on broader issues influence judgment: the likelihood of malevolent actions by china , russia , iran , and north korea ; the value of treaties and regimes for restraining or halting nuclear proliferation ; the balance between obtaining security through military capability or diplomacy , and how the two are linked ; and the value of u.s. nuclear weapons for influencing the behavior of other nations .

in the case of the ctbt , there is no more agreement on the direction of these assessments than there is on judgments on individual criteria .

as a result , members of congress , secretaries of defense and state , and chairmen of the joint chiefs of staff have often arrived at opposed assessments .

appendix a .

history of nuclear testing , test bans , and nonproliferation efforts toward a ctbt date from the dawn of the nuclear age .

in 1946 , representative louis ludlow introduced h.con.res .

146 , declaring the sense of congress that an atomic bomb test be canceled , "that the manufacture of atomic bombs shall cease," and that u.s. officials should seek "a definite postwar agreement by the united nations to ban the atomic bomb forever as an instrument of war. .

a scholarly study , analyzing a 1952 report , stated , "perhaps convinced by the failure to control the a - bomb that there was no possibility for international control once a weapon had been tested , the oppenheimer panel recommended approaching the soviets on control before testing the h - bomb. .

in 1954 , prime minister jawaharlal nehru of india proposed "some sort of what may be called 'standstill agreement' in respect , at least , of these actual [nuclear] explosions. .

president dwight eisenhower and soviet chairman nikolai bulganin began a correspondence in 1957 on a nuclear test ban , and discussions and negotiations continued in various fora toward a ctbt for several years .

the two nations were often deadlocked over on - site inspections , which the united states claimed were needed to assure that the soviets were not cheating and which the soviets claimed were a means to introduce spies into the country .

the cuban missile crisis of october 1962 added impetus to these negotiations .

on july 15 , 1963 , in the wake of this crisis , negotiations between the soviet union , united kingdom , and united states began in moscow .

the united states initially sought a ctbt , but soviet negotiators ruled this out .

instead , the negotiators quickly worked out a ban on nuclear testing in the atmosphere , in space , and under water .

the result was the limited test ban treaty ( ltbt ) , which was signed on august 5 and which president kennedy submitted to the senate on august 8 .

while the treaty did not limit underground tests because of the difficulty of monitoring them , the preamble noted that the u.s. , u.k. , and soviet governments were "seeking to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time , determined to continue negotiations to this end , and desiring to put an end to the contamination of man's environment by radioactive substances. .

in senate hearings on the ltbt , the joint chiefs of staff recognized gains from the treaty , but expressed concern that the treaty could lead the united states to let down its guard on nuclear matters .

accordingly , they conditioned their support for the treaty on four "safeguards," or measures the united states could take unilaterally within the treaty to maintain u.s. nuclear capabilities: safeguard a , an aggressive underground nuclear test program ; safeguard b , technology facilities and programs to attract and retain scientists ; safeguard c , maintenance of the ability to resume atmospheric testing promptly ; and safeguard d , improvement of monitoring capability .

owing to concerns about the balance of risks and benefits of the treaty , senate majority leader mike mansfield and senate minority leader everett mckinley dirksen met with president kennedy to discuss the matter .

the president sent them a letter on september 10 providing "unqualified and unequivocal assurances" on the treaty .

these assurances included the safeguards set forth by the joint chiefs ( though differently worded ) , and provisions regarding cuba , east germany , and peaceful nuclear explosives .

these assurances were instrumental in securing senator dirksen's support , and that of the senate .

the senate gave its advice and consent to ratification on september 24 , and it entered into force on october 10 , 1963 .

the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) involved a bargain between the nuclear weapon states ( nws — china , france , soviet union , united kingdom , and united states ) and the nonnuclear weapon states ( nnws ) .

in 1959 , the u.n. general assembly adopted a resolution calling for barring states not having nuclear weapons from acquiring them , and in 1961 another general assembly resolution supporting such a treaty passed unanimously .

the treaty was signed in july 1968 .

the senate gave its advice and consent to ratification in march 1969 .

the united states ratified it in november 1969 , and it entered into force in march 1970 .

the central bargain was that nws would retain nuclear weapons but would not aid nnws in acquiring nuclear weapons , and nnws would not acquire nuclear weapons .

nnws were concerned that these provisions would permit the nws to have nuclear weapons indefinitely , so they insisted on a provision , article vi , making clear that the intent was the opposite: "each of the parties to the treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament , and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control. .

this provision has been at the heart of disputes over nuclear disarmament between nnws and nws , especially the united states , ever since .

other provisions include "safeguards" to verify compliance with the treaty ( article iii ) , "the inalienable right of all the parties to the treaty to develop research , production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes," aided by exchange of equipment , materials , and information for that purpose ( article iv ) , the benefits of peaceful nuclear explosions would be made available to all parties to the treaty ( article v , which has become a dead letter as such explosions have been not been conducted for decades and would be barred by the ctbt ) , a conference to review the treaty every five years ( article viii ) , and a conference 25 years after entry into force "to decide whether the treaty shall continue in force indefinitely , or shall be extended for an additional fixed period or periods" ( article x ) .

these conferences , and especially the 25-year conference , provided further leverage for the nnws to press the nws for nuclear disarmament .

while the treaty did not ban nuclear testing , its preamble recalled "the determination expressed by the parties to the 1963 treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere , in outer space and under water in its preamble to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and to continue negotiations to this end. .

the threshold test ban treaty ( ttbt ) was signed in 1974 , and the peaceful nuclear explosions treaty ( pnet ) was signed in 1976 .

 ( these treaties did not enter into force until 1990 , as discussed below. ) .

both were between the united states and soviet union , and both contained verification protocols .

the ttbt banned underground nuclear weapon tests having a yield greater than 150 kilotons ; the pnet extended this limit to peaceful nuclear explosions to preclude weapon tests under the guise of explosions for peaceful purposes .

the preamble of the ttbt recalled article vi of the npt and the determination expressed in the preamble of the ltbt "to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time , and to continue negotiations to this end. .

article i provided that both sides would undertake to observe the 150-kiloton threshold beginning march 31 , 1976 .

when the ltbt was negotiated in 1963 , the united states had limited experience with underground tests .

the first contained underground test was conducted in 1957 , and the extent to which underground testing would prove adequate for weapons development was unclear .

as a result , safeguard c as set forth by the joint chiefs of staff called for "the maintenance of the facilities and resources necessary to institute promptly nuclear tests in the atmosphere should they be deemed essential to our national security or should the treaty or any of its terms be abrogated by the soviet union. .

after eight years of experience with testing conducted solely underground , the value of such testing had become clear .

in 1971 , carl walske , assistant to the secretary of defense for atomic energy , stated , the test program since 1963 has made the difference between having fairly reliable knowledge about vulnerability [of warheads] , both during the launch and reentry phases , and not having it ; between having the poseidon and minuteman iii [missile] systems , and having systems which at best could be a fraction as effective in terms of effects on defended targets ; and between the possibility of an effective abm [antiballistic missile] , and most likely , no such possibility .

with the need for atmospheric testing having diminished , president ford decided in january 1976 to redefine safeguard c as "the maintenance of the basic capability to resume nuclear testing in the atmosphere should that be deemed essential to national security. .

it was understood that "atmosphere" included all prohibited environments .

the other safeguards were retained .

president carter pursued a ctbt rather than seeking senate advice and consent to ratification of the ttbt and pnet .

according to a senate report , "in mid - 1978 , the administration concluded that a push to gain senate consent to ratification of the ttbt and pnet could stir up a fight which would jeopardize the prospects for a complete ban. .

instead , the united states , united kingdom , and soviet union conducted negotiations on a ctbt .

by 1979 , almost all issues were resolved or seemed resolvable .

however , strong opposition within the administration to a ctbt led to a u.s. position that the treaty should expire after three years unless renegotiated .

further , in 1979 and 1980 , the salt ii ratification debate overshadowed the ctbt negotiations , which continued at a low level until the end of the carter administration .

president reagan declined to reopen negotiations for a ctbt , and cited concerns about u.s. ability to monitor the ttbt and pnet .

meanwhile , in 1986 , the house and senate included provisions limiting nuclear testing in their fy1988 defense authorization bills .

the house included a one - year moratorium on nuclear tests over 1 kiloton , while the senate version contained a non - binding provision that called for ratification of the two treaties and resumption of ctbt talks .

a conference committee considered these provisions as president reagan left for a summit meeting with president gorbachev in october 1986 .

again according to the senate foreign relations committee report , to break the impasse on the defense bill and to leave the president free to deal with general secretary gorbachev , a compromise was reached .

the congress accepted the senate provision in exchange for presidential assurances which were contained in an october 10 letter from president reagan to chairmen [senator barry] goldwater and [representative les] aspin .

the president agreed as follows: to take two important steps toward limiting nuclear testing .

first , i intend to inform general secretary gorbachev in reykjavik that as a first order of business for the 100 th congress , if the soviet union will , prior to the initiation of ratification proceedings in the senate next year , agree to essential ttbt / pnet verification procedures which could be submitted to the senate for its consideration in the form of a protocol or other appropriate codicil , i will request the advice and consent of the senate to ratification of the ttb and pne treaties .

however , if the soviet union fails to agree to the required package of essential procedures prior to the convening of the 100 th congress , i will still make ratification of these treaties a first order of business for the congress , with an appropriate reservation to the treaties that would ensure they would not take effect until they are effectively verifiable .

i will work with the senate in drafting this reservation .

second , i intend to inform the general secretary in reykjavik that , once our verification concerns have been satisfied and the treaties have been ratified , i will propose that the united states and the soviet union immediately engage in negotiations on ways to implement a step - by - step parallel program — in association with a program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons — of limiting and ultimately ending nuclear testing .

negotiations began on the verification protocols for the ttbt and pnet in november 1987 ; as noted , these treaties had been signed in 1974 and 1976 , respectively .

on june 1 , 1990 , the united states and soviet union signed these protocols , which replaced protocols initially submitted with the treaties .

the senate gave its advice and consent to ratification of both treaties by a vote of 98-0 on september 25 , 1990 , and they entered into force december 11 , 1990 .

the senate's resolutions of ratification were "subject to — the declaration that to ensure the preservation of a viable deterrent there should be safeguards ..." these safeguards were ( a ) the conduct of a continuing nuclear test program , ( b ) the maintenance of modern laboratory facilities and nuclear technology programs to attract and retain nuclear scientists , ( c ) "maintenance of the basic capability to resume nuclear test activities prohibited by treaties ...," ( d ) improved treaty monitoring capabilities , and ( e ) improved intelligence capabilities .

the resolutions of ratification were also subject to a second declaration: mindful of the commitment of the united states , the soviet union and great britain in the limited test ban treaty of 1963 and in the non - proliferation treaty of 1968 to seek the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and of the commitment which shall be legally binding on the parties upon ratification of the treaty on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests [the ttbt] to `continue their negotiations with a view toward achieving a solution to the problem of the cessation of all underground nuclear weapon tests,' the united states shares a special responsibility with the soviet union to continue the bilateral nuclear testing talks to achieve further limitations on nuclear testing , including the achievement of a verifiable comprehensive test ban .

in 1992 , following the end of the cold war and the dissolution of the soviet union , congress attached an amendment by senators mark hatfield , james exon , and george mitchell to the fy1993 energy and water development appropriations act , which president george h.w .

bush signed into law ( p.l .

102-377 ) in october 1992 .

the amendment , section 507 , barred underground nuclear tests between september 30 , 1992 , and july 1 , 1993 ; permitted fewer than 20 tests between july 1993 and september 1996 under certain conditions , including an absence of congressional disapproval of such tests ; and halted u.s. nuclear tests after september 1996 unless another nation conducted a test after that date .

it called for the president to submit "[a] plan for achieving a multilateral comprehensive ban on the testing of nuclear weapons on or before september 30 , 1996. .

the last u.s. test was held september 23 , 1992 ; none have been held since .

the following year , in the fy1994 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

103-160 , section 3138 ) , congress established the stockpile stewardship program ( ssp ) "to ensure the preservation of the core intellectual and technical competencies of the united states in nuclear weapons. .

ssp elements included enhanced computing capabilities to better simulate nuclear weapon detonation , experiments not involving nuclear explosions , and new experimental facilities .

the legislation required the president to submit an annual report to congress noting "any concerns with respect to the safety , security , effectiveness or reliability of existing united states nuclear weapons ...," and actions taken or to be taken to address such concerns .

also in p.l .

103-160 , congress modified safeguard c , barring in section 3137 the use of any funds "to maintain the capability of the united states to conduct atmospheric testing of a nuclear weapon. .

according to the conference report , "the conferees agree that the united states no longer needs to maintain the capability to resume the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. .

in november 1993 , the united nations general assembly unanimously approved a resolution calling for negotiation of a ctbt .

the conference on disarmament ( cd ) , a u.n. - affiliated organization that is "the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community," conducted the negotiation .

the cd's 1994 session began in january , with negotiation of a ctbt its top priority .

this priority resulted at least in part from the npt review and extension conference scheduled for april and may of 1995 , at which time the states parties to the npt would decide whether to extend the treaty indefinitely , as the united states wanted , or for one or more fixed periods .

the decision would be binding on the states parties to the treaty .

the 1995 npt conference was contentious .

nnws parties to the npt saw attainment of a ctbt as the touchstone of good faith on matters of disarmament .

they argued that the nws failed to meet their npt obligations by not concluding a ctbt .

they saw progress on winding down the arms race as inadequate .

they assailed the npt as discriminatory because it divided the world into nuclear and nonnuclear states , and argued for a nondiscriminatory npt regime in which no nation would have nuclear weapons .

the ctbt , in their view , was the symbol of this regime because , unlike the npt , the nws would give up something tangible , the ability to develop sophisticated new warheads .

some nnws saw npt extension as their last source of leverage for a ctbt: once they agreed to a permanent extension of the npt , they could not pressure the nws to achieve a ctbt .

other nnws saw the npt as in the interests of all but would - be proliferators and felt that anything less than indefinite extension would undermine the security of most nations .

this position saw the npt as too important to put at risk as a means of pressuring the nws for a ctbt .

the review and extension conference extended the npt indefinitely .

extension was accomplished by a package of decisions that , because it was so controversial , was adopted without a vote .

the package included decisions on indefinite extension of the npt , strengthening the treaty's review process , a resolution on the middle east , and principles and objectives for nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament .

the latter set forth goals on universality of the npt , nuclear weapon free zones , etc. , and stressed the importance of completing "the negotiations on a universal and internationally and effectively verifiable comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty no later than 1996. .

this explicit ctbt - npt linkage lent urgency to ctbt negotiations .

meanwhile , president clinton extended the hatfield - exon - mitchell nuclear test moratorium several times , beginning in 1993 , and his administration debated whether to pursue a ctbt or another type of test ban , such as one permitting very low yield nuclear tests .

in august 1995 , the president announced his "decision to negotiate a true zero yield comprehensive test ban" ( i.e. , a ctbt that permitted no nuclear yield ) .

a white house fact sheet accompanying the president's statement conditioned a ctbt on six safeguards , including the ssp , modern laboratory facilities and nuclear technology programs to attract and retain scientists , the "basic capability to resume nuclear test activities," continued r&d to improve the ability to monitor compliance with the treaty , continued improvement of intelligence capabilities to provide information on nuclear weapons programs worldwide , and the understanding that if a key nuclear weapon type could no longer be certified as safe or reliable , "the president , in consultation with congress , would be prepared to withdraw from the ctbt under the standard 'supreme national interests' clause in order to conduct whatever testing might be required. .

the cd completed work on a draft ctbt in august 1996 , though objections by india prevented the cd , which operates by consensus , from submitting the treaty to the u.n. general assembly as a cd document .

the general assembly adopted the treaty in september 1996 , and it was opened for signature on september 24 , 1996 .

president clinton and others signed it on that date .

president clinton submitted it to the senate in september 1997 .

on october 13 , 1999 , the senate declined to give its advice and consent to ratification by a vote of 48 for , 51 against , and 1 present ; a two - thirds majority was required .

the international community has continued to press for the ctbt and has linked it to nuclear nonproliferation and the npt .

in a joint statement to the 2000 npt review conference , the nws said , "no effort should be spared to make sure that the ctbt is a universal and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty and to secure its earliest entry into force. .

the final document of the conference , which was adopted by consensus , reaffirmed that "the cessation of all nuclear weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions will contribute to the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons" ; called on all states , especially those that must ratify the ctbt for it to enter into force , "to continue their efforts to ensure the early entry into force of the treaty" ; and agreed , as a practical step toward disarmament , "an unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear - weapon states to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament to which all states parties are committed under article vi" of the npt .

in 2002 , a dod official spelled out the position of the bush administration: "we are continuing the current administration policy , as i said , which is we continue to oppose ratification of the ctbt ; we continue to adhere to a test moratorium. .

secretary of state condoleezza rice reiterated this position in 2007: "the administration does not support the comprehensive test ban treaty and does not intend to seek senate advice and consent to its ratification .

there has been no change in the administration's policy on this matter. .

the 2005 npt review conference was widely seen as ending in failure .

the united states focused on iranian and north korean nuclear issues , and on steps to counter proliferation , while , according to one report , "nonnuclear states insisted that the united states and other nuclear powers focus on radically reducing their nuclear armaments," and some wanted agreement on the ctbt .

in keeping with the bush administration's policy , the united states has resisted international pressure to ratify the ctbt .

five conferences have been held pursuant to article xiv of the ctbt to facilitate the treaty's entry into force .

the most recent conference was held in september 2007 .

one hundred and six nations participated ; the united states did not send a delegation .

in september 2006 , to mark the tenth anniversary of the ctbt's opening for signature , 59 foreign ministers issued a statement on the treaty that reaffirms that the ctbt "would contribute to systematic and progressive reduction of nuclear weapons and the prevention of nuclear proliferation," and "[calls] upon all states that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the treaty without delay , in particular those whose ratification is needed for its entry into force. .

by wide margins , the u.n. general assembly passed several resolutions supporting the ctbt that the united states opposed .

for example , one such resolution , in 2007 , passed by a vote of 176 for , 1 against ( united states ) , and 4 abstentions .

as of march 2008 , the treaty had been signed by 178 nations and ratified by 144 , including 35 of the 44 whose ratification is required for the treaty to enter into force .

among the nuclear weapon states , france , russia , and the united kingdom have ratified ; china and the united states have signed but not ratified .

appendix b. abbreviation .

