currently , u.s. meat and poultry slaughter facilities and processing plants operate under one of two parallel inspection systems .

the one familiar to most people is the federal meat and poultry inspection system administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) food safety and inspection system ( fsis ) .

the other is made up of 27 separate state - administered inspection programs .

federal law has prohibited state - inspected meat and poultry plants from shipping their products across state lines , a ban that many states and small plants have long sought to overturn .

both the house and senate versions of the omnibus farm bill ( h.r .

2419 ) included amendments to the federal meat inspection act ( fmia ) and the poultry products inspection act ( ppia ) that would permit interstate shipment of these products if usda approves and certain requirements are met .

however , the senate approach diverged in significant ways from the house version .

the conference farm bill , cleared in may 2008 , generally opted for the senate approach , viewed by many on both sides of the issue as an acceptable compromise .

proponents of ending the current ban have long argued that limiting state - inspected products to intrastate commerce is unfair .

many state agencies and state - inspected plants have argued that their programs by law already must be , and are , "at least equal" to the federal system .

while state - inspected plants cannot ship interstate , foreign plants operating under usda - approved foreign programs , which are to be "equivalent" to the u.s. program , can export meat and poultry products into and sell them anywhere in the united states .

advocates for change have contended that that they should not be treated less fairly than the foreign plants , and that foreign programs are not as closely scrutinized as state programs .

opponents of allowing state - inspected products in interstate commerce have argued that state programs are not required to have , and do not have , the same level of safety oversight as the federal , or even the foreign , plants .

for example , foreign meat and poultry products are subject to u.s. import reinspection at ports of entry , and again , when most imported meat is further processed in u.s. - inspected processing plants .

opponents also contended that neither the usda inspector general ( oig ) in a 2006 report nor a relevant 2002 federal appeals court ruling would agree , without qualification , that state - inspected meat and poultry were necessarily as safe as federally inspected products .

approximately 2,100 meat and poultry establishments in 27 states are subject to state - conducted rather than federal inspection programs .

however , these state programs are operated in accordance with cooperative agreements that usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) has with each of the states ; the federal government also provides 50% of the cost of state programs .

the "federal and state cooperation" provisions of the fmia ( 21 u.s.c .

661 ) were added by the wholesome meat act of 1967 ( p.l .

90-201 ) .

congressional quarterly ( cq ) at the time of the 1967 legislation observed that the state cooperation provision was "[t]he farthest - reaching portion [of the measure] ... aimed at helping — or , if necessary , forcing — states to strengthen their own meat inspection systems. .

all plants providing meat for interstate and foreign commerce had been subject to federal inspection regulations basically since passage of the meat inspection act of 1907 .

however , plants that limited their product sales within a state were covered by what critics described as a patchwork of varying , often inadequate laws and regulations ; seven of them had no inspection at all , according to cq .

"revelations in the press and during committee hearings about slaughter and packing practices at some state plants made meat inspection the most emotional consumer issue of 1967. .

currently , the secretary of agriculture ( hereafter , usda or fsis ) is authorized to approve a cooperative program in any state if it has enacted a "law that imposes mandatory ante mortem and post mortem inspection , reinspection and sanitation requirements that are at least equal to those under title i of [the fmia] , with respect to all or certain classes of persons engaged in the state in slaughtering amenable species [i.e. , cattle , sheep , swine , goats , equines] , or preparing the carcasses , parts thereof , meat or meat food products , of any animals for use as human food solely for distribution within such state" ( 21 u.s.c .

661 ( a ) ( 1 ) ; emphasis added by crs ) .

section 661 also requires usda to assume federal inspection of state plants whenever a state decides to terminate its own program , or usda determines that fmia requirements are not being met .

pursuant to the fmia as amended by the wholesome meat act , usda - fsis must receive a formal request for a program from the governor , and review the state's laws , regulations , and performance plan ( including funding , staffing , training , labels and standards , enforcement , laboratory and testing procedures , and other aspects ) .

to ensure continued compliance , fsis annually certifies state programs based on a review of materials ( like performance plans and an annual report submitted by the state ) ; fsis also conducts a more comprehensive review of each state every one to five years .

section 11103 of the house version of h.r .

2419 would have rewritten rather than merely amended title iii of the fmia .

it would have entailed a number of major departures from current authority .

the senate language was approved as section 11067 .

house - senate conferees generally adopted the senate language , as section 11015 of the final bill .

unlike the provisions in the house bill , the conference - adopted senate language would not replace title iii ( federal - state cooperation ) in the current fmia .

rather , it would create a new title v — inspections by federal and state agencies .

under the new farm bill , for the first time in 40 years , meat and poultry that is not federally inspected could be shipped across state lines .

these and other pending changes raised a series of issues that were debated by proponents and opponents of the legislation .

as noted , the new farm bill would amend the fmia and ppia in order to modify a key element of federal food safety policy that has been in place for 40 years .

at the heart of the debate has been a seemingly simple question: do , or can , state programs provide the same assurance of product safety as the federal program ? .

if the bill becomes law , stakeholders will turn their attention to usda , which will be required to implement the new provisions .

this rulemaking process can be expected to fill in many of the details on program operation and , ultimately , to help determine its effectiveness .

