acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) , a disease caused by the human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) , weakens the immune system , leaving individuals with the disease susceptible to infections .

as of 2013 , hiv , including aids , had been diagnosed and reported in an estimated 953,245 individuals living in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories .

these estimates do not include those who have not yet been diagnosed as hiv positive but are currently living with the disease .

currently there is no cure for hiv / aids , and in the early years of the aids epidemic , individuals infected with aids often died quickly .

in recent years , however , medications have allowed persons living with hiv and aids to live longer and to remain in better health .

despite improvements in health outcomes , affordable housing remains important to many who live with hiv / aids .

this report describes research that shows how housing and health status are related and the effects of stable housing on patient health .

it also describes the housing opportunities for persons with aids ( hopwa ) program , the only federal program that provides housing and services specifically for persons who are hiv positive or who have aids , together with their families .

in addition , the report describes how a small portion of funds appropriated through the ryan white hiv / aids program may be used by states and local jurisdictions to provide short - term housing assistance for persons living with hiv / aids .

in 2016 , congress passed legislation to change the hopwa formula as part of the housing opportunities through modernization act ( hotma , p.l .

114-201 ) .

the hopwa method for allocating formula funds had been an ongoing issue since the program's inception due to the data that were used to distribute the majority of funds .

through fy2016 , 75% of funds were distributed using the cumulative number of aids cases as reported by the cdc , including those who had died , but not including those living with hiv .

an alternative way of distributing funds , which was adopted in p.l .

114-201 , is to use the current number of people living with aids as well as hiv .

hopwa was enacted within four months of another federal program targeted to assist those living with hiv and aids , the ryan white care act program ( now called the ryan white hiv / aids program ) .

both programs relied to some degree on the cumulative number of aids cases in distributing funding to eligible jurisdictions ; the data reported by the cdc at the time were cumulative cases .

since then , however , the ryan white program stopped using cumulative aids cases and now uses the number of people living with aids and hiv .

the hopwa formula remained the same until 2016 .

the ryan white program formula change came about shortly after the program's enactment .

in 1995 , at the request of two senators from the labor and human resources committee , the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) examined funding disparities per person living with aids that resulted from using cumulative aids cases to distribute ryan white funds .

it proposed several data changes that would result in more equitable per - case funding , including a way to weight cdc data to arrive at an estimate of persons living with aids .

the next year , in 1996 , congress reauthorized the ryan white program and changed the way in which grants to metropolitan areas were distributed to use cdc estimates of persons living with aids ( p.l .

104-146 ) .

the data change included hold - harmless provisions to ensure that the shift in funding would not be too dramatic .

since then , in 2006 , the ryan white program formula was further modified to incorporate living hiv cases in addition to living aids cases .

as a result of advances in medical science and in the care and treatment of persons living with hiv and aids , individuals are living longer with the disease .

as the number of those with hiv and aids grows , so do the jurisdictions that qualify for formula - based hopwa funds .

since 1999 , there has been a steady increase in the number of jurisdictions that meet the eligibility test to receive formula - based hopwa funds .

funding for the hopwa program steadily increased from the time the program was created , and , since fy2010 , funding has ranged between $330 million and $335 million .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the number of households receiving hopwa housing assistance ( including short - term housing assistance , housing provided through community residences , or rental assistance in permanent housing ) has generally declined from fy2003 through fy2015 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

between fy2003 and fy2009 , the number of households served dropped from 78,467 to 58,367 .

with increased funding , however , the total households served went up in fy2010 to 60,669 and by fy2012 was 61,614 .

however , households assisted have declined since fy2012 , reaching 54,647 in fy2015 .

these general reductions in households served could be due to such factors as increased housing costs and households remaining longer in housing units .

in addition to funds for housing provided through hud , funds appropriated to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ryan white hiv / aids program may be used to provide short - term housing assistance to persons living with hiv / aids .

the ryan white comprehensive aids resources emergency act ( p.l .

101-381 ) established the ryan white program in 1990 .

the program provides funds to states and metropolitan areas to help pay for health care and supportive services for persons living with hiv / aids ( referred to as "support services" in the statute ) .

the statute governing the use of ryan white funds does not specifically list housing as an eligible activity for which grantees may use funds .

however , the statute defines support services as those "that are needed for individuals with hiv / aids to achieve their medical outcomes. .

in 1999 , the hiv / aids bureau of the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) within hhs released policy guidance regarding the type of housing that ryan white grantees could provide for their clients ( policy notice 99-02 ) .

grantees may use funds for housing referral services and for emergency or short - term housing .

ryan white funds must be the payer of last resort , meaning that other sources of funds for housing must be exhausted before using ryan white funds .

initially , the policy regarding use of ryan white funds for housing did not impose time limits on short - term housing .

however , when the ryan white program was reauthorized in 2006 , the law limited the amount of grants to states and urban areas that could be used for supportive services to no more than 25% by requiring that at least 75% of funds be used for "core medical services. .

due to these funding limits , hrsa released guidance on time limits for housing assistance .

its final notice , released on may 12 , 2011 ( notice 11-01 ) , defined "short - term or emergency housing" as: transitional in nature and for the purposes of moving or maintaining an individual or family in a long - term , stable living situation .

thus , such assistance cannot be permanent and must be accompanied by a strategy to identify , relocate , and / or ensure the individual or family is moved to , or capable of maintaining , a long - term , stable living situation .

in addition , the notice 11-01 strongly encouraged grantees or local planning bodies to define short - term housing themselves , recommending that they consider adopting the hud definition of transitional housing: 24 months .

under notice 11-01 , housing must either provide medical or supportive services , or , if it does not provide these services , the housing must be necessary for clients to gain access to or compliance with medical care .

in 2013 , out of 524,675 ryan white clients served , 14,837 received housing services .

hiv / aids status is associated with homelessness: persons who are homeless are more likely to be hiv positive than those who are housed ( see " housing status of persons living with hiv / aids " ) .

in addition , during the last decade , research has found that the health outcomes of homeless individuals living with hiv / aids may be improved with stable housing .

in response to evidence from some studies , the administration's national hiv / aids strategy , published in 2010 , acknowledged that "access to housing is an important precursor to getting many people into a stable treatment regimen .

individuals living with hiv who lack stable housing are more likely to delay hiv care , have poorer access to regular care , are less likely to receive optimal antiretroviral therapy , and are less likely to adhere to therapy. .

the national hiv / aids strategy included pursuing the goal of housing as one of the ways to increase access to care and improve health outcomes for individuals living with hiv and aids .

this section of the report gives a short overview of several studies that have examined how access to stable housing influences health outcomes for those living with hiv and aids .

the chain project is a longitudinal study , begun in 1994 , of a sample of individuals living with hiv / aids in new york city and the northern suburbs .

in 2007 , researchers released a study that used the chain data to examine the effects of stable housing on health care for individuals living with hiv and aids .

the study looked at those who were unstably housed — meaning that they were either living in some form of transitional housing ; in a jail , drug treatment facility , or halfway house ; in a hospice ; or temporarily living in someone else's home — or who were homeless , meaning that they were living in a shelter or place not meant for human habitation .

researchers measured the likelihood of six scenarios involving the receipt or continuity of both medical care in general and appropriate hiv medical care .

in general , individuals who were unstably housed were less likely to enter into and retain both medical care and appropriate hiv care .

however , the likelihood of obtaining and retaining medical care increased if individuals received some form of housing assistance .

in addition , receipt of mental health services and social services case management had a statistically significant relationship to individuals entering into and retaining medical care .

in the housing and health study , hud , together with the cdc , provided hiv positive individuals who were homeless or at severe risk of homelessness with hopwa - funded rental housing .

 ( the study considered individuals to be at severe risk of homelessness if they frequently moved from one temporary housing situation to another. ) .

individuals in the comparison group received services , including assistance with finding housing , but did not receive hopwa - funded housing .

despite the differences in rental assistance provided between the treatment and comparison groups , both groups had a statistically significant increase in stable housing .

after 18 months , 82% of hopwa - assisted renters and 52% of individuals in the comparison group were living in their own housing .

perhaps due to the fact that the comparison group also had some success in achieving and maintaining housing , both groups saw statistically significant improvements in health outcomes .

after 18 months , both groups had fewer emergency room visits , fewer hospitalizations , reduced opportunistic infections ( those that occur due to weakened immune systems ) , and reduced use of medical care generally .

self - reported depression and perceived stress saw improvement as well .

the chicago housing for health partnership study identified homeless individuals with chronic illnesses , including hiv , for participation .

among those who participated in the study , 36% were hiv positive .

the treatment group received housing funded through either hopwa or hud's supportive housing program for homeless individuals , while the comparison , or usual care group , received available supportive services but no separate assistance with rent .

the study found that , after 12 months , the group receiving housing assistance had higher rates of intact immunity compared to the comparison group and were more likely to have undetectable viral loads .

there was no statistically significant difference between cd4 counts for the treatment and usual care group .

 ( very generally , cd4 counts are a measure of immune system strength. ) .

at the conclusion of the study , the treatment group was found to have spent fewer days in emergency rooms and hospitals during the 18 month period in which the researchers followed participants .

specifically , compared to those in the usual care group , those in the treatment group showed 29% reduction in hospitalizations , a 29% reduction in the number of days spent in the hospital , and a 24% reduction in visits to the emergency room .

