this discussion of governance for a public - private partnership is based on preparations undertaken by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to auction 62 mhz of radio frequencies in the 700 mhz band of radio spectrum in conformance with requirements in the deficit reduction act .

the fcc issued rules , in a second report and order , concerning the allocation of this spectrum , the auction , the final disposition of spectrum assigned for public safety use , and the creation of a public - private partnership to build and operate a network for public safety users , with agreements for sharing spectrum .

responding to a requirement in the balanced budget act of 1997 , the fcc had previously set aside 24 mhz in the same bandwidth for public safety users .

in the second report and order , it proposed to set aside 10 mhz from the public safety frequency bands to be paired with 10 mhz of auctionable spectrum to create a shared network of 20 mhz for a nationwide broadband network .

the decision to create a shared network was centered on two conclusions , endorsed by the fcc and the majority of stakeholders: ( 1 ) that a network with national coverage would meet public safety needs for robust communications capabilities , information , and interoperability ; and ( 2 ) that sharing spectrum and network facilities with commercial users would benefit public safety by providing new sources of funding , economies of scale in building the needed network , and access to additional spectrum in times of large - scale emergencies , among other benefits .

this section provides an overview of steps taken by the fcc preceding auction 73 , establishing the key provisions that the fcc is reviewing and may change .

since it initiated auctions in 1994 , the fcc has consistently provided auction rules that allow it to establish financial requirements for potential bidders , to set aside licenses for specific classes of bidders , to provide economic incentives , and to use other tools for managing the auction process .

in addition to setting up rules for the auctions it conducts , the fcc also establishes and enforces service rules for the use of licenses .

among the provisions of service rules for advanced wireless services there is typically a requirement that licenses be put to use within a specific number of years .

service rules can also be used to specify technologies , uses , or users .

for auction 73 , the fcc expanded the scope of its service rules to include a plan that would mandate spectrum sharing between a public safety spectrum license holder and a commercial licensee .

the commercial licensee would be obligated to build a network to satisfy public safety needs as well as those of its commercial customers .

congress directed the fcc to allocate 24 mhz of spectrum within the 700 mhz band for public safety use as part of the transition from analog to digital television , which would free these airwaves .

the initial planning for public safety use of frequencies at 700 mhz began in 1997 and concluded with the submission of the final report of the public safety national coordination committee ( ncc ) in 2003 .

the ncc operated as a federal advisory committee to the fcc , developing technical and operational standards for the 700 mhz band and structuring the management of licenses through regional committees .

the existing governance for these channels is made up of 55 regional planning committees ( rpcs ) , loosely coordinated through the efforts of the national public safety telecommunications council ( npstc ) .

the band plan originally intended to carry public safety radio traffic at 700 mhz has been revised to create two different licensing approaches .

with the support of npstc and others , the fcc negotiated modifications to the band plan that reflect changes in technology and public safety needs .

one block of the revised band plan is designated for narrowband ( primarily voice ) applications and the other for broadband applications .

channels have been reassigned to support narrowband operations in 12 mhz of paired spectrum , at 769 - 775 mhz and 799 - 805mhz .

these channels will be administered by states and localities through the existing regional committee structure .

all rpcs with approved band plans are required by the fcc rule making to submit amended band plans .

the networks built on the narrowband frequencies will be financed through long - standing procedures that use a combination of local , state , and federal funds .

spectrum is to be allocated for broadband communications ( high speed data transmission , video , and voice ) in 10 mhz of frequencies at 763 - 768 mhz and 793 - 798 mhz .

these frequencies are to be assigned to the public safety broadband licensee that would also be responsible for the administration of two guard bands , each covering one megahertz , at 768 - 769 mhz and 798 - 799 mhz .

guard bands are created to act as buffers against interference from other operations on nearby frequencies .

in order to accommodate the new band plan , some public safety network operators will have to modify equipment already purchased for use on 700 mhz frequencies .

some of the cost of these changes would be covered by the commercial d block licensee .

 ( discussed below , in section on 700 mhz rebanding. ) .

the intended commercial partner in the public - private partnership would be the winning bidder for block d. the fcc ruled that eligible bidders for block d in auction 73 that qualified as small businesses under existing fcc rules would be entitled to a bidding credit ( a reduction in the amount due on the wining bid ) of 15% for companies with average attributable gross revenues of $40 million in the past three years and 25% for companies with average annual earnings of no more than $15 million .

many start - up companies could have qualified as designated entities under this designation .

the network sharing agreement ( nsa ) was created to be the keystone of the public - private partnership ; its rules are to be the contractual mortar uniting the two licensees .

adherence to the agreement had been set as a regulatory condition for both the commercial and the public safety licensees .

the fcc would review the nsa and must approve all of its components .

although the fcc would allow the two parties leeway in negotiating the agreement , it has set various requirements , such as network coverage requirements noted above , that must be included in the nsa .

in particular the fcc included minimum standards for the network as part of the second report and order .

under the current rules , the public safety broadband licensee is authorized by the fcc to lease access to the frequencies covered by its license exclusively to the d block licensee , on a secondary , unconditionally preemptible basis .

this means that the d block network commercial users would be able to transmit on available frequencies in the public safety band only when there is no demand from the primary , public safety users , and that any demand from public safety is to be immediately met by terminating the commercial traffic and yielding to the public safety user .

this privilege of secondary access would be accorded to the d block licensee as part of the interlocking agreements that constitute the public - private partnership .

for example , the public safety broadband licensee would be required to lease spectrum to the d block licensee , and the d block licensee would be required to build a network for public safety use .

the fcc has required a spectrum manager leasing arrangement for the full term of the ten - year license .

this form of lease would place the responsibility for compliance fully on the lessee , the d block license holder .

as part of its spectrum management obligations , the d block licensee would be required to assure that public safety users would not experience harmful interference , interruption , or degradation of service due to commercial operations in the public safety spectrum band .

one prerequisite for this level of assurance would be a requirement by the fcc that the network be designed to assign priority to first responders automatically , with immediate preemption or exclusion from access to the network by commercial users .

in return for allowing commercial usage of its bandwidth , public safety would have the right to real time access , on an emergency basis , of the spectrum licensed to the d block .

the obligation to provide this priority access was one of the service rules attached to the d block license for auction 73 .

the definition of what constitutes an emergency would be part of the nsa .

in situations not covered by the nsa , where an agreement between the two licensees about what constitutes an emergency cannot be reached , the public safety licensee could appeal to the fcc to declare that an emergency exists that requires access to d block frequencies .

in order to accommodate both narrowband and broadband networks for public safety , the fcc revised the original band plan for the 24 mhz allocated to public safety .

in addition to opening the way for a shared spectrum agreement between the public safety community and the private sector , the fcc resolved other spectrum management issues that are not discussed in this summarizing report .

among the fcc decisions of consequence to the operation of public safety networks in the 700 mhz band are: move some networks already in the preliminary stages of build out , requiring a certain number of technical adjustments to equipment and software .

require the d block licensee to pay for the costs of these adjustments .

cap at $10 million the amount of allowable reimbursement to public safety network operators by the d block licensee .

prohibit new operations of narrowband systems on 700 mhz public safety networks that will be relocated as a consequence of the rebanding .

limit building and use of wideband networks .

in the second report and order , the fcc assigned itself the role of champion and protector for public safety interests , nationwide emergency communications , and interoperable networks .

under the umbrella of the communications act , it would undertake to monitor and regulate the actions of the public safety broadband licensee and the companies formed to manage the obligations of the d block license holder .

congressional oversight of the public - private partnership therefore would be placed squarely within the jurisdiction of the committees dealing with telecommunications .

in extending the scope of its authority to write service rules for auctions , the fcc has made a commitment to oversee and adjudicate the operation of a network that , when completed , could have an asset value in the tens of billions of dollars .

a large part of that asset would be under the control of the public safety broadband licensee , governed by its board of directors in accordance with fcc regulations .

among the voting members of the board , as currently constituted , four have been appointed directly by the fcc .

in its plans for oversight of the public - private partnership , the fcc has announced its intention of enforcing existing rules or creating new rules as circumstances warrant in the future .

measures to enforce the rules include litigation , revocation of license , or other means that might be supported by a reading of the communications act .

the role of congress , in accepting this arrangement , would be to provide guidance to the fcc commissioners through the various means available to it .

two bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress that would provide solutions to specific problems raised in the debate over creating a shared network .

the public safety broadband authorization act of 2008 ( h.r .

6055 , harman ) would provide $1 million in both fy2009 and fy2010 for operating expenses of the public safety broadband licensee .

the funds would be made available in the form of grants by the fcc , assuming specific conditions were met .

appropriations for an additional $2 million would be authorized for used by the fcc "to promote the establishment of a nationwide , interoperable broadband public safety communications network. .

the bill puts limits on the activities of the public safety license - holder , reiterating some of the requirements suggested by the fc , such as not - for - profit status and no participation by a commercial entity in its management .

the reliable , effective , and sustained procurement of new devices for emergency responders ( responder ) act of 2008 ( s. 3465 , wicker ) would create a first responders interoperable device availability trust fund to provide grants to purchase interoperable radios for the new public safety network proposed for some of the channels being released in the transition to digital tv .

the network plan is linked to the auction of a remaining block of analog spectrum , known as the d block .

the responder act would place the entire net proceeds of the d block auction in the trust .

additional funds would come from a percentage of future auctions .

auction authority for the federal communication commission would be extended to assure the continuation of revenue - producing auctions .

