this crs report analyzes the security implications of taiwan's presidential election of march 22 , 2008 , including the implications for u.s. assessments , security interests , and options for policymakers in congress and the bush administration .

this analysis draws in part from direct information gained through a visit to taiwan to observe the election and to discuss views with a number of interlocutors , including those advising or aligned with president chen shui - bian and president - elect ma ying - jeou .

this crs report will discuss the results of taiwan's presidential election and symbolic yet sensitive referendums on u.n. membership , outlook for taiwan's policies , implications for u.s. security interests in taiwan , and options for u.s. policymakers presented with a window of opportunity .

for details on u.s. arms sales , taiwan's missile program , a possible withdrawal of missiles by the people's liberation army ( pla ) , taiwan's defense budgets , etc .

mentioned below , see crs report rl30957 , taiwan: major u.s. arms sales since 1990 , by [author name scrubbed] .

other relevant reports on the election and u.s. policy toward taiwan are: crs report rs22853 , taiwan ' s 2008 presidential election , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report rl30341 , china / taiwan: evolution of the " one china " policy — key statements from washington , beijing , and taipei , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33510 , taiwan: overall developments and policy issues in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

there are a number of alternative futures for taiwan in the near and longer terms , including scenarios that are conducive to stability and policymaking , and scenarios that would challenge consensus - building and effective governance in taiwan , with implications for u.s. security interests in stability and deterrence .

greater stability: kmt controls ly and ey ; dpp is divided and weak .

kmt stays unified ; dpp rebuilds ; and stable two - party democracy is sustained .

greater instability: kmt dominates politics and integrates with prc ; dpp's supporters demonstrate .

kmt splits into factions ( ly out of control ) ; dpp re - organizes as strong challenge .

kmt splits into factions ; dpp stays divided between moderates and hardliners .

third party is formed that precludes majority rule by any one party .

the results of march 22 sapped the prc's alarmist warnings about the election and referendums , although it might still warn about instability until the inauguration on may 20 while chen shui - bian is still president .

nevertheless , cross - strait tension is greatly reduced .

chen is effectively weakened and concentrating on the transition .

president - elect ma and kmt interlocutors give pro - u.s. assurances .

as president , ma is expected to be less provocative towards beijing than chen .

in one view , there is opportunity to turn u.s. attention from managing the cross - strait situation to urgent problems that require the prc's improved cooperation , such as dealing with nuclear proliferation in north korea and iran , the crisis in darfur in sudan , repression in burma , the crackdown in tibet , etc .

alternatively , a window of opportunity is presented for the first time in years to advance u.s. security interests in taiwan's self - defense , democracy , economy ( as the united states' 9 th largest trading partner ) , and role as a responsible global citizen ( for example , in weapons nonproliferation ) .

ma ying - jeou's election presents a window of opportunity in the cross - strait and u.s. - taiwan relationships .

the issue is what options might be pursued by u.s. policymakers in congress and the bush administration to advance u.s. interests .

 ( crs takes no position on the options discussed here. ) .

one approach in continued management of peace and stability in the taiwan strait is for the administration to "run out the clock" through the end of president bush's term rather than pursue initiatives with taiwan that might meet beijing's ire .

in this approach , the lessened cross - strait tension presents an opportunity to focus on other u.s. priorities requiring more robust prc cooperation .

an alternative would be for the united states to continue its existing policy of resisting policy initiatives through the presidential inauguration on may 20 , 2008 ( until current president chen shui - bian leaves office ) .

new initiatives with taiwan might be pursued after ma takes office .

the united states could wait until the kmt resolves internal debates and clarifies its national security policy , including decisions on military programs , organization , personnel , leadership , and spending .

those decisions could provide greater certainty about whether the kmt has changed its attitude toward acquisitions of u.s. arms , given its record in the past few years .

a second approach would respond to president - elect ma with these options: allow ma ying - jeou to visit washington , dc , or another u.s. city before his inauguration .

ma expressed a desire to visit the united states before becoming president ( when u.s. policy would deny him a visa and allow only transits ) .

congress could invite and host ma .

another option is a video conference with ma .

in august 2005 , co - chairs of the house taiwan caucus had written to ma as the new kmt chairman , in part to invite him to visit .

in 2007 , the house passed h.con.res .

136 to support visits by taiwan's officials .

work with ma's transition team in ensuring a smooth power transition , as was done for chen's transition team in 2000 .

discuss the substance of ma's inauguration address , including his policy intentions in dealing with the prc and taiwan's security , to convey critical near - term and long - term u.s. interests .

send a senior delegation to attend ma's inauguration .

 ( representative james leach , then chairman of the house international relations subcommittee on asia and the pacific , was the u.s. representative at chen's second inauguration in 2004. ) .

a third approach to take ( either before or after ma's inauguration ) with comprehensive or certain options would strengthen u.s. - taiwan relations in military , political , or economic security .

however , careful consideration could include the question of whether such steps would seriously risk other u.s. priorities that require prc cooperation .

policy options include: set positive objectives to achieve in the relationship with taiwan .

while u.s. officials list many goals to pursue with beijing , they are often at a loss when asked to identify objectives in the relationship with taipei .

chen's departure could change this u.s. stance .

accept taiwan's formal letter of request for u.s. consideration of whether to sell new f - 16c / d fighters .

the removal of chen as a factor in negative u.s. - taiwan and prc - taiwan relations presents a fresh situation for acceptance of the letter .

in october 2007 , the house passed h.res .

676 to urge the president to consider security assistance "based solely" upon the legitimate defense needs of taiwan ( citing section 3 ( b ) of the taiwan relations act ( tra ) , p.l .

96-8 ) .

on march 19 , 2008 , the co - chairs of the senate taiwan caucus , senators tim johnson and james inhofe wrote a letter to defense secretary robert gates , offering their "assistance" in his receipt of taiwan's request .

reach out to moderate , pro - u.s. elements of the kmt .

ma ying - jeou as well as some of his defense and foreign policy advisors are english speakers with familiar ties to the united states .

ma was educated at harvard university , and his daughters are studying at u.s. universities .

u.s. efforts might bolster the long - term influence of such pro - u.s. leaders in the kmt over the influence of pro - prc ones .

u.s. efforts are more likely to succeed if undertaken early , while ma enjoys the initial "honeymoon" period and before the prc can influence its allies in the kmt .

reach out to the moderate , pro - u.s. elements of the dpp .

the dpp's electoral defeats have demoralized its members , particularly the moderates , with feelings of betrayal by washington .

a viable opposition dpp would check the kmt's power .

support taiwan's bipartisan efforts to gain observership , if not membership , in the world health organization ( who ) .

on april 21 and may 6 , 2004 , the house and senate passed h.r .

4019 and s. 2092 in support of taiwan's efforts to gain observer status in the who .

in signing s. 2092 into law ( p.l .

108-235 ) , president bush stated support for taiwan's observer status in the who .

the next meeting of the who's governing body , the world health assembly , will start on may 19 ( the day before ma's inauguration ) in geneva .

engage with the kmt to more quickly reduce uncertainties and anxieties in the military about changes to personnel , programs , and organization expected under ma .

one option would be to allow taiwan's defense minister to visit for a conference in september 2008 ( as was done in 2002 ) .

conduct a meaningful and genuine dialogue with taiwan's military to establish a new understanding if not agreement about the sensitive hf - 2e cruise missile program to remove an irritant in defense ties .

allow u.s. naval port visits to taiwan , particularly after the dispute in november 2007 , when the prc disapproved a number of port calls at hong kong by u.s. navy ships , including two minesweepers in distress seeking to refuel in face of an approaching storm and an aircraft carrier planning on family reunions for thanksgiving .

support taiwan's senior - level representation at the summit of the apec ( asian pacific economic cooperation ) forum .

although taiwan is a full member of apec , its representation has been downgraded due to prc demands .

the next summit will be held in lima , peru , in november 2008 .

support taiwan's inclusion in the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) .

taiwan already is a cooperative member of the container security initiative ( csi ) .

as shown by the defense department's announcement on march 26 , 2008 , of taiwan's own notification to the pentagon of a mistaken shipment of parts for warheads in u.s. intercontinental ballistic missiles to taiwan in 2006 , it can be considered a responsible weapons nonproliferation partner .

engage more meaningfully with taiwan's government in its relatively new exercises to ensure continuity of government , critical infrastructure protection , and crisis - management .

such engagement could be conducted through comprehensive channels ( including congress , secret service , national security council , as well as departments of homeland security , defense , energy , and treasury ) .

negotiate an fta as taiwan has sought unsuccessfully for years , in recognition of its status as one of the top ten trading partners of the united states and its dominance in the global information technology ( it ) industries .

s.con.res .

60 and h.con.res .

137 would urge the start of negotiations with taiwan on an fta .

another option would be to pursue an fta in the services sector , since this sector dominates taiwan's economy .

senator baucus had suggested a services fta with the european union and japan .

send a cabinet - level official to visit taiwan .

the bush administration has refused to allow cabinet officers to visit taiwan , in a reversal of policies pursued by the george h. w. bush and clinton administrations .

the last such officer to visit taiwan was secretary of transportation rodney slater ( in 2000 ) .

a fourth approach concerns the u.s. role in renewed cross - strait dialogue .

for decades , an issue for u.s. policy has been what role the united states should play to ensure a peaceful dialogue across the taiwan strait .

as part of u.s. policy , president reagan issued his "six assurances" of 1982 , including one of no mediation between taipei and beijing .

short of whether that policy should change , there are various possible u.s. roles .

in one view , the united states should seize this first window of opportunity presented in a decade to effectively ensure a cross - strait dialogue for sustainable peace and stability that would be worthwhile to help prevent a war between two nuclear powers .

the united states could also shape the cross - strait dialogue to focus on functional cooperation , rather than premature political integration , national unification , or concessions on taiwan's security .

in another view , the united states should continue to stay out of any prc - taiwan negotiations , beyond a spectator's encouragement of dialogue .

indeed , in his congratulatory message to ma , president bush stated that "it falls to taiwan and beijing to build the essential foundations for peace and stability by pursuing dialogue through all available means and refraining from unilateral steps that would alter the cross - strait situation. .

president bush also called prc ruler hu jintao on march 26 , to stress that the election "provides a fresh opportunity for both sides to reach out and engage one another in peacefully resolving their differences. .

in response , hu jintao appeared to state explicitly for the first time that the "1992 consensus" involved "one china , different interpretations," a point that national security advisor stephen hadley also noted to the press on that day .

a fifth approach would be for congress to require a strategic review of policy .

there has been no major policy review since 1994 , one conducted by the clinton administration .

some say that a coherent strategy is needed to sustain u.s. interests in taiwan , including peace and stability .

others say that the last year of a presidency leaves little time or energy to undertake such a review .

a february 2008 report by the taiwan policy working group chaired by former bush administration officials randy schriver and dan blumenthal offered a comprehensive "common agenda" with taiwan .

an alternative is to forge a strategic approach in coordination with allies in europe and asia ( eg , australia , japan , south korea ) , plus singapore .

