debarment and suspension ( collectively known as "exclusion" ) are of perennial interest to congress because exclusion is one of the primary techniques that federal agencies use to avoid dealings with vendors who have failed , or are deemed likely to fail , to meet their obligations under federal law or government contracts .

debarred contractors are generally ineligible for new federal contracts for a fixed period of time , while suspended contractors are generally ineligible for the duration of any investigation or litigation involving their conduct .

federal law specifies various grounds for exclusion , only some of which expressly relate to procurement .

the grounds and procedures for nonprocurement exclusions are outside the scope of this report .

however , all persons excluded on procurement or other grounds are listed in the system for award management ( sam ) ( previously the excluded parties list system ( epls ) ) .

contracting officers are generally barred from soliciting offers from , awarding contracts to , or consenting to subcontracts with contractors who are listed as excluded in sam .

this report discusses grounds and procedures for procurement - related exclusions .

in particular , it surveys the authorities requiring or allowing federal agencies to debar or suspend contractors , as well as the due process and other protections for contractors in exclusion proceedings .

contractors can currently be debarred or suspended under federal statutes or under the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , an administrative rule governing contracting by executive branch agencies .

there are only two explicit overlaps between the causes of debarment and suspension under statute and those under the far , involving debarments and suspensions for violations of ( 1 ) the drug - free workplace act of 1988 and ( 2 ) various statutes proscribing intentionally affixing a "made in america" label to an ineligible product sold in or shipped to the united states .

however , the far includes certain "catch - all" provisions that could potentially make the same conduct grounds for debarment or suspension under statute and under the far .

one of these provisions authorizes debarment for "any ... offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty. .

the other authorizes debarment or suspension for "any other cause of [a] serious or compelling nature. .

although agencies generally have broad discretion in determining whether contractors should be excluded for particular conduct , contractors enjoy several protections in the exclusion process .

perhaps the foremost among these is an entitlement to due process of the law under the fifth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

early government contractors were generally held to lack due process protections because contracting with the government was viewed as a privilege , not a right , and courts held that persons were entitled to due process only when deprived of rights .

however , this changed in 1964 , with the decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit in gonzalez v. freeman .

written by future chief justice warren burger , who was then a judge for the d.c .

circuit , gonzalez held that while contractors may not have a right to government contracts , "that cannot mean that the government can act arbitrarily , either substantively or procedurally , against a person or that such a person is not entitled to challenge the processes and the evidence before he is officially declared ineligible for government contracts . .

for this reason , the court found that the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) had improperly debarred the thos .

p. gonzalez corporation , in part , because the ccc failed to provide written notice of the charges against the contractor and did not give the contractor "the opportunity to present evidence and to cross - examine adverse witnesses , all culminating in administrative findings and conclusions based upon the record. .

a subsequent decision by the d.c .

circuit in horne brothers , inc. v. laird held that contractors are also entitled to due process in suspension determinations , although the court distinguished between suspensions of shorter and longer duration in finding that a contractor is entitled to pre - exclusion notice and an opportunity to be heard in suspensions of five months but not of three weeks .

because of these and subsequent decisions , the far currently provides that contractors must generally receive notice and an opportunity for a hearing before being debarred , but can be suspended without prior notice or an opportunity to be heard so long as they are "immediately advised" of the suspension and allowed to offer information in opposition to the suspension within 30 days .

the judicially developed doctrine of de facto debarment can also serve to protect contractors from improper exclusion in certain circumstances .

while the possibility of de facto debarment often arises in connection with agency conduct that also deprives the contractor of a protected liberty interest without due process , the de facto debarment analysis focuses primarily upon conduct outside the debarment and suspension process that effectively excludes contractors .

for example , in its 1980 decision in old dominion dairy products , inc. v. secretary of defense , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit found that the air force had improperly de facto debarred a contractor through repeated nonresponsibility determinations based on the same information .

the air force had determined the contractor to be nonresponsible for the award of one contract because of an audit report showing three irregularities in billing statements .

the air force never informed the contractor of these allegations , in part , because contractors do not routinely receive notice of nonresponsibility determinations concerning them .

however , the contractor was later determined to be nonresponsible for the award of a second contract by another contracting officer , who had received news of the earlier determination and relied upon it to conclude that the contractor lacked integrity .

the court found that the second nonresponsibility determination constituted an improper de facto debarment because the contractor was excluded from government contracts without any notice of or opportunity to challenge the allegations against it .

later judicial and administrative tribunals have similarly found that an agency improperly de facto debars a contractor based upon repeated nonresponsibility determinations based on the same information , as well as through words or conduct evidencing an intent to exclude the contractor from government contracts .

additionally , in certain circumstances , agencies' determinations to debar or suspend a contractor could potentially be found to violate the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , particularly if the agency excludes the contractor based upon circumstances that the agency was aware of when it previously found that contractor sufficiently responsible to be awarded a federal contract .

such a situation arose in the 2001 case of lion raisins , inc. v. united states , where the u.s. court of federal claims found that the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) suspension of a contractor for falsifying raisin certifications violated the apa , given that the usda knew of the contractor's conduct when making five prior determinations that the contractor was "responsible. .

according to the court , [e]ven assuming plaintiff's alleged conduct evidences "a lack of integrity or business honesty" so as to justify suspension , the court holds that [the suspending official] abused his discretion when he determined that the evidence of plaintiff's lack of integrity in april 1998 , which was known to the agency as of may 1999 , "seriously and directly" affected plaintiff's "present responsibility" as a government contractor in february of 2001 .

the usda awarded plaintiff five contracts between the completion of its investigation in may 1999 and its decision to suspend plaintiff in january 2001 .

the usda statutorily was obligated to make an affirmative finding of plaintiff's responsibility before awarding each of those contracts .

in other words , five times between may 26 , 1999 , and february 1 , 2001 , the usda itself affirmed that plaintiff's business practices met the standards for present responsibility .

significantly , by the usda's own representations , it did so despite the possession of all the evidence that it would later use to suspend plaintiff .

the court finds these facts dispositive of the issue of plaintiff's present responsibility .

that [the suspending official] knew of the five interim contracts is demonstrated by their incorporation into the administrative record and by his reference to them in his final report and decision .

that he nevertheless concluded that suspension was immediately necessary to protect government interests , without pointing to any event as to the issue of immediacy , was arbitrary and capricious .

while the decision in lion raisins has been strongly criticized by some commentators and distinguished by some courts , it has been followed or cited approvingly by others and could potentially be construed as precluding agencies from debarring or suspending contractors under the far based on "stale" allegations of wrongdoing .

