the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) is the primary federal law for protecting public water supplies from harmful contaminants .

first enacted in 1974 , and broadly amended in 1986 and 1996 , the sdwa is administered through programs that regulate contaminants in public water supplies , provide funding for infrastructure projects , protect underground sources of drinking water , and promote the capacity of water systems to comply with sdwa regulations .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) is the federal agency responsible for administering sdwa ; however , the 1974 law established a federal - state structure in which epa may delegate primary enforcement and implementation authority ( primacy ) for drinking water programs to states and tribes .

the state - administered public water supply supervision ( pwss ) program remains the basic program for regulating public water systems , and epa has delegated primacy for this program to all states , except wyoming and the district of columbia ( which sdwa defines as a state ) .

epa has responsibility for implementing the pwss program in these two jurisdictions and throughout most indian lands .

a second key portion of the act requires epa to regulate the underground injection of wastes and other fluids to protect underground sources of drinking water from contamination .

primary enforcement authority for the underground injection control ( uic ) program also may be delegated to the states .

thirty - three states have assumed primacy for the program , epa has lead implementation and enforcement authority in 10 states , and program authority for different classes of injection wells is split in the remainder of the states .

since the law was first enacted , much progress has been made in assuring the quality of public water supplies .

epa has regulated some 91 drinking water contaminants , and more regulations are pending .

despite this progress , drinking water safety concerns and challenges remain .

according to epa's 2006 national public water systems compliance report , the number of public water systems reporting no violations of the health - based standards for 2006 was 93% , and 73% of the u.s. population was served by public water systems that had no reported significant violations .

however , epa estimated that states had submitted to the epa database only 62% of violations of health - based standards and 29% of violations of monitoring and reporting requirements , thus increasing uncertainty as to the quality of water provided by many systems .

epa and the states have resolved some data quality and reporting problems , and efforts to address this issue continue .

epa and state compliance data indicate that water systems still incur tens of thousands of violations of sdwa requirements each year .

although these violations primarily involve monitoring and reporting requirements , they also include thousands of violations of standards and treatment techniques .

moreover , monitoring and reporting violations create uncertainty as to whether systems actually met the applicable health - based standards .

also at issue is the rate at which epa has been reviewing and updating existing contaminant regulations to respond to newer scientific information ( eg , chromium and trichloroethylene ( tce ) ) or to address implementation and compliance problems ( eg , the lead and copper rule ) .

concern also exists over the potential health effects of drinking water contaminants for which standards have not been set , such as perchlorate and methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) .

the act requires epa to continually evaluate contaminants that may be candidates for regulation and to periodically review existing standards ; however , epa's perceived lack of action on specific contaminants of concern has generated criticism in congress and elsewhere .

recent drinking water safety issues have included the gap between infrastructure funding needs and spending ; the capacity of public water systems , especially small systems , to comply with a growing set of complex standards ; and the contamination of water supplies by unregulated contaminants , such as perchlorate and various pharmaceuticals and personal care products .

issues involving the act's groundwater protection provisions include proposals for large - scale storage of carbon dioxide deep underground to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions , as well as the increased reliance on hydraulic fracturing to develop domestic oil and natural gas resources , and the potential impacts these activities might have on underground sources of drinking water .

bills were introduced on these issues in the 111 th congress .

congress last reauthorized appropriations for most sdwa programs in the 1996 amendments , through fy2003 .

as with other epa - administered statutes having expired funding authority , congress has continued to appropriate funds annually for sdwa programs .

the 111 th congress amended the safe drinking water act with the reduction of lead in drinking water act , p.l .

111-380 .

this legislation revised the act's definition of lead free ( section 1417 ( d ) ) to reduce the amount of lead allowed in water pipes , plumbing fittings , and fixtures to 0.25% .

previously , pipes and pipe fittings have been allowed to contain 8% lead , while fixtures were required to meet a lead leaching performance standard , rather than a lead content standard .

this law is intended to further reduce exposure to lead from tap water .

several sdwa funding bills also were enacted in the 111 th congress .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) provided $2 billion for drinking water infrastructure projects through the drinking water state revolving fund program ; the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , included $829 million for this water infrastructure funding program ; and the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-88 ) , provided $1.387 billion for the program .

the fy2010 funding act and arra require states to make available at least 20% of their dwsrf grants for projects to address green infrastructure , water or energy efficiency improvements , or other environmentally innovative activities .

additionally , arra included $50 million for site characterization activities in geologic formations related to carbon sequestration , and $20 million for geologic sequestration training and research activities .

after several short - term continuing resolutions for fy2011 , congress extended epa funding at fy2010 levels through march 4 , 2011 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) .

in july 2009 , the senate environment and public works committee reported the water infrastructure financing act ( s. 1005 , s.rept .

111-47 ) , which would have authorized a grant program and increase funding authority for the drinking water and clean water state revolving fund programs .

the house energy and commerce committee reported , amended , h.r .

5320 , the assistance , quality , and affordability act of 2010 ( h.rept .

111-524 ) .

as passed , h.r .

5320 would have reauthorized funding for the dwsrf program for three years , tightened the definition of "lead free," applied davis - bacon prevailing wage provisions to projects financed in any way by a dwsrf , required a study on pharmaceuticals and personal care products in sources of drinking water , revised epa's endocrine disruptor screening program , and made various other changes to the dwsrf program and the act more broadly .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on environment and public works .

water infrastructure financing act of 2009 .

report to accompany s. 1005 .

111 th cong. , 1 st sess .

july 15 , 2009 .

59 p. ( s.rept .

111-47 ) .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on government reform .

subcommittee on energy policy , natural resources and regulatory affairs .

epa water enforcement: are we on the right track ? .

hearing , october 14 , 2003 , 108 th cong. , 1 st sess .

201p .

 ( serial no .

108-157 ) .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on transportation and infrastructure .

subcommittee on water resources and environment .

aging water supply infrastructure .

hearing , april 28 , 2004 , 108 th cong. , 2 nd sess .

78 p. ( serial no .

108-63 ) .

u.s. environmental protection agency .

providing safe drinking water in america : 200 6 national public water systems compliance report .

office of enforcement and compliance assurance .

report no .

epa - k - 09-002 .

march 2009 .

18 p. plus appendixes .

http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / resources / reports / accomplishments / sdwa / sdwacom2006.pdf .

u.s. environmental protection agency .

drinking water state revolving fund program: increasing impact , 2006 annual report .

office of water .

report no .

epa 816-r - 07-002 , june 2007 .

44 p. http: / / www.epa.gov / safewater / dwsrf / index.html .

u.s. environmental protection agency .

the clean water and drinking water infrastructure gap analysis report .

office of water .

report no .

epa 816-r - 02-020 .

september 2002 .

50 p. national research council .

health implications of perchlorate ingestion .

board on environmental studies and toxicology .

national academies press .

january 2005 .

177 p .

