proposed legislation in previous sessions of congress demonstrates legislative interest in the recently recognized phenomenon of patented tax strategies .

the proposed , but unenacted legislation would have stipulated that patents upon tax strategies could not be obtained .

as discussion of tax strategy patents may continue in the 112 th congress , a review of this controversial category of patents is appropriate .

previously introduced , but unenacted legislation defined a "tax planning invention" as "a plan , strategy , technique , scheme , process , or system that is designed to reduce , minimize , determine , avoid , or defer , or has , when implemented , the effect of reducing , minimizing , determining , avoiding , or deferring , a taxpayer's tax liability or is designed to facilitate compliance with tax laws...." under the proposed legislation , such inventions would not have been patentable .

however , "tax preparation software and other tools or systems used solely to prepare tax or information returns" were not subject to this ban .

tax strategy patents are the subject of a spirited debate .

some observers believe that such patents negatively impact social welfare .

according to some experts , tax strategy patents may limit the ability of taxpayers to utilize provisions of the tax code , interfering with congressional intent and leading to distortions in tax obligations .

others assert that tax strategy patents potentially complicate legal compliance by tax professionals and taxpayers alike .

still others believe that the patent system should not provide incentives for individuals to develop new ways to reduce their tax liability .

other commentators explain that patents on "business methods" have been obtained and enforced for many years .

legislation enacted in 1999 that accounted expressly for patents claiming "a method of doing or conducting business" arguably approved of such patents .

in addition , some commentators believe that tax strategy patents present a positive development , potentially improving the public disclosure of tax shelters for the attention of congress and federal tax authorities .

they also observe that many kinds of patents , on subject matter ranging from automobile seat belts to airplane navigation systems , potentially involve legal compliance .

although views on tax strategy patents vary , evidence suggests that numerous applications that arguably cover tax planning methods have been filed at the uspto .

some of these applications have been approved as issued patents .

further , several of them have been the subject of infringement litigation in the federal judicial system .

discussion of the recently appreciated phenomenon of tax strategy patents therefore appears to be timely .

this report introduces the concept of tax strategy patents and reviews their implications for intellectual property and tax policy .

the report begins by providing an overview of both the practical workings and innovation policy aspirations of the patent system .

it then provides a brief history of the phenomenon of tax strategy patents .

the report next reviews competing views about the impact of tax patents upon innovation policy .

this report concludes with a summary of congressional issues and options .

although business method patents have been held to be patentable at least since the issuance of the state street bank opinion in 1998 , the more recent phenomenon of tax strategy patents has resulted in a spirited discussion .

some commentators , and in particular tax professionals , have found tax strategy patents to be "ridiculous," "bizarre" and "deeply unsettling. .

on the other hand , other observers , including many patent professionals , believe both that concerns over tax patents are overstated , and that the patenting of tax strategies may lead to numerous positive consequences .

this report next reviews some of the competing concerns about tax strategy patents .

should congress conclude that the current situation with respect to tax strategy patents is satisfactory , then no action need be taken .

if congress wishes to intervene , however , a number of options present themselves .

in the 111 th congress , three bills were introduced that would limit the enforcement of tax strategy patents .

none were enacted .

h.r .

1265 and s. 506 defined the excluded category of "tax planning invention[s]" to mean "a plan , strategy , technique , scheme , process , or system that is designed to reduce , minimize , determine , avoid , or defer , or has , when implemented , the effect of reducing , minimizing , determining , avoiding , or deferring , a taxpayer's tax liability or is designed to facilitate compliance with tax laws , but does not include tax preparation software and other tools or systems used solely to prepare tax or information returns.... " h.r .

2584 would have prevented any patent claiming a "tax planning method," which is defined similarly .

the legislation would have applied to any application filed at the uspto on or after the date of enactment .

other legislative responses are also possible .

in furtherance of its oversight over the uspto , congress could continue to track that agency's activities with respect to tax strategy patents .

in this vein , commentators have proposed several reforms , including uspto hiring of examiners with expertise in taxation and related disciplines .

congress could also encourage continued cooperation between the uspto and the irs with respect to tax strategy patents .

congress may also wish to promote the engagement of the community of tax professionals with the patent system .

the patent laws allow members of the public both to comment upon many pending patent applications and to challenge issued patents through administrative proceedings .

the voluntary contributions of knowledgeable specialists , through these and other mechanisms , may help promote a high level of quality of issued tax strategy patents .

tax strategies represent the latest area of controversy regarding patentable subject matter .

other sorts of inventions , such as business methods , biotechnologies , and computer software , have also raised considerable legal and policy questions when they were initially brought before the patent system .

some observers believe that patents on these and other innovations have been allowed for many years , without any evidence of harm to the u.s. innovation environment .

others contend that the affirmative case for granting patents on business methods remains weak , and that patents on tax strategies present uniquely deleterious social consequences .

although proposed legislative responses to the phenomenon of tax strategy patents have thus far been limited to those instruments , this episode might also promote broader congressional thinking of the sorts of inventions that may be appropriately patented .

