deforestation is responsible for the largest share of additional carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) released to the atmosphere due to land use changes , approximately 20% of total anthropogenic greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions annually .

deforestation results in carbon emissions when trees and underlying vegetation are burning or decomposing .

deforested areas that are later cultivated also release carbon to the atmosphere when soil carbon is oxidized .

further , deforested areas converted to other land uses ( eg , pastures ) might sequester less carbon than forests , enabling greater levels of co 2 in the atmosphere .

forests store approximately 45% of terrestrial carbon , and in the 1990s were estimated to remove 2.6 billion tons of carbon ( mtco 2 ) from the atmosphere per year ; this sequestered amount is equivalent to approximately 33% of anthropogenic carbon emissions from fossil fuel and land use changes .

data on carbon sequestration and emissions are not available for many regions , making global estimates uncertain .

much of the deforestation responsible for co 2 releases occurs in tropical regions , specifically in developing countries such as brazil , indonesia , and the democratic republic of the congo .

tropical forests store approximately 25% of the total global terrestrial carbon .

scientists estimate that tropical deforestation and other land use changes may have been responsible for releasing approximately 1.5 billion metric tons of co 2 per year to the atmosphere during the 1990s , and may be contributing similar amounts of carbon to the atmosphere today .

some contend that deforestation due to logging might result in small carbon emissions because timber converted into products will not release co 2 immediately .

others disagree , stating that the percentage of wood transformed into wood products is probably small in tropical and temperate regions .

deforestation rates vary across the world , yet are generally higher in tropical regions ( see figure 1 ) .

by continent , the highest rate of net forest loss is in south america , which lost approximately 4.3 million hectares ( ha ) of its forest ( 0.5% ) annually from 2000 to 2005 .

this is followed by africa , which lost approximately 4.0 million ha ( 0.6% ) of its forest annually during the same period .

north america ( including central america ) , in contrast , lost approximately 333,000 ha ( 0.05% ) annually from 2000-2005 ; and in china , there was a reported gain of 4.1 million ha of forest annually ( 2.2% ) during the same period , primarily due to large - scale afforestation efforts .

figure 1 .

global change in forest cover , 2000-2005source: the u.n. food and agriculture organization , global forests resources assessment ( rome , italy: 2006 ) , 320 pp.note: dark lines represent the tropics of cancer and capricorn .

the role of forests in the carbon cycle and the extent of deforestation and its impact on ghg emissions are primary reasons deforestation is addressed in climate change legislation .

many experts contend that protecting forests or preventing deforestation may be less expensive than other technologies to reduce co 2 emissions , and provide other environmental and socioeconomic benefits such as preserving biodiversity .

others contend that increasing carbon sequestration through restoration and preventing deforestation , though compelling in theory , might be challenging and more expensive in practice .

bills that address deforestation propose in their findings that international deforestation is a major contributor to ghg emissions , and that foreign countries with forests have a role in preventing deforestation and engaging in restoration and afforestation activities .

some argue that congressional intent to address deforestation is misplaced with funding initiatives to prevent deforestation in foreign countries .

they question the ability of some foreign countries to implement and monitor forest restoration and preservation programs , and the potential value to the united states of implementing these programs .

further , they argue that funds should be focused on domestic efforts to address forest restoration and carbon sequestration technologies .

this crs legislative analysis covers key issues and policies addressed by three selected climate change bills introduced in the 110 th congress that include international deforestation: s. 3036 , h.r .

6186 , and h.r .

6316 .

implementing forest protection programs in the tropics can be challenging for several reasons .

some assert that the causes of deforestation vary in different regions and that a "one size fits all" approach to reduce deforestation might not be successful .

for example , deforestation in the amazon basin is driven , in part , by livestock and soybean production , which leads to the conversion of forests to pastures and farms .

in contrast , in parts of central africa , deforestation is driven , in part , by fuelwood extraction and charcoal production .

policies that are flexible and address diverse economic , social , and cultural influences are expected to be most successful , according to some .

observers also contend that deforestation programs will require consistent and effective monitoring and measuring systems that quantify changes in forest cover and provide accurate accounting of forest carbon stocks .

for example , some contend that the coverage and quality of satellite imagery in tropical countries is inadequate to estimate forest cover and rates of deforestation on small scales .

some also suggest that consistent and tested methods for establishing baseline and historical changes in forest cover and carbon stocks need to be implemented in any global plan to address deforestation .

in some developing countries , monitoring and enforcement capacity may be lacking .

some contend that funding should be first directed at improving infrastructure and the capacity to measure carbon stocks , monitor emissions and land use , and enforce forest carbon activities .

enforcement obligations to prevent deforestation might be a challenge in developing countries .

if a multilateral program is implemented , with individual countries responsible for enforcing and monitoring forest cover obligations , problems related to corruption , weak governance , and inconsistent enforcement may hinder the program .

there are few , if any , models for an international entity to successfully enforce natural resource laws or policies in other countries .

some argue that programs to reduce deforestation should cause minimal disruptions to rural livelihoods .

some rural people in tropical countries depend on forest resources for subsistence and economic gain .

forest uses include fuel wood , charcoal , wild game , fruit , and timber .

strict forest protection programs may affect subsistence use of forest products and cause significant economic harm to rural and indigenous peoples who depend on forests .

some examples demonstrate success where local populations benefit directly and there are incentives to enforce forest protection .

